                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            Hospital UtJli2:ation
               An Analysis of S1!SA Differences in Hospital
                Admission Rates, Occupancy Rates and
                              Bed Rates
                                  by
                           Barry R. Chiswlck


      -
                    Working Paper No.      2
                     -___.                                   0




CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                 261 Hadison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                               June 1973


                   Preliminary; Not for Quotation

      NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
 number for coruents only. They should not be quoted without wrItten
 permission.

      This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
 publications; in oarticular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
 by the Board of Directors.
Hospital Utilization: An Analysis of SMSA.Differences
  in Occupancy Rates, Admission Rates and Bed Rates

                        Barry R. Chiswick




                the   national   surplus of hospital be4s
        by no teans     contradicts the fact that there
        are frequent     sho'tages in particular
        cotinnunities   at   particular titnes.tt



        (New   York Times, EditorIal, August 26, 1971, p. 36)




∑   ∑
                              Hospital Utilization:
                         An Analysis of SNSA Differences
                     in Hospital Admission Rates, Occupancy
                               Rates and Bed Rates


                                Barry R.    Chiswick

                                Table of Contents

Chapter I --   Introduction   and Summary
     1. Introduction
     2. Framework
     3. Summary of Findings

Chapter II -- The Theory
     1. Introduction
     2. Occupancy Rate
     3. Admission Rate
     4.   Bed Rate

Chapter III -- Empirical Analysis
     1. Occupancy Rate                                    -



     2. Admission Rate
     3. Bed Rate.

Appendix A: Data Appendix

Appendix B: Additional Tables




     his   paper has benefited from comments received from Victor
Fuchs and Michael Grossman, and at seminars at the National Bureau
of Economic Research, the Graduate School, City University of New York,
the Center for Health Administration Studies, University of Chicago,
and the Health Services Administration, New York City. I also appre-
ciate the research assistance of. Carol Breckner, Phyllis Goldberg
and Janice Platt. The project was financed by a grant to the NBER
from the National Centcr for Health Services Research and Development
(Grant Number 5P01HS00451) and by the Industrial Relations Section,
Princeton  University. I  alone am responsible for any errors of
commission or omission.
                                      Chapter I
                              Introduction   and Summary


1.    Introduction
       A topic of continued public concern is the national level and

distribution      among areas and individuals of the availability of hospital
services. The      New   York Times in 1971 contained articles stressing the
cost in terms of delayed treatment and death of insufficient hospital
beds.1 During the same year, the Times carried articles indicating


       See, for example, New York Times, January 21, 1971, p. 29, column 1;
and   September   12, 1971, section IV, p. 9, column 5.



                                                    2
the   cost to society of unused hospital beds.




      2For example, the Timea reported Elliot Richardson, then Secretarj
of   Health, Education and Welfare, as citing "an estimate of $3.6 billion
as    last year's cost of maintaining unused beds all over the country."
(York_Times, August 26, 1971, p. 36). Richardson's (unexplained)
figure of $3.6 billion may be contrasted with the $4 billion in federal
money spent for hospital construction under.the Hill--Burton program
sice its inception 25 years ago. (New York Times, November 23, 1972,
p.i., column 1.)



       Table I--i presents data for the country         as a whole on hospital
utilization    during the post World War II period for short--tern non--federal

hospitals. The bed rate( the number of beds per thousand popuiatio4

increased nearly 25 percent. The admission rate (admissions per thousand

population)    increased nearly 50 percent. The average bed occupancy rate
                                    Table I--i
                Utilization of Short Term General and
              Specialty    non--Federal Hosj.ta1s, 1946--19 70



                                                 Occupancy       Length of
                    Bed           Admission          Rate           Stay
       Year         Rate a          Rateb         (Percent)        (Days)

1946                 3.4             96.6            72.1          9.11
1950                .3.3     .       109.9           73.7           8.15

1955                 3.5             115.6           71.7           7.78

1960                 3.6             127.1           74.6           7.60

1965                 3.8             136.2           76.0

1967                 4.0             135.8           77.7           8.28

1968                 4.0             135.9           78.2           8.45

1969                 4.1            .139.4           78.8           8.41

1970                 4.1             142.8           78.1           8.26




Sources:: 1940 to 1960: Historical Statistics of the United States
From Colonial Times to the Present, U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1965,
Series A--i, B--198, 208, 251, 252.
           1965 to 1970: Statistical Abstract of the United States,
   2, U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1972, Table Nos. 2, 104, 107.

       aBed Rate = Beds per thousand population


       bAdgission Rate = Admissions per thousand population
                                           --2--



(the   proportion of days in the year the average bed is occupied)

increased during most of the period, but has recently been on the decline.'



       1See, for example, Harry T. Paxton, tlTThatever 1-fappened to the

Hospital Bed Shortage'?" Medical Economics, February 28, i973, p. 33.




These changes are important because hospitals do perform useful services,

but at a considerable cost ---- a cost which has been growing rapidly.2




     2The American Hospital Association reported that the daily cost
of caring for patients in short--term general hospitals averaged $81
in 1970, $92 in 1971 and $105 in 1972. The cost has almost doubled
ftoin 1966 to 1972. (New York Times, July 31, 1972, p. 36, co1tn 4,
                                                              -
and January 15, 1973, p. 23, column 5.)



Although        occupancy rates are declining nationally, regIonal mal-

distributions and political pressures still induce hospital bed

Construction.




        The Government Accounting Office reported the I,overbuildingti
                                       ∑




of hospital facilities in six cities   (New York Times, December 18, 1972,
P. 78, column 1). Congress still passes legislation to promote.
hospital bed construction (New York Times, September 21, 1972, p. 36,
column 1).



       The purpose of this study is to present a. model (Chapter II)

for    analyzing the utilization of short--term general hospitals ---- in
particular,    occupancy rates, admission rates ,   bed   rates and length
of stay.                                                          .
                                        --3--

    This model is then applied (Chapter III) to a cross--section analysis

    of regional differences in hospital utilization. The objective is

    ∑to develop structural equations and hypotheses as to why the measures

    of   hospital utilization vary across communities, and to estimate these
    equations   and test these hypotheses. There is, however, an identity
    relationship   between average length of stay (LS), and the occupancy

    rate (OR), admission rate (Adnis*) and bed rate (Beds*):

                     OR =                .   Length of stay is the "redundant't
    varable     for the purpose of this study.

    2. Framework

          The number of hospital admissions demanded in a year in a

    community is viewed as a declining function of the cost of such care.

    This relation)however)need not be the sane for all communities. For.

:
    example, the number bf admissions demanded may be greater, the larger

    the number of surgeons and the more      important   is health insurance in

    the   community. In addition, more strict rationing of admissions
    (and hence a smaller number of admissions) may occur when hospitals
    are very crowded.
          The analysis of the supply of hospital admissions is based on
    both a short run and a long run model of hospital bed availability.
    In the short run the bed rate    (the number of beds per thousand

    population)    is assumed to be fixed and determined by factors outside
                                   --4--

the model under investigation. If we assume a fixed bed rate (Beds*)

and a constant length of stay (LS), the largest possible admission

rate   would be found by: Adms* = (Beds*) (365)   .    In   Figure I this is

represented   by the point at which the demand curve for admissions
intersects the supply curve of admissions and the numl)er of admissions

isq0.
       However, this is an unrealistic view of the supply side of the
short run model. The demand for hospital beds is not a constant
daily quantity but rather a fluctuating one. It is higher on some days
than on others.' In the case of hospital care, the output cannot


       his is true of all markets, and output or productive capacity
tends to be "stored by suppliers or demanders depending on the exteit
offixe.d. costs and relative storage costs.


generally   be stored by the consumer.2 This means     that    if on a given




     2Preventive   medicine may be viewed     -
                                                      - as a means of "storing"
health services.



day there is a greater demand for hospital beds than can be satisfied
by the available supply and if    non--price rationing is used, some con--

awners   will have to delay (or forego) the satisfaction of their demand
for hospital services even though they were willing to pay the current
market price. Delayed satisfaction of demand for hospital care is
not without cost, as anyone who has ever been in pain or discomfort or has
ever faced death is veil aware. Thus, a community would want to have
                            FIGURE


                   Short--Run Supply And Demand
                        For Hospital Admissions




Price


         Number of Admissions
             Per Year




                                                  C)
                         FIGURE II
               Long-Run Supply And Demand
                        For Admissions

                                  Sh1ic;cr

P rice




                Per Year
                                     --6--

what appears to be excess capacity in hospital beds on the average

day of the year, so that it could provide some additional in--hospital

bed care during periods of high demand.1




     'This assumes that "at capacity" the marginal cost of admissions
rises steeply. If the marginal cost of providing additional beds
and ancillary services did not rise with the quantity supplied in the
short run, there would be no economic demand for an "excess supply"
on the average day.


     A useful measure of "excess capacity" in a community is its
average occupancy rate in a year. The average occupancy rate is
measured by the ratio of the number      of patient days (admissions multi--

plied by average length of stay in days) to the number      of available
bed days (thenumber of beds trniltiplied by 365 days) ----
       (Admissions) (Length of Stay) .
OR
                (Beds)(365)             If, for example, the average
length of stay is five days, a community with 100 beds and an average
bed occupancy rate of 90 percent accomniodate6,570 admissions.
        OR(Beds)365    =   (0.90)(l00)(365)    =   6,570 admissions.) At a 100
(q
percent occupancy rate it      could accommodate this nuniber of admissions with
90 beds, but more   patients   would have to b granted a delayed admission.
A delayed (or denied) admission of a serious case is costly. More
excess capacity on the average reduces the likelihood of the demand for
beds exceeding the number of beds. However, constructing and maintaining
excess capacity are costly. Thus, there is some desired average occu-
pancy rate   that is less than 100 percent. This is represented in
Figure I by a number of admissions equal to q1, which is less than q0.
                                       --7--

       Hospital administrators have control over the occupancy rate

through their control of admissions and length of stay. If a lower

∑occupancy rate is desired) they can be more        selective   in the cases

that are admitted and thus decrease the admission rate and/or the average

length of stay. The variables that are hypothesized to enter into the

process of selecting the community's desired occupancy rate, given a

fixed supply of beds, form the framework for the analysis of the occu-

pancy rate equation.

       In summary, the short run includes a fixed supply of

beds, a hospital admission rate equation and          an occupancy rate equation.
Both equations are needed to detepnine the number of admissions
Vand the occupancy rate    in   a community: a high admission rate causes
a high occupancy rate, but a high occupancy rate causes a low admission
rate.
        In the long run, however, the bed rate (beds per thousand population)
is    not exogenous to   the model. For example, if      the    demand for admissions
is high   relative to the number of beds, the occupancy tate is high.

Some patients for whom     the   cost of   a   delayed admission is high do

 in   fact experience a delayed admission in       their community and    must

either    postpone the hospital    admission or seek such care elsewhere.

The implicit value of an additional admission is now high. If corn--

inunities respond to this high marginal value of admissions, the

 number   of beds will be increased in the long run (see          Figure II)




     'The supply response may come from the public sector,
 voluntary hospitals or proprietary hospitals.                        V
                                    --8--


Our long run analysis        relies on a two equation model: the admission

rate is a funÈtion of the bed rate, and the bed rate is a function of

the admission rate.

    This study, therefore, focuses on three inter--related dependent

variables: the admission rate, the occupancy rate and the bed rate.

Chapter II presents the development of the three equations       one for

each dependent variables and Chapter III presents the empirical

estimation and interpretation of these equations.

    The   Standard   Metropolitan Statistical Area serves as the unit

of observation in the empirical analysis.1 SNSAs    were   selected for




     "A standard metropolitan statistical area is a county or group
of contiguous counties which contains at least one city of 50,000
inhabitants or more, or two contiguous cities with a combined population
of at least 50,000. In New England. however, SMSA's consist of towns
and cities rather than counties. Since town and city information s
not available, the. SNSA's in New England have been replaced by metro-
politan State economic areas,vhich are defined in.terms of whole
counties. (Hospitals: County and Metropolitan Area Data Book,
National Center for Health Statistics, Department of Health, Education
and Welfare, 1970.) For simplicity of exposition, non--New England
SNSA's and New England metropolitan State economic areas are referred
to as SMSAs.




three   reasons.2 First, SNSA borders are designed to represent population




         the author's knowledge, this is the first study of hobpital
 utilization to use SUSAs as the unit of observation.
Other studies for the United States have used individuals (microdata),
hospitals in a particular geographic area, or states as the unit of
observation.




centers and are clearly better suited for this purpose than city,

county or state boundaries. It seems reasonable that this is also true
                                     --9--



for health regions. Potential patients, doctors and hospital administra--
tors are presumably concerned more with "reasonable commutation dis-
tances" than with city or county boundaries.' While SMSAs may not


      or example, Santa Monica, Culver City and San Fernando are three
cities in Los Angeles county surrounded by Los Angeles city. Yet
these separate cities do not appear to constitute separate health corn--
munities as there is considerable mobility across city boundaries.
At the other extreme are the five counties which comprise New York City.
The large proportion of residents who seek hospital services outside
of their own county suggests that the populace acts as if the city
represents a single medical center. States were not used as the unit
of observation because for many states either there are two or more
hospital areas between which there is little mobility, or there is
commutation across state borders for the purchase of hospital care.



be ideal candidates for health regions, they are reasonably good

'approximations. Second, the data needed for this study are generally available
                    2
on an SMSA basis.       Third, by using SMSAs we obtain a sufficiently




     2The data for hospital utilization are from a 1967 survey of all
short term general hospitals in the country. (Hospitals: a County
and Metropolitan Area Data BoOk, National Center for Health Statistics,
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, November 1970.) For a
discussion of these and the other variables, see Appendix A.




large sample, 192 observations.
∑


                                      --9--



    for health regions. Potential patients, doctors and hospital administra-
    tors are presumably concerned more with "reasonable commutation dis--
    tnces" than with city or county boundaries.' While SMSAs may not


         'For example, Santa Monica, Culve.r City and San Fernando are three
    cities in Los Angeles county surrounded by. Los Angeles city. Yet
    these separate cities do not appear to constitute separate health corn--
    tnunitie.s as there is considerable mobility across city boundaries.
    At the other extreme are the five counties which comprise New York City.
    The large proportion of residents who seek hospital services outside
    of their own cotnty suggests that the populace acts as if the city
    represents a single medical center. States were not used as the unit
    of observation because for many states either there are two or more
    hospital areas between which there is little mobility, or there is
    commutation across state borders for the purchase of hospital care.



    be ideal candidates for health regions, they are reasonably good

    approximations. Second, the data needed for this study are generally available

    on an SMSA basis.2 Third, by using SNSAs we obtain a sufficiently




         2The data for hospital utilization are from a 1967 survey of all
    short term general hospitals in the country. (Hospitals: a County
    end Metropolitan Area Data BoOk, National Center for Health Statistics,
    Department of Health, Education and Welfare, November 1970.) For a
    discussion of these and the other variables, see Appendix A.



    large sample, 192 observations.
                                                 10




            3. Summary of Finding

                  This study analyzes SMSA differences in the utilization of short--
∑

            term general hospitals by explicitly examining three dependent (endogenous)
        ∑
            variables: the occupancy rate, admission rate and bed rate.



                  Our analysis of SNSA differences in occupancy rates is based on

            the randcnness of the demand for admissions. Since the demand for admis-

            sions fluctuates, the populace and hospital planners in an SMSA     are
    ∑


            concerned with maintaining an average occupancy rate sufficiently less

            than 100 percent so as to have an optimal probability that someone

            desiring an admission will be turned away because the hospitals are at

            full capacity. It is estimated that under 1967 utilization levels the

            demand   for beds in an SNSA   would exceed the supply of beds (on average)
            in   only one week out of 12.8 years.
    ∑
                  The empirical analysis strongly supports    the predictIons of   the
            randomness model for occupancy rates. SMSA''s with higher admission
            rates have higher occupancy     rates. More populous SMSAare   better able
            to take advantage of their smaller relative fluctuations in demand for
            admissions, and maintain a higher occupancy rate. When there are more
            hospitals for the same number of beds (and hence the hospitals are smaller))
            there is a lower occupancy rate. The larger number of hospitals reduces
            the substitutability among hospital beds, because of a poorer "referral"
            system between hospitals than within hospitals.
                  Higher occupancy rates could be obtained by reducing the barriers
            between hospitals. These barriers iticlude the limited number of hos-
            pital affiliations had by most physicians, the required veteran status

            for entry into federal hospitals,     the provision of charity hospitaliza--
                                       'I--




tion   primarily by public hospitals, and hospitals restricted to par-

ticular demographic (age, sex, etc.)            groups.
       Occupancy   rates are higher in SMSA"s with colder winter climates
and a   larger proportion of nonwhites in the population. These effects

are presumably due to longer lengths of stay.

       The analysis of hospital admission rates. looks at variables which

have been hypothesized to effect the height of the demand for, or the

price of, a hospitalization. When             hospitals   are more crowded (high

occupancy rate)) the admission rate is lower because hospital administra-

tors are more selective in the cases            that   are admitted in order to

reduce the probability of capacity' utilizatiÁn. In addition, admission

rateare higher, the more important is hospital and surgical insurance

and the more numerous are surgeons in the SNSA's population)                The

relative number     of   non--surgical physicians has no effect on the admis--

sion rate. Admission rates are also higher, the lower the median family

income (elasticity at mean = --0.78), the more numerous are nonwhites in

the population, end the colder the            winter   climate. The effect of non-

whites on admissions may be due to the poorer level of health of non-

whites.

        Our third dependent (endogenous) variable is the bed rate. A 10

percent increase in the bed rate results in a 2 percent decrease in the

occupancy rate, a L       percent   increase in the average length of stay and

a tI   percent Increase in the admission rate. This largely supports


        11t is not clear to what extent a larger relative number of surgeons
is   a cause or a consequence of a greater .demand for hospitalization.
Roemer's Law that an increase in beds results in these beds being filled

with little change in the occupancy rate. It is, however, noteworthy

that a 10 percent increase in admissions increases the number of beds by

9 percent. Thus, the effect of admissions on beds is stronger than the

effect of beds on admissions.

      Our model for the randomness of demand for admissions suggests

several other variables as relevant for an analysis of the demand for

hospital beds. Two of these variables, population size and the number

∑of hospitals, have no significant effect empirically. Three other

variables, the proportion of beds in federal hospitals, the emergency

death rate and median family income, do have an effect.

      Beds    in federal hospitals are found to be imperfect substitutes for
beds in non--federal hospitals presumably because of the required veteran
status   in   the former. The presence of) say, a 130 bed federal hospital
in   an SNSA   with   a million inhabitants decreases the number of norx--ederal

beds in the SNSA by approximately 40 beds.. The more important are

emergencies in an SMSA's case mix, the greater is the expected cost of

a delayed admission because of capacity utilization, and hence the

greater is the SHSA's demand for beds. The positive effect of income

on the bed rate (elasticity at the mean +0.12) is consistent with

the hypothesis that wealthier SMSA"s buy more excess capacity than

poorer SMSA"S through the construction of more beds.

      ∑There is an interesting relation between the relative number of

nonwhites in the population and hospital utilization. SMSAOs        with
relatively more nonwhites have higher admission rates and a longer

average length of stay, but there is no compensating difference in the
bed rate. The result is greater hospital crowding and a greater pro-
bability that a desired admission ill be      delayed   (or denied) the larger
the   relative number of nonwhites in the population)

      Our theoretical and empirical analysas of hospital occupancy rates,

admission rates) bed rates and length of stay indicate that these sta-

tistics vary across SNSA'5   and   that this'variation can be related sys--

tematcally to the characteristics of the SMSA.




     1llowever, the data used in this study do not permit n identifi--
cation of racial diffeLences in the delay of admission (case mix constant)
within SMSAs.                                                    V
                                   CHAPTER II


                                   The Theory


                                1. Introduction


           This chapter presents the theoretical analysis by which we arrive at

     the hypotheses and structural equations for the three dependent variables

     examined in this study: the admission rate, the occupancy rate and the bed

     rate. The equations should not be estimated by ordinary least squares (single

     equation) techniques. In our short run model, the      occupancy rate is deter-

     mined simultaneously with the admission rate since each affects the other. In

     our long run model, the bed rate (beds per thousand population) and the

     admission rate are mutually determined.

fl          Part (2) of this chapter presents the development of the hospital

     occupancy rate equation. A model based on th randomness of admissis suggests

     that .the occupancy rate in an SMSA is related to the admission rate, popu-

     lation size and number of hospitals. This forms the basis of the analysis of

     occupancy rates,   and    proxy variables are entered in some of the analysis

     to control for SMSA differences in length of stay.

            The            admissions equation is developed in part (3). The

     demand for admissions is assumed to be greater) the lower the price of an

     admission, or the easier the non-price rationing by hospitals. Thus, hospital

     and surgical insurance, the presence of physicians, the occupancy rate and

     the number of hospital beds are shown to enter the admissions equation. Other

     variables, mainly to hold constant demographic differences across SMSAs, are

     included.
                                   11-2



       In   Part (4) the bed rate (beds per thousand population) equation is

presented. The equation is developed under the assumption that it represents

  long run supply             The model for the randomness of admissions

suggests that the admission rate, the demand for emergency care, the size of

the population and the number of hospitals are explanatory variables.


2. Hospital Occupancy Rates:'



'The      occupancy rate of a region is the total ∑number of patient days
in a period of time (e.g., a year) divided by the product of the average
number of beds and the number of days in the time period. Bed occupancy
rates can be greater than lOO7 if some beds (e.g., temporary beds in
passageways) are not counted in the bed census but their occupants are
counted in the total number of patient days.



       A. Introduction:

       The average       occupancy rate in short term general hospitals in an

area is neither constant nor purely random. It may be

determined by the economi‡ and institutional characteristics of the community.

The purpose of this section is to develop a structure which will be used to

obtain hypotheses concerning regional differences in      occupancy rates.

       The maintenance of a hospital bed and its auxiliary equipment and

personnel is costly. A bed is productive when it is occupied. ∑This does'

not mean, however, that average occupancy rates of less than 100

percent represent wasted resources. If there were a known constant number

of beds demanded each day for each hospital,       occupancy rates less than

100 percent would indeed represent wasted resources. However, since there are

fluctuating demands for hospital services,       the presence of "excess

capacity" on the average day is efficient. That is, up to a point, vacant
                                                                                 )
beds are a productive resource. The extent to which        occupandy rates do
                                   11--3


in   fact respond to fluctuations in admissions is a major aspect of our

analysis of occupancy rates.'




     'Other studies have used the randomness of admissions as a basis
for analyzing hospital occupancy rates. See, for example, Hyman Joseph
and Sherman Folland, "Uncertainty and Hospital Costs," Southern Economic
Journal, October 1972, pp. 367--73; William Shonick, "A Stochastic
Model for Occupancy Related Random Variables in General--Acute Hospitals,"
Journal of the Am*ican Statistical Association, December 1970, pp. 1474--1500;
M. Long and P. Feldstein, 'Economics of Hospital Systems: Peak
Loads and Regional Coordination," American Economic Review, May 1967,
pp. 119--129, and references therein. This study differs from the others
in terms of (1) the specification of the randomness model (including
the effects of population size and number of hospitals), (2) treating
the admissions variable as endogenous rather than exogenous, and (3)
the application of the model to regional differences in hospital utiliza--
tion rather than to hospital differences within an area.


B. Fluctuating Demands

         The rate of admission (p) is the number of admissions in a time

period, N, divided by the size of the population (pop). That is, p= N/pop.

Either an individual is a hospital admission or he is not. Using the

binomial theorem, the variance across time periods in the number of hospital

admissions is Var (N) = (pop) p(l-p).

        The number of patient days (PD) of hospital care in a time period is

the sum across patients of all of the lengths of stay (LS) within that time

period.&1' Itcan be thought of as the average length of stay (LS) multiplied



     we know the number of hospital beds (B), the number of admissions in a
time period (N), the length of the time period CD) and the occupancy rate (OR),
by a simple identity we know the average length of stay.  {LS = (OR) (D) (J.]
In this study length of stay is viewed as the redundant variable, andNthe
analysis focuses on the occupancy rate,the bed rate and the admission rate.
For simplicity of presentation of the randomness model, the average length
of stay is assumed constant across time periods.
                                          II -- 3a




 by    the number of admissions (N). If LS does not vary across time periods,

 the      variance in patient days can be    written as.

(II--')      Var(PD) =   ()2     (pop) (p) (l-p).
 The expected number of patient days is
(11--2)      E(PD) = E(LS N) = LS(pop) (p).
 The coefficient of variation in patient days is
(11-3)        CV(PD) =   sD(PD1 =
                         E(PD)
                                     ][op5i)
                                      LS pop p        pop
                                                            (l-p)
                                                              p
                                                                      1
                                                                    (pop)
                                                                            (!
                                                                             p   1).

 The relative variation in patient days in a time period is smaller, the
                                              11--4




larger the size of the population, and the greater the rate of admission.i"



1Sitnhlar conclusions emerge if length of stay (LS) is not considered
constant over time. Let us assuma that across time periods (i) the
average length of stay and the number of admissions are independent.


(a)   Var (PD) = Var (LS. . N.)              (j)2     Var (N) +     VAR (LS) + Var (LS) Var (N),
      if LS.
           1   is independent of N.
                                  1
                                                                             Then, since
(b)   Var (N.) =   (pop)   p(1-p) and N = (pop) p.
(c) Var (PD) =     pop     ff2 Var (LS) + (LS)2] p          -
                                                                [(Ls)2 + Var (LS) ]

(d)   cv(PD) -   SD(PD)    -    k/pop   {   [2 Var (LS) ˜ ()21 p-[(i)2 + Var          (LS)] P}
                 E (PD)                                    LS     pop. p
      and        __________________________________________

(e) (PD)                       [(!)   (2CV(LS)2 +          (cV(LS) + 1)]

cV(PD)  isnegatively related to population size and the rate of admission,
and positively related to the coefficient of variation of length of
stay across time periods. These relationships would hold even if
length of stay were not statistically independent of the admission rate,
although the equation would ie far more complicated. See Leo Goodman,
"On the Exact Variance of a Product," Journal of the American
tical Association, December 1960, pp. 708--713.



      Let us assume that the mean            and standard deviation of the number of
patient days that will be demanded in a time .period in a community
were known. If the demand for an admission by one individual were
independent    of that of others, the demand for patient days would be
normally distributed.2 Then, if              the   community wishes to have


'Annual rates of admission are about 15 percent. Assuming independence
of individual admissions, the distribution of admissions for, say,
a week approximates the Poisson Distribution for a small sample (e.g., a
household or .a small work group), but approximates a normal distribution for
a large sample (e.g., a large factory, census tract or SMSA). For a
binomial distribution, if the proportion of successes [in this case
the admission rate (p) multiplied by the sample size (pop)] exceeds 10,
                                                  "-5


   the number of successes (admissions) approximates a normal rather than a
   Poisson distribution. For a population of 100,000 and a weekly admission
   rate of .15/52,                  admissions Z   (100,000). (.15) 300 and
   the normal distribution is a close approximation to the binomial distribution.



   beds to satisfy demands for admissions for, say, 97.5 percent of the time,

   the number of beds should exceed the mean number of patient days by approx-

   imately twice the standard deviation of patient days.V



   21This assumes perfect pooling of beds among the hospitals in the community.
   The effects of a lack of perfect pooling among hospitals in an area and the
   time lag in filling a vacant bed are discussed below. For the normal dis-
   tribution only 2.5 percent of the observations are more than 1.96 ' 2.00
   standard deviations above the mean.



             Let us assume there is no cost in shifting patients within the

   time period of D days. Of course, D may be one day. Let us designate

   Z      as the standardized normal variate which indicates that the number of
    a
   beds is sufficient for all but 100 a percent of occurrences. Then the

   number of beds in the community is

  ("--4)B = [E (PD) + Z            SD(PD)J

   That is, for only 100 a              percent of occurrences-will the number of patient
   days demanded in the time period of D days exceed E(PD) +                          SD (PD).
                                                                                 Za

   Then2

                  =   1   +   Z   cV(PD).
                                                              .




   The expected bed occupancy rate (OR) equals                         if the number of beds
   is assumed fixed. Then,

(11--6)    R-----
           0 --
             (B)(D)                 ˜
                                         1  --
                                        ZCV(PD)
                                                          -
                                                                   -




                                                                             -
                                                                                        -
                                             11-6



  Taking    natural logs and using the relation that Ln(l+a)               a when a is
        1/
  small,--



  'For a population of one million, a daily admission rate of .15                      ,   and
                                                                                 365
  and a = .001 (i.e., an insufficient number of beds for one-tenth of one

  percent of occurrences, or Z =                 3.0), Z cV(PD) =   Z/_i-- ( - 1)      = 0.22.

  If the pooling is done over a week, Za CV(PD)                 0.084. These values of

  Za CV(PD) are ufficiently small for the approximation to apply.



(11--7) LnOR   =
                   _(Za) CV(PD).
  Combining eqUations (3) and (7),
                                 1
(11--8) Ln(OR) =        - zriJ       (1 -    1)).
  The               -
                          occupancy rate i positively related to the size of the
  population, to the rate of admission, and to the proportion of occurrences

  for which the demand exceeds the number of beds (a) fl"                This   provides us



  a"The parameter Za is smaller)the larger is a.                     Hence, the larger is
        the larger is LnOR.



  with two measurable explanatory variables for inter-SMSA differences in

  occupancy rates: population size and admission rate.

         Communities may --

  differ    in their desired a .            If   all admissionÈ are "discretionary" tt., the

  cost of a delayed admission is low]) the. community would be willing to accept

  a larger number of instances in which the admission of potential patients

  is either denied or delayed.' If all admissions are "emergencies "
                                       II -- 7



'The costs of a delay include the extra foregone productivity of the patient,
the extra psychic pain or death, and the additional curative costs due to
the delay. The benefits of delay include possibly a reduction in curative
costs (e.g., due to natural healing) and a smaller average "excess capacity"
of hospitals.



the cost of a delayed admission is high), the community would want a lower

frequency of occurrences in which admissions are delayed or denied. Holding

the admission rate constant, the effect of a differential emergency rate

across SMSAs would operate in the long run through the number of beds per

capita. SMSAswith more emergencies in their case load would have a higher

bed rate and,as a consequenceachieve the objective of a lower occupancy

rate.


C. Occupancy Rate. Versus Use Rate


         The annual occupancy rate of a hospital bed is the sum of the days

in a year in which a patient is assigned to and using the bed divided by

365   days. When   a bed   is vacated) it is not always immediately reoËcupied
by another patient even If there is queuing for beds. Th bed may be
vacated too late in the day forthe next patient to arrive, or the bed may
be reservad for a day or two for a. patient who is expected to arrive.' The

     'See, for example, Harry T. Paxton, "Whatever Happened to the
hospital Bed Shortage?" Nedical Economics, February 28, 1973, P. 42.
"use rate" of a hospital bed shall be defined as the occupancy rate plus
the   proportion of days of potential occupancy lost because of a late dis-

charge or because the bed is being reserved. Data on             bed   use rates do not

exist. However, the concept of "use"       without    occupancy may influence

the relation between       the admission rate    and the   occupancy rate.

        The total number of bed days "used" in an SMSA in a year is the sum

of the bed∑ days of occupancy and the bed days         consumed by lags between
                                      II -- 7



2"The costs of a delay include the extra foregone productivity of the patient,
the extra psychic pain or de3th, and the additional curative costs du to
the delay. The benefits of delay include possibly a reduction in curative
costs (e.g., due to natural healing) and a smaller average "excess capacity"
of hospitals.



the cost of a delayed admission is high], the community would want a lower

frequency of occurrences in which admissions are delayed or denied. Holding

the admission rate constant, the effect of a differential emergency rate

across SMSAs would operate in the long run through the number of beds per

capita. SMSAswith more emergencies in their case load would have a higher

bed rate andas a consequenceachieve the objective of a lower occupancy

rate.



C.    Occupancy Rate Versus Use Rate


            The annual occupancy rate of a hospital bed is the sum of the days
                                                                                        pm
in    a year in which a patient is assigned to and using the bed divided by

365   days. When     a bed is vacated) it is not always iediately reoccupied

by    another patient even if there is queuing for beds. The bed may be
vacated too late in the day for the next patient to arrive, or the bed may
be reserved for a day or two for a patient who is expected to arrive.' The

        'See,   for example, Harry T. Paxton, "Whatever Happened to the
Hospital      Bed Shortage?" Nedical Economics, February 28, 1973, p. 42.

"use rate" Of a hospital bed shall be defined as the occupancy rate plus
the proportion of days of potential occupancy lost because of a late dis--
charge or     because the bed is being reserved. Data on        bed use rates do not
exist.       However, the concept of "use"   without   occupancy may influence

the    relation between   the admission rate    and the   occupancy rate.

        The total number of bed days "used"     in   an SMSA in   a   year is the sum

of    the   bed days of occupancy and the bed days' consumed by lags between
                                                        11-8




    successive occupancies. That is,

                                                                                     ( lag
                                                                                              in filling a
             Use = (admissions) ( length of stay)
                                            per
                                      admission
                                                                      + (admissions)
                                                                            .  .
                                                                                       bed
                                                                                                     .  .
                                                                                              per admission
                                                                                                           ).
    We obtain the use rate (UR) by dividing both                    sides of        equation (IT-a) by (365)(Beds)

(11--10) U R --
                             Use
                                                   OR     ,(c1missions)lag)
                             (365)(Beds)                      (365)(Beds)

              & i nCe    OR --     (admissions) (length of stay per admission)
                                             (365) (Beds)

            Designating          the   average lag per admission per bed day as
                                                                                                  (365) (Beds)

    since admissions =                 (p)(pop),

'(11--11)
              UR =      OR   + g, p    (pop).

    At   full capacity the use               rate is unity. Differentiating equation (U) with

    respect to the admission rate when the hospitals.are operating at full capacity,


(11-12)                 =              +( +        )    pop      0.


    Thus, at full capacity (UR= 1.0), the marginal effect of adwissionson the

    occupancy        rate is

(11-13) = -. (1+)                           (pop),
    where         is the elasticity of the lag per admission () with                             respect to

    the     admission rate. If the lag exists ( 2.> 0) but is invariant                          with respect

    to   admissions (-                    0), at full capacity the measured occupancy rate will
∑   be less than unity, and                 a higher admission rate implies a lower occupancy
    rate.      ¿Ë long as the             elasticity of the lag with            respect to admissions is

    larger     in algebraic value than minus unity                       (i.e., -1 <
                                                                                       ci),   occupancy rates

    decrease with an increase in admissions at full capacity (UR                                1.0).
                                   11-9



       Thus, the effect of the adr1ission rate on the bed occupancy rate is
expected to be positive for utilization at less than full capacity,. but it

may be negative at or near use rates equal to unity. Since high occupancy

rates may imply capacity utill:ation, the admission rate may have a negative

effect on occupancy rates at very high levels of occupancy.


B. Bed Rate

       If an SMSA experiences an increase in its bed rate (beds per thousand

population), and the SMSA's admission rate and average length of stay remain

constant, the occupancy rate will fall."1 The exogenous increase in the bed



"Recall that since OR       _____         LnOR
                           (365) Beds ) 2LnBeds


rate also tends to increase the admission rate. Therefore, SMSAs with larger

bed rates may have higher admission rates and lower occupancy rates.' If


2/The
--                 .          .
      effect of an increase in the bed rate on admission and occupancy
rates is referred to in the literature as "Roemer's Law". Roemer's Law
says that exogenous increases in bed rates affect primarily admissions
and length of stay, and leave occupancy rates virtually unchanged. That
is, patients fill the available supply of beds. (For example, see M.I.
Roemer and M. Sham, Hospital  ljtilization Under Insurance, Hospital
Monograph Series, No. 6, Chicago, American Hospital Association, 1959).
                          --The coefficient of variation of occupancy rates
across SMSAs is considerably smaller than the coefficient of variation in
admission rates and bed rates. (See Appendix A.)



the bed rate is not held constant in the occupancy rate equation, we could

observe a negative partial effect of admissions on occupancy rates. The bed

rate is hypothesized to have a negative effect on the occupancy rate.


E. Communication Among Hospitals

       Suppose two cornmunities'have the same population, admission
                                              .11-10


  rate     and desired a .          The communities differ in that Community A has one

  hospital (HA = 1), whereas Community B has k identical hospitals (HB =                               k),
  each serving () (100) percent of the population, with no communication of

  vacancies among hospitals. It can be shown that community B is expected to

  have more beds and a lower                             occupancy rate.

            By substituting equation (3) into equation (4), for community A,

(11--14) BA(D) = E(PD) (1 + z CV ('PD) ) = E (PD) (1 + z
                                                                                ,/_i_
                                                                                         (!_   l) ).
  For   Community B,

(lI--is) BB(D) = k          E (PD)                 J_           -   I))   ):

                                          (l+Zf

                      =E                                        - 1)),
                           (PD) (1 ˜k)z (
  where k > 1. Thus, BB is larger than BA .
             Recall   that equation (8) was;                        '




(11--16)   LnOR            '.
                                =                  (I - 1),

  Therefore,      for Community B,             -




(11-17) Lt0R = -Z               --- (1 I) = ([k)          (-Z              (-   - 1))   = (Tk)
                                                                                               LnORA



  Since the natural log of a number smaller than unity is negative and since


  ORA<l.O,ORB<l.Oandk>l,                             .                             .



(11-18)                              or
             Ln0RB <LnORA,
             L    ORB<ORA

  That is, ceteris paribus, because of less efficient pooling of                            beds, occupancy

   rates    are lower in SMSAs with         more hospitals.
                                        h-h


           If a bed in one hospital were a perfect substitute ∑for a bed in

    another hospital, the number of hospitals would have no effect on the bed

    rate or the occupancy rate. Thus, holding the bed rate and admission rate

    constant the inclusion of a variable for the number of hospitals in an

    analysis of occupancy rates tests for the lack of perfect substitution of

    beds among hospitals.


    F. Demographic    Control Variabins
           Holding   cOnstant the   admission rate and   bed rate, the occupancy rate

    is, by definition)a function of the average length of stay. The average

    length of stayis a function of the SMSAs case mix and the demographic

    structure of the population. Although case mix data cannot be included,

    some of the empirical analysis does control for demographic variables. These

    variables include the sex, age, and race distributionSof the population, the

    live birth rate and the rate of growth of the population.

∑
           There is evidence that nonwhites have a longer ,average length of stay

    than whites.' This suggests that, ceteris paribus, occupancy rates are



    VFor example, in New    York Citythe average length of stay of a white
    person is shorter than that of a black person, in spite of the younger
    average age of blacks.   Average Length of Stay in Days
                            1964            1966                1968
    white                   10.9            11.2                13.4
    Black                   13.2            11.6                14.5
    Puerto Rican            14.2            12.6                15.0

    Source: Donald G. Hay and MoreyJ. Wontrnan, "Estimates of Hospital Episodes
             and Length of Stay, New York City, 1968's February 1972, mimeo.



    higher in SMSAT with a greater proportion of the population nonwhite. More

    rapidly growing SMSAs are hypothesized to have a lower occupancy rate
                                  11--12



because of a shorter length of stay. The shorter length of stay may be due

 to both thebetter health of Tnigrants, and the greater attractiveness

to migrants of healthier environments.


C. Climate

        Thus far the analysis has assumed that the variables under study do

not vary systematically over the year. Given an admission, however, climate

may affect the length of stay)-' It seems reasonable to hypothesize that,



'The effect of seasonality on admissions is examined explicitly in the
admission rate equation.



holding the admission rate constant, SMSAs in colder winter climates have

longer lengths of stay for two reasons. First, since admission rates are

higher in colder winter climates,' for two SMSAs with the same admission



'See, this monograph, chapter III,   part .


rate,   the case mix is expected to be more heavily weighted toward more

serious cases in the SMSA with the lower mean January temperature. More

serious cases have longer average lengths of stay. Second, holding case

mix constant, patients are likely to be kept in the hospital longer, the less

amenable is the non-hospital environment to recuperation. Non-hospital care

is presumably less productive than hospital care for recuperative

purposes in a colder winter climate than in a warmer climate. Since longer

lengths of stay increase the occupancy rate, holding the admission and bed

rates constant, the partial effect of mean January temperature on occupancy

rates is hypothesized to be negative.
                                  .11-13



H.   Summary

         Table 11-1 contains the regression equation for the occupancy rate

analysis.      If hypotheses as to the sign of a variable have been presented

above, the sign is indicated.

         All but one of the explanatory variables may be viewed in the short

run as being "caused" independently of the dependent variable, LN(OR). The

one exception is the admission rate (p). The admission, rate isjin part, a

function of the occupancy rate. At high levels of. hospital occupancy, the cost

to society of admitting a patient to fill a bed is the sum of the resources

consumed because the bed is occupied plus a measure of the cost because a

potential patient is denied access (or is granted delayed access) to a bed.

This latter cost component does not exist when occupancy rates are low. Thus,

we expect admissions to be more selective when occupancy rates are high}-'



1For a time series study see John Rafferty, "Patterns of Hospital Use:
 An Analysis of Short--Run Variations," Journal of Political Economy, January!
                                            .

 February 1971, pp 154--165.

c-- It      is for this reason that it is appropriate to use a predicted rather

than the observed admission rate in the occupancy rate analysis.

      The next section develops an euat1on with the admission rate

 as the dependent   variable. In the empirical analysis the   occupancy

 rate.   and admission rate equations are estimated simultaneously.




                                                                                  U
                                  ∑




                                      11-14



                                 Table Il-I


                          Occupancy Rate Eguationa


               Dependent Variable: The Natural Log of the
                           Occupancy Rate (LnOR)




        Name                  Explanatory Variables               Predicted Sign of Slope

(1) 'Admission Rate                   P or Adms*         +        in "randomness model"
                                                         --       in "lag model" when near
                                                                  1OO7 use rate

(2) Bed Rate                          Beds*

(3) Square root of inverse
      of population

-(4) Square root of number
                                      V _____
                                                  SPOP



      of hospitals                     }Iosp
(5) Percent Nonwhite                  ZHWIIT                             -+

(6)   Percent Change in                                       ∑


                                                                   -
       Population                             -




(7)   Mean January Temperature        JANTEMP

(8) Age, Sex Distribution




          aF or a nre detailed definition of the variables and data
                                                                    sources
           see Appendix A.
                                    'I--1

2.   Admission Rate

      Economic, demographic and institutional variables are used in

this section to generate a model to explain SMSA differences in the

rate of admission to short term general hospitals.


(A) Hospital Occupancy Rate

      Hospitals appear to be more selective in the cases they admit when

beds are scarce       than    when vacant beds are abundant. Medical

conditions for which delay in treatment or alternative treatments are

less costly are put ∑lower down on the admissions queue during periods

of high occupancy rates. To the extent that higher occupany rates

increase the delay before a desired admission can take place, alternative

sources of medical treatment (including spontaneous cures) or death may

reduce the total number of actual admissions. Alternative sources of

medical treatment include home care, specialized hospitals, nursing

homes, and hospitals outside of the SMSA. Thus, we expect anegative

partial effect of the occupancy rate on the admission rate.


 (B) Bed Rate

      An alternative hypothesis (Roemer's Law)   is   that communities maintain a constar

occupancy rate and admissions and length of stay are a function of the

number of beds in the SMSA.(1) To test a "beds effect" on admissions,


      'The coefficient of variation across SMSAs is much.sra1ler for the

occupancy rate than for the admission rate and bed rate.

 (Number of observations     192)
                                    Coefficiei1of Variation
 1) Occupancy Rate (OR)               0.09

 2) Admission Rate (P)                0.24

 3) Bed Rate (Beds*)                  0.28
Source: See Appendix A.
                                        II -- 16




the bed rate is entered as an explanatory variable.
     It could be argued that a positive partial correlation between the

admission rate and the bed rate is not due to more beds causing more

admissions, but rather is due to a higher demand for admissions

causing more hospital beds to be constructed. This suggests that the bed

rate should be viewed as an endogenous variable (determined within the

model) not an exogenous variable (determined outside of the model) in our

analysis of hospital utilization.                  -



     In,the   short run the bed rate (Beds*)       is   viewed as

fixed, and the hospital admission rate and occupancy rate as interacting

simultaneously. In the' long run, the bed rate' is not fixed and the

three variables ----   p,   BEDS* and LnOR---' are interdependent. As the number

of beds adjusts to long run conditions, the occupancy rate variable may

lose some of its variab!lity. In the next section a model is developed

for predicting the bed rate in an SMSA. The analysis of inter--SMSA

differences in admission rates is performed for both a short run model,

using predicted LnOR and observed BEDS* as explanatory, variables, and

a long run model, using predicted BEDS*.
                                  II-7

(C) Hospital Insurance

     It   is often argued that the effect of more extensive hospital and

surgical insurance coverage is to increase the amount of hospital care

and surgery demanded by patients and their physicians. The effect of

insurance is a change from a "fee for service" pricing system to an

annual lump sum payment independent of the amount of services to be

consumed and (usually) a smaller fee for service. By lowering the

direct cost tothe patient of an additional unit of medical services

the patient has an incentive to purchase more medical services than

otherwise. This may be done directly by the patient either through

requesting more services or by searching for a doctor who will prescribe

these services. The increased use of medical services may also occur

if the patient's doctor, seeing the lowered direct price to the patient,

suggests or provides more medical care. The additional medical care may

show up, in part, as a higher rate of hospital admission. Thus, a greater

hospital and surgical insurance coverage is expected to. be associated with

a higher rate of hospital admission.


(D) Physicians

     The number of physicians per capita in an SMSA can be associated with

the utilization of their services in several ways. First, the greater the

relative number of physicians, holding the demand for their services constant,

the lower would be the cost, and consequently the greater the use of their

services.' Second, if we hold fixed the supply schedule of physicians


     1The cost of physician's services include the direct price (fee),

the waiting room time, and the costs incurred due to a delay in

receiving care.
                                       11--18



     services, communities with a higher demand for health care have a larger

     number of physicians per capita.2 Finally, it has been alleged that

          2ThiS   suggests that the number of physicians.is an endogenous

     variable. However, in this study the observed number of physicians is

     used in the empirical analysis.


     physicians create their own demand:    the larger the number Of physicians

     per capita, the greater           the amount of medical care received

     per capita because "consumer ignorance" results in patients placing a great

     deal of faith in the physician's advice as to the amount and type of

     medical care that should be purchased and physicians wish to "fill upt'

     their day.

          The effect on hospital admissions of an increase in the purchase of

     medical care due to the presence of a larger number of   physicians   depends

:
     on whether physicians' services are complementarywjth or substitutable

      for hospital services. Surgeons' services are hospital using. It is

     not clear a priori whether hospital services are substitutes or comple-

     ments for the medical care provided by non--surgical out--of--hospital

     physicians. Thus,                          the number of surgeons per thousand

     population(SURG*) should have a positive partial effect on            admission

    rates, but the partial effect of non--surgical out--of--hospital physicians

     per thousand population (GENMD*) is not clear.

          It might be asked, "Does the effect of the presence of a larger

     nuinler of physicians depend on the extent of hospital insurance coverage?"
                                     11--19



    This question is answered            by ihcluding two linear interaction

    variables for hospital insurance and physicians per thousand population.1


         'These variables are (a) (HI)(GENND*) and (b) (HI)(SURG*).



    (E) Income

         The variable median family income serves several inter--related

    functions. First, income may be a proxy variable for health status.2


∑

         2There is evidence that income and good health are negatively

    correlated among whites but positively correlated among norihites. See

    Michael Grossman, The !)emand for Health   (BER,   Occasional Paper 119, 1972)

    and Morris Silver, "An Econometric Analysis of Spatial Variations in

    Mortality Rates by Age and Sex," V.R. Fuchs, ed., Essays in the Economics

    of Health and Medical Care (NBER, 1972) pp. 161--227.


    Second, it is not clear a priori whether, ceteris paribus, hospital

    admissions increase or decrease with income, holding an initial Level

    of health constant.3 Thus, no prediction is offered as to the effect


         3For a given initial level of health, if preventive or early curative

    care are less hospital using than cure at later stages, those with higher

    incomes may have a lower admission rate. On the other hand, there may

    be a positive income elasticity of demand for hospital using curative

    medicine.


    of median family income on the demand for admissions across SMSAs.
                                11--20
F. Climate

     Hospital admission rates appear to be'seasonal; they tend to be

higher in the fall and winter than in the spring and summer.1 Thus, if


     'For example, see Helen Hershfield Avnet, jsician Service Patterns

and Illness Rates (Group Health Insurance, Inc. 1967) Table 42, p. 110.



all other variables that influence hospital admissions were held constant,

communities wiLh more severe winters would tend to have higher

admission rates. Nean January temperature is used as a measure of the

severity, of the winter.


(G) The SNSA as a Nedical Center          .




     The dependent variable, the admission rate,, is defined as the number

of admissions in the short term general hospitals located in the SMSA

in 1967 divided by the population of the SMSA in 1966. An admission rate

obtained in this manner is a biased estimate 'of the hospital admission

rate of the population of the SNSA. To obtain the populationt s admission

                                                                                   -
rate, the admissions of non--residents who used the SMSA"s hospitals           .



should be subtracted from the data, while the admissions of residents who
entered short term general hozpita1s outside of the SMSA should be

included in the data. Unfortunately, it is' not possible to make these
                                              .

adjustments.     .




     An alternative procedure is to obtain a proxy for the net in--migration

 of patients. The net in--migration would be greater, the greater. the ex-

 tent to which the SMSA serves as a health center. An SNSA is more likely

 to serve as a health center if it has a medical school, and, if a medical

 school exists, the larger its size. The number of medical school students

                                                                                       C)
                                      11--21



per hundred thousand population is entered for this purpose.'


     'The variable is defined to be zero for SMSA s without medical

schools.




(II) Demographic Variables

     The probability of a hospitalization in a year is related to the

person's age, sex and race. Thus, admission rates by SMSA will vary

with the age, sex and race composition of the population. Seven

variables are included to capture the effects of sex and age

differences.2 The live birth rate (LBR) is included to control for


     2The seven variables are the percent of the population female

(ZFENAL),   and the perceÒtof males and females separately, in the age

groups 10 to 39, 40 to 54 and 55 years of age andover.


SMSA differences in fertility. Holding the birth rate constant, the sign

of %FEMAL is expected to be negative as women tend to be more healthy

than men of the same      age.   The percent of the population who are nonwhite.

(%NWHT)    is   hypothesized to have a positive effect on the admission rate

since nonwhites have a lower level of health than whites.

     It would be desirable to hold constant a measure of the "healthi--

ness" of the SNSA's environment. The mean January temperature captures

some of this effect. Holding constant the median family income and the

sex, age, and race distributions of the SMSA, the health status of the

environment may be highly correlate4 with the mortality rate. The number
                                      11--22


    of deaths per thousand population (MORT*)                   J

    ii is   expected to have a positive effect on admissions.


3   Sunmiary:

         Combining the separate analyses presented in this Section, Table

    11--2 presents the admission rate equation and indicates the hypothesized

    effects of each variable. In Chapter III the admissions equation is

    estimated simultaneously with the occupar.cycate equation and with the

    bed rate equation.




                                                                                0




                                                                                0
                                             11--23


                                         Table 11--2

                                    Admission Rate Eguationa

           Dependent Variable: Admissions per Thousand Population (P)



                                         Explanatory Variables:

     Name                                    Symbol               Predicted Effect
                               C.
1)   Natural log of occupany
     rate                                    LnOR

2) Bed Rate                                  Beds*                        +

3) Hospital and surgical
    insurance per capita                     HSB/C                        +

4) Non--surgical ND: per
     thousand population                      GENND*                  .   ?


5) Srgical MD.s per thousand
     population                               SURC*                       +
6) Insurance non--surgical
    ND interaction                          (III) (GENND*)

7)   Insurance surgical ND
     interaction                            (HI)(SURG*)                   +

8) Median Family Income                      NC                   -



9) Mean January temperature                  JANTEMP

10) Medical Students per hundred
     thousand. population                      MST*C                      +
11) Percent of the population
                       .

     nonwhite                                  %NWHT                      +

12) Mortality per thousand
     population                                MORT*                      +

13) Demographic variables
      a) Live birth rate                       LBR                        +

      b) Sex                                  %FEM

      c)    Age distribution

 aFor a detailed definition of the variables and data sources)see Appendix A.
                                                11-24


4. Bed Rates

      A. Introduction

              Although ---------- the number of hospital beds in an SMSA

on January 1 comes prior in time sequence to the number of admissions

in that year, this is not a sufficient reason for treating the bed rate

as exogenous (determined outside of the model). The number of hospital
                                                          future
beds is a function of past demands and       expectations of/demandS

for these beds, and there is a strong time series correlation in the

demand        for hospital care. The larger the demand tor hospital care,
the greater are the economic and political incentives for the government,
andreligious, other not--for--profit and for--profit organizations to increase
the   number of hospital beds. This section develops a theoretical model

to explain SMSA differences in the bed rate.                          -




         B.     Admission Rate and the Randomness Model

         If we divide both sides of equation 11--15 by the            size   of the

population (in terms          of       thousands of inhabitants) and D,


(11-19) Beds* =                                     +   Z\!_i) ]
The bed rate       indicated          in equation (11--19) is composed of a mean predicted

demand               plus a demand due to the stochastic nature of admissions

    L∞                        2
I   (--) (Z) ----(p --    p       )   ]   The mean predicted demand in our simplified

model is proportional to the admission rate and the length of stay.
                                    II --25


The   "stochastic demand" is proportional to length of stay, inversely
proportional to the square root of the population size, proportional
to the square root of the number of hospitals, and positively
related to the admission rate (for p < .5).
       We can test the effect of density on the substitutability of
hospital beds. If a greater density increases the substitutability
among hospital beds, an SHSA with a smaller land area (holding
constant population, admissions and number of hospitals) will have
a smaller bed rate.
C. Hospital   Administration

       If beds under different administrative control (government, voluntary,

proprietary) were equally, good substitutes for each other, the fraction

of beds under a given administration should have no effect on the SMSA's

overall bed rate. However, if only veterans can use federal short--term

general hospitals, tfie addition of federal hospital beds has a smaller

 and indirect effect on bed availability for non--veterans than for

veterans. This is expected to increase the number of beds (but by

less than the increase in fedral beds) and the proportion of beds in

federal hospitals. It seems reasonable to assume that state and local

government short--term general hospital beds are              good

substitutes for beds in voluntary hospitals. Although proprietary

hospitals charge higher fees than non--profit non--federal hospitals, there

are no other special barriers to patient entry. The proportion of

proprietary beds in the total bed census is so small)it is unlikely that

SMSA variations in proprietary hospital beds have a statistically
                                                          .




significant effect on the overal ed rate.'
                        -
                                                11--26
        Ftnote from p.-L- 'c
        --
        1/
           Average   across 192 SMSA of the proportion of beds under each form

        of administrative control:                              '

                                                         Mean
             Control
                                                 rercent of Beds
            State and Local government              15.8

            Federal government                      10.6

            Proprietary                              4.5

            Voluntary               .
                                                    69.1
                                                   100.0

        Source: See Appendix A.



                  Three hospital administration variables are added to the bed rate

∑
        analysis, the percent of beds in state and local (%SLBEDS), federal

        (%FEDBEDS) and proprietary (%PRBEDS) hospitals. Insignificant effects
    ∑
        are expected for state and local, and proprietary beds. The "veterans

        effect" is expected to result in a significant positive effect of federal

        hospital beds on SMSA bed rates,


         D. Z          Emergencies and Income
              a


                The parameter Z    is the standardized normal variate indicating

        the proportion of occurrences (a) for which, the demand for beds exceeds

        the available supply. There are no direct measures of Z      ,   but we can
        postulate that it is a function of two variables, the relative importance

        of emergencies in the SMSA's case mix and, median family income.

              The more important are emergencies in an SMSA's case mix, the
                    expected                                     /
                                                                       of
        greater is the/cost of    delayed (or denied) admissionc/because/the
                             ing
        demand for beds exceed! the available supply. Thus, ceteris paribus,

        the more important are emergencies, the smaller the desired a (larger Z),
                                         .11--27



and consequently the larger the bed rate.'




         'The emergency variable (E!.ERG) is the sum of deaths from six causes.
Thevariable is entered as emergency deaths per thousand population (EMERG*).
These six causes are:
            (a) Arteriosclerotic heart disease, including coronary conditions (HEART)
            (b) Vascular lesions affecting the central nervous system (STROKE)
            (c)   Motor Vehicle accidents (MOTOR)
            (d) Other accidents (OTHACC)
            (e) Suicide (SUIC)
            (f) Homicide (HOMIC) .                    .




       If    the availability of a hospital bed is viewed as a superior good,

 higher income SMSA's would prefer a smaller a (larger Z) to reducE the

 probability that a desired hOspital admission would be delayed. This impljes
                                                             .

 a positive effect of income on the bed rate.


E.    Percent Nonwhite

        Since nonwhites have been subjected to disËrimination in the

 provision of other public services,2 they may            have been subject to


 2For discrimination in public schoo1 expenditures see Richard Freeman,

 "Labor Market Discrimination," paper presented at Econometric Society

 Meeting, December l972Ûr Finis Welch, "Black--White Differences in Returns

 to Schooling," American Economic Review (forthcoming).



 past (and perhaps also current) discrimination in the provision of hospital

 services. In addition, since non--profit hospitals are financed to a

 large extent by voluntary contributions from wealthy individuals and

 foundations, discrimination by these sources against nonwhites implies

 that SNSAs with a larger fraction of the population nonwhite have a smaller

 bed rate. To test these hypotheses, a variable for the proportion of

 noni.thites in the SMSA's population is added to the bed rate analysis.
                                   11--28



F. Other Variables

       ilbiding the admission rate and number of hospitals constant, SMSAs

which serve as medical education centers are likely to have a larger bed

rate. This can be due to both a longer average length of stay and a larger

Z   (to reduce the probability of rejecting an "interesting't case) in hospitals

affiliated with medical schools.

           number of medical students per hundred thousand population (MST*C)

is used to capture the medical center effect on the bed rate.

       The bed rate in an area is a function of the way its denominator,

population, changes. If hospital construction lags behind population

growth, the greater the increase in population, the smaller the bed rate.

If the community anticipates future demands on the basis of current

population growth rates, a positive partial relation would exist between

the bed rate and the rate of growth of population (%CHPOP). In terms of

equation (19), holding the admission rate constant, the population growth

rate effect would appear as short--rurL variations in Z-.




G. Summary

       Table 11--3 presents a listing of the variables which enter the

bed rate analysis and the hypothesized effects of these variables. The

empirical analysts uses a predicted admission rate (rather than the

observed admission rate) since the admission rate and the bed rate are

simultaneously determined in the long run.
                                       ∑.    ∑r
                                             .1. .1. -




                                       Table 11-3
                                                    a
                                   Bed Rate Equation

              Depe.ndent Variable: Beds Per Thousand Population (Beds*)


                                  Explanatry Variables

      Name                              Symbol               Hypothesized Sign

1) Admission rate                             P                    +

 2) Square root of inverse                  SPOP
     of population (/---- )
3)    Square root of number
      of hospitals

 4) Median family income                     INC                    +

 5) Emergency deaths per                    EMERG*                  +
     thousand population                                 .




 6) Medical students per hundred            MST/C                   +
      thousand population

 7) Area (square miles) per                 Area*
     thousand population

 8) Percent change in population            %CIIPOP

 9) Percent nonwhite                        XNWHT

10)   Percent of beds in                    %SLBeds                 0
      state and local hospitals

11) Percent of beds in federal              ZFed Beds               +
     hospitals         ∑




12)   Percent of beds in
      proprietary hospitals                 %PRBeds                 0




 aFor a detailed definition of the variables and data sources, see Appendix A.
                                   Chapter III

                                Empirical Analysis


      chapter II developed hypotheses and three structu.ral equations

to explain regional differences in short term general hospital

occupancy rates, admission rates and bed rates. This chapter presents

an empirical estimation of the equations and tests of the hypotheses

using the Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area as the mit       of
observation.'




       'The   analysis is for 192 SNSAs. Data    for nine additional SNSAs

were available, but, becatte     of extremc values for the proportion
of   beds in fedaral hospitals and for length    of stay, it was felt
.that long term care or specialty care hospital facilfties were included
in what was supposed to be short term general hospital data. (See
Appendix A.) The two stage 1eastquares regressions for the         full

sample   of 201 SHSAs, as well as the ordinary least squares regressions
for both saiple sizes, are presented in Appendix B.


The data for hospital occupancy, admission and bed rates are from
a 1967 survey of a.1 short--term general hospitals in the      United States.2




       2llospitals:   A County znd Metropolitan Area Data Pook, National
Center for Health Statistics, Department of Health, Education and
Welfare, November 1970. For the sources of the data for the explanatory

variables see     Appendix A.
                                      III -- 2




1. Occupancy Rate Equation

             a. Randomness Model

       If we designate the randomness model variables by V           /1 (1 --
                                                                                 1) k)
                                                                     popp
we can write equation 11--17 as

        (111--1)   Ln OR =   -- ZV.

If    the assumptions of the model are valid, the regression of the natural

log of the occupancy rate on the structure of the randomness model (V)

will not have an intercept but will       have   a negative slope coefficient.

Using the normal distribution, the slope coefficient indicates the average

proportion of occurrences for which the denand for beds exceeds the avail-

able supply (a).


       Table III-1 presents the regressions when the admission rate

is the annual probability of an admission, divided by5--) that is,

the   explanatory variable assumes the time period D is one week.'


       1Because of th.e simultaneous determination of the admission rate
and the    occupancy rate, the predicted admission rate is used. The
variables used to obtain the predicted admission rate are the exogenous
variables in Tables Bjand 3 --ifQ,

When an intercept is allowed, it is insignificant (t-- 1.58). Thus,
we accept the hypothesis that the intercept is zero. When the regres-
sion is forced through the origin, the slope coefficient is highly
significant, has a negative signand its magnitude indicates that
                                                                                         U
                                  TABLE Ill--i

               Randomness Model Analysis of the Occupancy Rate



                         Dependent Variable: LnOR



                                                            Regression Forced
                              Linear Regression              Through Origi
Independent Varicble        coefficient t        ratio    coefficient t ratio


                             --2.409         --6.63        --2.97      --4.4

Intercept.                   --0.051         --1.58




         =
             \j!- ( -- 1)k    ,    where p    is   the predicted admission rate

per thousand population (for exogenous       variables, see Tables (2--3, Z._
and 8'64i-) divided by (l,000).(52.).

     Source:    See Appendix A.
                                      III -- 3



the   demand for beds exceeds the number available in only 0.15 percent

of the weeks (a       0.0015)) The value of a can be computed f or




       'For Z        2.973, using the upper tail of the normal distribution,

a     0.0015     0.15 percent.



various time periods (D). For example, on approximately 13 percent

of    the days some potential patients would be rejected and be subject
to either a delayed or a denied admission.2


        2For a daily admission rate p* = --,        since          --   1

because p' is     small, Ln OR
                                     (73)_L (- -- 1)k
orZ      (one day) =    .l.land    a (one day)      0.12k,



       The findings in Table 111--1 provide emp1rical support for the
randomness      model developed in Chapter II. The regression in Table III--,

which    uses a looser form of the randomness    model variables as well

as other     control variables, provides additional 3upport for our
theoretical analysis of occupancy       rates.

     3The ordinary least squares equation (i.e., the equation using
the observed admission rate) explains over 40 percent of SMSA variation
in the natural log of the occupancy rate.


        In   Table III--.2, the annual admission rate has    a   positive effect

on    the occupancy rate.4 The     mean annual admission rate is 170 per
                                     Table 111--2

                       Two Stage Least SQuares Analysis of
                        SNSA Differences in Occupancy Rates
                            Dependent Variable = LnOR
                                   N = 192 SI'ISA



Variab les                                  coefficient                      t ratio
  A
ADMS *                                        .0015                            1.94

BEDS *                                       --.038                           --2.61

sP0P66                                 --78556                                --3.54

S PRO S P                                    --.016                           --3.26

%NWHT                                         .0017                            2.23
%CHGPO                                       -- .00035                        --1.65
JANTENP                                      --.0028                          --3.91
LBR                                          --.00055                         --1.22
%FENAL                                        .021                             0.80

%N1039                                        .012                  ∑
                                                                               0.37
%N4054                                       -- .014                          --0.37
%N55                                          .016                      ∑
                                                                               th5l
%F1039                                       --O058                         ∑ --0.18
%F4054                                  ∑
                                               .023                            0.58
ZF55                                         --.011                           --0.36
const.                                       3.112                             2.18



            A
         ADMS*   = Predicted Admission Rate      ----
                                                        using exogenous variables
in    this table and Table B--6 #2

         Source: See Appendix A.
                                     III -- 4




      4The first stage equation used to predict the admission rate
                                                                                          0
has an R2 of approximately 77 percent. Because predicted admissions

and the square of predicted admissions are very highly correlated

(R    0.98), it was not possible to test for non--linear effects of

admissions on th log of tha occupancy rate.



thousand, with a standard deviation of 40.4 per thouGand. An increase
                                                                                  2'T1'
in   the admission rate from 130 per thousand to 210 per thousand (from

one standard deviation below to one standard deviation above the mean)

predicts an increase in the occupancy rate of approximately 9 per--

ce1tage points.'




      'Since Ln0R           +00015       OR      =    (77)(+o   0015)       +.O3ll55


Then,           t0R      +0.001155 (2i0--l30)        +0.092

The mean occupancy rate is .77 and the standard deviation is 0.067..



      When   hospital   admissiors are viewed as random events, larger popu--

lations have a more stable relative demand for hospital beds and, there-

fore, are able to maintain a higher occupancy rate. The variable SP0P66,

the   square root of the inverse of the population of the SMSA(             ),    has

a significant    effect on the occupancy rate. Going from an SMSA of one--
quarter   of   a million to one of one ml1ion inhabitants       increases   the

occupancy rate by six percentage      points.2
                                              III -- 5




      2Since                   =    --78.66       and             .77        at   the mean,
                                              ,                          ,
                asPoP66

  0R       =   --60.57     .
aSPOP66


            t0R =                                            yTyj) =         --60.57 (.001.002)


                      +0.0606 or 6 percentage points.

The   difference in occupancy rates between an SNSA with

50,000    inhabitants and one with one--quarter of a million is I 5

percentage points

       (AOR =    -60.57                                      =   -60.57 (.002_.0047)= .lT)




       The randomness model also predicts that                   if   beds in different

hospitals are not perfect substitutes for each other, the larger the

number of hospitals in an SMSA, the lower the occupancy rate. The

model suggests the variable SR.HOSP = \'tumber                   of   general hospitals,

which has a significant negative effect on the occupancy rate. Coing

from four hospitals to sixteen hospitals decreases the bed occupancy

rate by 2.5 percentage points.1




         ihe mean   and    standard deviation of Hosp are 3.2 and                  1.92

respectively. Using Table III2.                          0
                                                                                    --0.016


               --0.01232       ,   and   0R =      --0.01232 (4--2) =         --0.02464
                                             111--6


           Note   that a four fold increase in the number of hospitals and in

the population size leaves unchanged the number of hospitals per capita,

but the occupancy rate need aot be unchanged. An increase in the number

of       hospitals from 4 to 16 and an increase in populadon size from one--

quarter million to one million results in a net increase in occupancy

rates.1 The increase in occupancy rates with                  population       size when




           'dLnOR                  dSPOP66 + -.            d\i
     ∑

                        Ln0R = (-78.66)(.00l-.002)          +-   (--0.016)(4-2)


                                    +0.0787).+ (-0.032) =             +0.OI7

                        OR = (.77)(+0.0755)            =   +0.0
     -

                                     hospitals   per capita is unchanged suggests

that there is substitution among hospitals but that this substitution

is less perfect betwaen            than   withIn hospitals.2.              -




          LThat is, an SSA with       k   hospitals of equal size does not behave

as if it were          k separate SNSAs each     with one --k of the SMSA's popu--

lation.

          Similar but weaker results emerge when the regression in Table 111--2
is       computed without the bed rate variable.

                                                Slope                    t ratio
                  a)    SPOP65               --33.12                    --2.54

                  b) N'OS                      --0.011                  --2.58

           dLnOR                   dSPOP66 +                      =    0.011
                         3SP0P66
                                            III--7

       b. Other Variables
       The bed   rate has a significant negative effect on occupancy rates.

A 10 percent increase In the bed rate decreases the occupancy rate

by two percent.' This provides only partial suppor for Roemer's Law



                                    -
       'From Table ui-a

______        ____                = (--O.038)(5.22)        =     -0.198


that an increase in the bed rate results in these beds being filled,

with no change in the occupancy rate. Since the admission rate is

held constant, and the elasticity of response of OR to Beds* is

significantly different from minus unity, length of stay increases

with an increase in the bed rate.2




       2Since OR =
                            P)              , and Beds* = Beds/pop,


LuOR =                                          -                    Then,
           Ln(p) + Ln(LS) -- Ln(Beds*)              Ln(365)     ∑




  LnOR           =     3Ln(p)     +       Ln(LS)     -- 1 ∑.-   In   the previous footnote
aLn(Beds*)           aLn(Beds*)         aLn(Beds*)

                 LnOR       =
we found                          --0.2.0    In the analysis of SMSA differences
             aLnO3eds*)
in admission rates (this chapter, part 3), L(*) = +0. I∑

These terms imply that the elasticity of length of stay with respect

to the bed rate I
                           Ln(LS)
                          3Ln(Beds)
                                            =   +O3

       It is hypothesized that there is a negative partial effect of

mean   January teinperature on          the mean length    of stay and consequently)
                                          III -- 8




on the occupancy         rate.'   Empirically, mean January temperature has a




∑
          'The effect of temperature on occupancy rates through the admis-
sion rate is held constant when we use           predicted   admissions.




significantly negative effect on occupancy rates.2 The variable




          2The   average                        January temperature is 36cF,
with a standard deviation of 12F. The occupancy rate for SIISAs
one       standard deviation above the mean is lower by approximately 5.5
percentage points than the OR for SMSAs one standard deviation below
the mean.
                       LnOR                              = (-.003)(.77)    =   -0.00231   .
           Since, Jantemp                  ,
                                               Jantemp

Then, OR               --0.00231 (48--24) = --0.05544




maintains        its slope and standard error even after a South--NonSouth

dummy       variable   or a New   England dummy variable is added to thr
    regression equation (see Appendix B).
         The proportion of the population of an SMSA ho are nonwhite

    appears to have a significant posItive effect on the SMSA's occupancy
    rate.3 Going from an SMSA with no nonwhites to one with 20 percent


           3mis is not capturing      an income effect. When median    family income
13 included in the occupancy rate equation, income is not significant
    and      does not change the effect of percent nonwhite (see Appendix B).
                                           111--9


nonwhite (i.e., from approximately one standard deviation below to

one standard deviation above the rnean) increases the predicted

occupancy rate by almost three percentage points.1 The positive




     he mean percent nonwhite is 10.68 and its standard deviation

is 10.5 percent. Using Table III--.                                      = 0.00173


               (0.00173)(.77)     0.00133 and t0R              (0.00133)(20.0--0.0)   0.0266.




effect of percent nonwhite, when the admission rate and            bed   rate are

held constant, suggests there is a longer average length of stay

for nonwhites.2




     2mere is other evidence of a longer noawhie length of stay.

?or exp1e, the average length of hospital stay in New York City

;in 1964 was

                                Male                      Female (xcluding deliveries)

        White                   13.8                       10.5

        Nonwhite                i6.0                       16.4

        Puerto Rican            19.9                       14.4

Source: Hospital Discharges and Length of Stay, New York City, 1964
(New York City, Population Health Survey, Septerber 1966, Report Number H--i),
Table 8.



     The variable "percent change in population" has a negative

effect (significant at the 10 percent level) suggesting that more

rapidly growing SNSAs have             ,   lengths   of stay, either because

   a healthier population or environment. Eight other variables are
                                          111--10


    added to the occupancy rate equation to control fer SMSA differences
    in length of stay due to differences in the live birth rate (LBR), the
    ∑sex distribution (%FEMAL percent of the population female),
    and the age distribution. These demographic variables are generally not

    separately significant.

             c Surnma
             The   empirical analysio of SMSA differences in occupancy rates
    permits a test of the hypotheses developed in Chapter II, Part 2.
    The findings confirm the predictions of the randomness model. There
    is   a positive effect of     the admission rate on the occupancy rate:
    SMSAs with higher admission rates have higher occupancy rates More

    populous SMSAs are able to take advantage of the effect of population.

    size and maintain a higher occupancy rate. A larger number of hospitals

    ciecre2ses the occupancy rate, presumably because of a poorer referral

:   system between than within hospitals. Cormunication does occur

    across hospitals, as shcwn by the higher occupancy rate whenpopula--

    tion siza and nuuiber of hospitals are increased proportionately.

             Hoidng the admission rate constant, a higher bed rate implies

    a lower occupancy rate (the elasticity is --0.2). Thus, an nerease

    in beds is associated with both an increase in length of stay

    (elasticity is +0.3.9) and a decrease in the occupancy rate. This

    is only partial support for Roemerts law that when more beds are

    available they tend to be               filled.

         -
             Longer lengths of stay explain the findings that occupancy rates
    are higher in SNSAs in colder wintef climates and with a larger fraction

    of the population nonwhite.
H                                   111--11



        The empirical analysis

    indicates that occupancy rates vary across SNSAs and that this

    variation can be related systematically to the characteristics of

    the SMSA.
    . Admission Rate        Equation

           a. Introduction:

               The second dependent variable examined theoetical1y in

    Chapter II is the hospital admission rate. The admission rate is

    defined as the total number of admissions in a year in the SMSA's

     short   term generil   hospitals divided by the population in thousands

     of   the SMSA.           The mean and standard deviation of the admission
                                                                           1/
    rate   are 170 and 40 respectively, and the range is from 60 to 290.H




    'The data are f or 192 SMSAS.        See Appendix A.


               The regression equation developed in Chapter II for explaining

    SMSA differences in the hospital admission rate is estimated simultaneously

    with the occupancy rate in our "short run" model (Table III--), and simul--

:   taneously with the bed rate in our "long run" model (Table iii--4)--".




                                                      The model explains 68 percent

    of lnter--SMSA variation in    th2   admission rate in the ordinary least squares

    regression analysis (See Appendix B).


          b. Endogenous                                       Rate

               The Cost to the hospital or society of a patient occupying a

    bed depend,in Part,on the space (beds) available. The more crowded are
                                           ILz-/3


hospitals   (higher bed occupancy rate), for a fixed number of beds,

the more likely it is that accepting an admission precludes (or delays)

accepting another patient with a more "urgent" demand for hospital care.

          As expected, the predicted natural.log of the occupancy rate

has a significant negative effect on the admission rate. A one per-

centage point increase in             occupancy rates, ceteris paribus, decreases

the admission rate by over four admissions per thousand .population per year):!



       Table III-, regression 2, at the mean OR,

          aAdms* --    Adms*          --   341 9
          aLnOR        OR

          aAdms*      '--341.9   --     --341.9     -- --444 0
          30R                               77
                         OR
Thus, a one percentage point increase in the occupancy rate (OR = 0.01)',

in the neighborhood of the mean OR, results in a decrease in admissions

per thousand population by 4.44.


     Holding the predicted occupancy rate constant, a larger bed rate (Beds*)

implies a larger absolute number of vacant beds per capita. A larger absolute

number of vcant beds per capita implies a lower probability that an admission

will preclude or delay the admissiun of a patient with a more serious illness.

The variable Beds* does indeed have the expected significant positive partial

effect on the admission rate (Table III--). An increase of one bed per

thousand population is associated with an 11.2 per thousand population

increase in the admission rate.'

'The   mean and standard deviation of bed rate are 5.22 and l.44,respectively.

A one bed per thousand increase represents nearly a 20 percent increase in the

stock of beds.
                                               T-ia
                                             Table      111--3

                                      Two_Stac;e Least Sguares
                  Anaiysis_of      SNSA Diffecnccs in Hospital Admission Fates
                                     Dependent Variable = ADNS*
                                            N = 192      SMSAs


                      1. W/LnOR (Table B-3, #1)                     2. W/LnOR (Table B--3, #2)
7ari ab les            coef.                trctio                   coef.             t ratio
 A
LnOR                 --362. 350              --3.27               --341. 875            --3.23
BEDS *                 10. 627                3.60                  11. 191              4.05
IISB/C                  2.296                 2.03                    1..                2.98
CENMD                --101.480               --0. 80

SURG*                 545.074                 2.73                 469.103               3.17
HI*XMD*                 2.343                 0.96
HI*XS 0*               --9 .497              --2.43                 :--7.615            --2.71
INC                   --19.901               --3.28                --22.896             --4.36
JANTEMP                --1.961               --3.80                 --1. 839            --3.65
%TR!DE                   1.068                0.75

%IMIT                    1.053                2.48                      .938             2.23
LER                     --.248               --1.15
% FEMAL               --24.682               --2.32                --22.219             --2.22
MORT *                 --4.702               --1.11                 --4.346             --1.04
%M10 39               --37 .894              --3.27                --33.188            --3.08
%M405 4               --54. 9 15             --3∑. 65              --48.251            .-3.43

%M5 5                 --34.035               --2.77                --29 .365            --2.56
%F1039                 38.133                 3.24                   33 .517             3.01
% P4054                58.752                 3.64                  52.413               3.40
%F5 5                  33. 668                2.80                   29 .029             2.58
NENGL                 --15.864               --1.23                --16. 329           --1.33
MS T* C                 -- .061              --0.65
const                2899 .88                 3.60                2653.57                3.82
           A
         LnOR   = Predicted Log Occupancy Rate ---- using        exogenous variables in this
table     and   in Table B--3, #1 and #2.
         Source: See Appendix A.
                                nt-i 'I




          The net cost to the patient of a particular hospitalization

is lwr)       greater the extent that insurance pays for hospital and

surgical expenses. The insurance variable used in this study is an

estimated value of the benefits from hospital and surgical insurance per

capita in the SMSA)-" It is expected to have a positive effect on the



1'The estimation procedure is discussed in Appendix A.



admission rate.-                                   -




     principle,   the causation could run in the opposite direction. That

is, SMSAs with larger hospital admission rates for some reasonother than

insurance might have an incentive to buy more dollars worth of insurance.

This effect is not likely to be important in this study as the hospital

insurance variable is ccmputed from an interstate regression of state

values for hospital insurance on several explanatory variables which are

exogenous to the model of the hospital sector developed in this study.

See Appendix A.



              Variables are included to test the effect of the presence of

 physicians per thousand population. Non--surgical M.D.s (CENMD*) and

 surgical M.D.s per thousand population (SURG) are entered separately.

 It is argued in Chapter II that it is not clear a priori whether more non--

 surgical M.D.s per thousand population increases the use of hospitals (since the

 cost of medical care is cheaper and more of all medical care is purchased) or

 decreases the use of hospitals (since hospital care and   out--of--hospital non--
                                                               surgical M.D.
care may be alternative means of improving one's health). Since the

care provided by medical doctors specializing in surgery is hospital--using,

a   larger   SURC* is expected to be associated with a greater admission rate.

Surgical     and non--surgical hospital treatment are less expensive to the
patient, the greater the extent of insurance coverage.




             Insurance (HSB/C) and surgeons (SURG*) have significant positive
effects      and the insurance--surgeon interaction variable has a significant

negative effect on the admission rate. The number of non--surgical M.D.s

has no effect on hospital admissions. The significant negative slope for

the insurance--surgeon interaction variable says that the effect on the

admission rate of an extra surgeon:per thousand population is smaller

the greater the amount of insurance. That is, the more insurance benefits

the SMSA receivcs the greater the amount of hospitalization; but this

incremental effect is sma1le the larger the number of surgeons per capita.

Thisnegative effect is contrary to our expectations. The effect on admissions

of the number of surgeons is positive at the mean level of insurance)'


        Table III--, regression 2, since HSB/C =       50.5,

                      = 469.1 + (--7.615) (}ISB/C) =    84.5



                                                                                 U
                Median family income in the SMSA has a negative effect on

hospital admissions. This may be due to the higher value of time for

families with grter income and' the substitution of.less time consuming

out--of--hospital care for in--hospital traatment. It ma' also reflect a

greater efficiency in producing health dutside of the hospital on the

part of those with more schooling):"


1"The average median family income is $5,808, and the standard deviation

s $838. The equation says that going from an SMSA with a $5,000 median

family income to one with a $6,600 income decreases admission rates by

37   per   thousand per year. (Inc is9n thousands of dollars.) The elas-

ticity of admissions with respect to income at the mean.is --0.78

Source: Table iii--?, regression 2.




                The proportion of the population of the SMSA who are nonwhite has

a significant positive effect on the rate of admission to short--term general

hospitals.            The effect occurs after controlling for median family income,


     aAdms* =
                    0.938.   The mean and standard deviation of percent nonwhite
     a7.NWT

are 10.68 and lO.5 respectively. A ten percentage point increase in the

proportion nonwhite increases the admission rate by 9 per thousand population.


                                               '     '
among other variables.

                There are two possible interpretations of the nonwhite effect.

First, since nonwhites are on the average poorer than whites, for two

SMSAs      to   have the same median income, the one with the larger percent nonwhite

has a lower mean and a larger variance of income. A simple.
 non--linear Engel curve for hospital admissions                   could generate

 a negative partial effect on admissions for the variable percent

 nonwhite)' Second, ceteris paribus, nonwhites have higher hospital


 --
 1/
    For        .th
           the 1     family let

      f\dm. = a + a
          1
               0
                            £1   2i
                             I. + a I

                                                                          -
      where a0 > 0, a1 > 0, a2 < 0.

          Computing the mean of both sides of the equation>
                       a + a1T + a2(12 + Var(I))

 where Var(I) is' the variance of family income. A larger income reduces
                     Adm                                                 --
admissions     if      --   = a1   + 2a21 < 0 or if.


                                                       --a1
                                                              >
                                                                       a21 .   The empirical


 analysisdid find that larger median incomes reduced admission iates, and

mean and median incomes are highly correlated across areas. A larger variance

 of income (mean constant) reduces admissions as long as a2 < 0.



 admission rates than           whites.                            -




                                            Ii-
                                             SMSAs with colder winter' temperatures

have higher hospital admission rates.--'


'This effect is not due to regional differences.                  Dummy variables for South

 and New England were statistically insignificant and do not alter the climate

 effect.


   -:Attempts to find a medical center effect on admissions were unsuccessful.

 In Table III-, regression 1, the number of medical students per hundred thousand

 population is insignificant. Other attempts using variables for medical schools
                                               -/



and the extent to which the SMSA is a center for trade and commerce

were also unsuccessful.



    c.    Endogenous Exilanatorv      Variable: The Bed Rate

           While   it may be appropriate for a short--run model to view the
bed rate as exogenou5 this is clearly not correct for a long--run model.
Economic theory predicts that in the long run the bedrte is a positive

function of the admission rate. Using the observed bed rate rather than

the predicted bed rate biases the effect of beds on the admission rate.

           Table iii--/ presents the estimated admission rate equation for

the long--run model using the predicted bed rate and without the occupancy

rate variab1e.' The predicted bed rate has a significant positive effect

on the admission rate. A one bed per thousand increase in the bed rate


41The interpretation of the statistical significance and             direction   of effects

of the other (exogenous) variables is the same as in Table iii--3, except that

percent nonwhite becomes statistically insignificant.

                                increases the admission rata by 13.2 per thousand.

This implies a long--run response elasticity of admissions to beds of

  0J/(.    -'   This    elasticity is larger than the response of admissions to beds


VThC     elasticity of admissions with respect to predicted beds is


           cp,b        %AAdms
                       %Beds
                                =   Mdms.
                                    Beds As
                                            Beds    --
                                                    --   'l3" 'I7/    --
                                                                      --   41
                                            Table 111--4

                              Two    Stce Least Squares
               Analysis of SMSA Dif ferences in Hospital Admission Rates
                              Dependent Variable ADMS
                                        N      192 SMSAs




Variables                                     coefficient                t ratio
  A
.BEDS*                                          13.176                    5.30
1-ISB/C                                          1.290                    2.04
STJRC*                                         261.804
HPXSG*                                          --3.189                  --1.79
INC                                            --18.419                  --4.53
JAWiEMP                                          --.659                  --2.66
NST*C                                            --.117                  --1.75
%NWIIT                                            .136                    0.56
LBR               .                             ---.044                 --O29
%FENAL                                         --21.363                  --2.79
%M1039                                         --25.924                  --3.28
                                    0

%M4054                                         --31.978                  --3.48
%M55                                           --23.291                  --2.73
%F1039                .
                                                24.003                    3.07
%F4054                                          28.831                    3.00
%F55                                            20.741                    2.52
const.                                       .1372.16          .
                                                                          3.10
           A
         Beds*   Predicted Bed Rate ----        using     exogenous variables in this
table     and in Table B--9, #2.

          Source: See Appendix A.
in the short--run model where the bed rate s viewed as an exogenous
            1/
variable.--


      elasticity of admissions with respect to observed beds is

            cp,b             =
                                 (ll.2)(-)   =   O.3'J


Source: Table III-, regression 2.


           Thus, there is a "beds effect" ---- more beds, ceteris paribus,

mean more patients (admissions) will occupy the beds. Since the elasticity

is less than unity,           the occupancy rate decreases, or the length of stay

increases             in response to an increase in the bed rate not due to

an increase in admissions.



    4. Sumaa
    .The empirical estiiiation of the admission rate equation indicates

a significant negative effect of the (predicted) occupancy rate on

the admission rate. A one percentage point increase in the occupancy

rate decreases the admission rate by 4.4 per thousand population.

There is also a positive effect of the bed rate on the admission rate.
                                                            ( L -c &
A one bed per thousand increase in the observed stock of beds increases
                                                                             cci e()
                                                                &
admissions by 11.2 per thousand; the elasticity at the mean    is +0.3q.
when the bed rate is treated as an endogenous variable (the long run

model),   the elasticity is +0.41.

    The   "hospital and surgical insurance" variable and the number
of surgeons per capita have positive effects on the admission rate.
However, there appears to be no relation between the number of
                                                    ∑

                                                        Ii. -'.40
                                                          7




            non--surgical   MDs and   the admission rate.
                 Median family income is negatively correlated with admissions,
∑
            with an elasticity of --0.78. SMSAs with a higher proportion of the
    ∑       population nonwhite and with colder winter climates have higher
            hospital admission rates. The attempt to identify a medical center
            effect on the adrnision rate was not successful.
                 The empirical analysis indicates that hospital variable (occupancy
            rate, bed rate), hospital insurance, surgeons per capita, income,
V           climate and demographIc variables all play a role in determining a
            Standard etropolitan 3tatisdcal Area's admission rate for short tern
            general ltopitais                                                          V




                 Bed Rate Equation
                                                                                 V


        V
                                           V




                     V This section presents the empirical analysis of SMSA differences

             in the number of short--term general hospital beds per thousand popu1ation.'




                                                                                           V




                                               V
                                                   (1
                                                              'The explanatory power of the ordinary

            least squares equation is 76 percent. The regression in Table III-- 6

            containonly th variables with t--ratios greater than 1.0 in Table III--.




            Although the number of beds in an SMSA can be viewed as being fixed in the.

            short run, this is not an appropriate assumption for a long-run analysis.

            The admission rate and the bed rate equations are estimated simultaneously

            because of their interdependence: a higher demand for admissions increases

            the supply of beds, and a greater supply of beds increases the number of
admissions. The mean and standard deviation of the bed rate are 5.2 and

1.4respectively, and the range is from 2.0 to 9.2.-"


'The data are for      192 SMSAs. See Appendix A.



         The predicted admission rate has a strong positive effect on the

observed bed rate. (Table 111--5). The elasticity of the bed rate with respect

to the predicted admission rate is 0.92' Thus, acne percent increase


             %tBeds    1Beds   Adtns   =   0.028
                                                   17      = 0.92
   cb, p =   LAdms     Mdms Bs                     (---)


in the admission rate due to forces exogenous to the model increases the
                                                                    r
bed rate by nine--tenths of a percent. The effect of the admission rate on
                                   Table 111--5

                              Two Stage Least Squares
                Analysis of S1SA Differences in Hospital Bdd Rates
                             Dependent Variable = BEDS
                                   N      192 SNSAs




Variables                              coefficient                     t ratio
  A
ADNS                                        .028                        9 .63
INC                                         ,106                        1.32
NST   *                                   ∑ .0045                       2.30
%NWHT                                     --.0065                      --1.05
S POP6 6                               --162.704                       --0.99
SRHOSP                                    -∑.j0ll                      --0.23
% CII GPO                                 --00068                      --0.35
ENERG*                                     .347                          5.16
%SLBED                                     .00023                        0.07
%FDBED                                     .045                         10.25
%PRBED                                     .0026                         0.38
AREAC                                     -- .000012                   --0.15
const.                                   --1.641                        --2.02


            A
     ADNS*   Predicted Admission Rate ----          using   exogenous variables
In this table and ir TEble B--8, #2.

        Source: See Appendix A.
                                         711 -2)




                                     Table     111--6

                             Two Stare Least Squares
                 Malysis of SMSA Differences in Hospital Bed Pates
                           Dependent Variable = BECS*
                                     N     192 SNSAs




                                                                            ratio
                                 S




Variables                                coefficient                   t

  1%
ADNS                                        ..025                          10.44

MST*C                                        .0055                          3.15

EMERC*                                       .372                           6.20

%FDBED                                       .047                          11.90

 INC                                         .137                           1.76
∑%NWIIT                                     --.0044                     ---0.76

 const.                                   --1.961                          --2.36




           A
             Predicted Admission Rate ----
          ADNS                                        using   exogenous variables
 in this table and in Table B--8, /2.

          Source: See Appendix A.
the bed rate is, therefore, considerably stronger than the effect of

the bed rate on the admission rate)-



-J'Recall from Part2 of this chapter that the elasticity of admissions

with respect to beds was 0.41 in the long run model.


            The model of the randomness of demand for hospital admissions

predicts positive partial effects on tha bed rate of our measure of

population size,V , and pur measure of the number of hospitals,
             In spite of the significance of these variables for explaining

SMSA differences in occupancy rates, they play no role in determinthg the

bed rate.

            The randomness model of admissions also hypothesizes that the

number of beds in a community is a function of the probability that patients

will have to be granted a delayed or denied admission. The greater the

cost of a de1ayed'admissionthe greater the demand for beds, ceteris paribus.

            The cost of a delayed admission is greater, the more important are

emergencies in the SMSA'S health picture. An emergency variable (Emerg*),.

measured as the death rate from        "emergency" causes per thousand population,

is included in the bed rate equation.-' It has a significant positive effect



     2They                    are arteriosclerotic heart disease,
strokes, motor vehicle and other accidents, suicides and homicides.




on the bed rate.

            In the full equation for the bed rate median family income has

an insignificant positive effect (Table III--.. When variables with t--ratios
less than unity are deleted, income has a significant positive slope

(Table III--           and an elasticity of +0.l2-' This may reflect a positive


   %ABeds*              t9eds* Beds*                5.2'
                   =                     =                  =   +0.12
   %tINC                 EINC                (0.137)(581)



income elasticity of demand for "excess capacity" to reduce the probability

that a desired admissiQn will be delayed.-"


'The mean and standard deviation of income are $5,fl8 and $833, respectively,

Going from an SMSA one standard deviation below the mean to an SMSA one

standard deviation above the mean implies an'increase of two--tenths of a.

bed per thousand          population, or 223 beds in an SNSA    with a population
of one million.
     ABeds* =           0.13ThINC       0.137(1.63) = 0.223

INC is in thousands of dollars.


         To test the hypothesis that SMSAs which serve' as medical centers

have larger bed rates the analysis includes the variable the, number of medical.

students per hundred thousand population (MST*C). It has a significant

positive effect. The slope coefficient implies that the addition of a

400 student medical school (100 students per year) to an SMSA with one--million

inhabitants increas the number of beds per thousand population by two--

tenths of a bed or          the   number of beds by 22O.                   -




   LBeds*      =       .0055 (4   1T)C ') = .0055(40)       = .22
                                          111--24


       The three explanatory variables for administrative control

(the proportion of beds in federal, state and local, and proprietary

hospitals) would have insignificant effects on the bed rate if beds

in these hospitals were perfect substitutes for beds in voluntary hospi-

tals. Explicit barriers to admission or imperfect referral systems would

result in positive effects. The effects are insignificant for state and

local and    proprietary hospitals,     but positive and highly significant for

federal hospitals. This presumably reflects the required veteran status

for entry into federal hospitals.1 A one percentage point increase in



!"Note that this positive partial effect of the proportion of beds in

federal hospitals on the bed rate cannot be explained by federal hospitals

attractirg admissions from outside the SMSA. The effect of federal hospitals

on admissions appears in the predicted admissions variable in the bed rate

.equation.



the   proportion of beds in federal hospitals increases the bed rate by
+0.047. However, if       there   were no response of non--federal beds to an
increase in    federal   beds, at the mean, a onepercentage point increase in
federal beds would    increase the bed rate by +o.oss.2 An      increase in


        2The mean bed    rate is 5.22 and the mean percent of beds in   federal
hospitals    is 10.64 percent. (Source: Appendix A.)



federal bedc is associated with an increase in the overall bed rate, and

a   decrease in the non--federal bed rate.3
                                                III--2$


        (footnote 3 from previous page (111--24))         -




                 3since Bedg*       5.22 and %FDBEDS   10.64, FedBeds* 0.55and
        NonFed1edsc =      4.664.   A one percentage point increase in federal beds

        implies an increase in FedBeds* by 0.067, if the number of non--federal

        beds is constant. However, a one percentage point increase in the

        percent of federal beds increases the bed rate by 0.047. Since

        tBeds*      ANonFedBeds* + FDBeds*, ANonFedl3eds* = --0.20.   For an SMSA

        with a population of one inillion,.an additicnal 134 bed federal hospital

        decreases    the number of non--federal beds by 40,   for a net increase of

        only    94 beds.



        Thus,   we reject the hypothesis that a bed in a federal hospital is a
∑
        perfect substitute for a bed in a non--federal hospital.
    ∑            The proportion of nonwhites in the population has no effect on
        the bed rate. Recall, however, that SMSAs with more nonwhites have higher

        admission rates and occupancy rates. The higher occupancy rate in SMSAs with

        more nonwhites (holding the admission rate and bed rate Ëonstant) appears

        to be due to a longer length of stay of nonwhites. The two remaining

        variables, the rate of growth of the population and the area of the SMSAJ

        appear to play no role in explaining SMSA differences in the bed rate.
            The empirical analysis indicates that the bed rate varies

    systematically across SMSAs. The (predicted) hospital admission rate,

    the importance of emergencies in the SMSA's case.mix and the proportion

∑   of beds in federal hospitals are the most important variables and have

    positive effects on the bed rate. SMSAs which are wealthier or serve

    as medical centers tend to have larger bed rates, but these variables

    are of lesser overall importance.
                                   Appendix A
                                   Data Aiperidix


       Table A-i, The Variables, presents a listing of the variables used

in this study, their symbols, and a code for the source of the data.

Table A--2,   Sources,   has the detailed bibliographic information   on the
sources.      Table A--i also presents the mean, standard deviation and

coefficient of variation for each of the variables for the sample of

192 Standard Metropolitan      Statistical   Areas.

       The empirical analysis. is performed for the samples of 192 and

201 SFISAs. Although the data exist for all 2.01 SMSAs, nine are

excluded to form the smaller sample because of either an excessively

large fraction of beds in      federal hospitals or very long   computed

lengths    of stay.1 Either   variable suggests the presence of long term

care   facilities in the data.


       i                                    Percent of Leds
                                         in Federal Hospitals
                                                                  Average Length
                                                                      of Stay
 (A)   Nine SMSA
   Ann Arbor, Michigan                           21.78                12.4
   Augusta, Georgia                              76.13                22.4
   Durham, North Carolina                        31.96                11.6
   Galveston,    Texas                            8.71                13.6
   Little Rock, Arkansas                         60.59                18.8
   Providence, Rhode Island                       7.30                 18.0
   Sioux Fails, South Dakota                     36.70                 10.0
   Tacoma, Washington                             0.0                  23.6
   Topeka,    Kansas                             60.96                 22.0

∑ (B) 192 SMSAs                      -




   Mean
                                                 IC. /
                                             -
   Standard Deviation                            I 3,9
                                  A- 2


     Data on hospital and surgical insurance coverage per capita or per
household do   not exist on an SMSA     basis.   State data are used to predict

the   SMSA insurance variable. The insurance variable is "total hospital
and surgical insurance benefits" in the state divided by the population
of   the state (HSB/C). States without SMSAs and       across   which there

is considerable commutation are exOluded from the state regression.

This leaves a sample of 41 states. The equation used to predict

SI4SA values for HSB/C is an inter--state weighted regression (see

Table A--3         -
                       and   is the   "best" equation obtained after experi-

roenting   with the data. The explanatory variables are the percent of
the state's labor force employed, (a) by local governments, (b) by
the   federal government, Cc) in manufacturing and (d)in white collar

jobs. The coefficient of determination adjusted for degrees of free-
                                                          -

dom is seventy percent..




                                                                                  U
                                       ∑
                                           TeD..Le pj  i'ne v'.p.Les                                             r   )
                                                    Hospital Utilization
                                                        N.=192SMSAs


Variable Nane                              Symbol       Mean         Standard    Coefficient   Source
   (Units)                                                           Deviation       of
                                                                                 Variation



A) Endogenous Variables

    1) Admission Rate (admissions          p or         169.55         40.38       .24         7, Tables 2 and 3
       ncr ttousand)                       ADMS*
    2) OccuDancy Rate (?r 11'              OR             77.28         6.72       .087        7, Table 2
    3) Natural Log of Occupancy            LnOR            )4∑31         .091      .021        7, Table 2
       Rate
    1) Bed Rate (beds Der thousand)        BEDS*           5.22         1.)414     .28         7, Table 2

B) Exogenous Variables

   1) Popu1ticn of SMSA, 1966              POP 66       61i.16       1237.6      1.93          7, Table 2
         (thousands)
    2)      Chan'e in Popu1at.on,          CHGP0          33.10        33.3k     1.01          1, Table 63
         1950--1960

    )
    3) % Non-white
       Median Family Income
       (thousand $)
                                           %NHT
                                           INC
                                                         10.68
                                                           5.01
                                                                      10.50
                                                                         .83
                                                                                   .98
                                                                                   .14
                                                                                               it, Table 63
                                                                                               ii, Tab1 12

    5) % oi General Hospital Beds                        15.82        18.36      1.16          7,   Thble 3
       which are in State and. Local
         Government Hospitals, 1967
   6)    % of Cen2ral Hosrdtal Beds        %FDBED                     13.95      1.31          7,   Table 3
         chich are in Federal
       Hospitals, 1967
    7) % of General Hosnital   Reds        %PRBED                       0.56     1.91          7, Table     3
         which are in Proprietary
         Hospitals, 1967
    8)   South/Non--South dumn,            SOUTH               .37               1.30          3
         Southl
   9)    Land   Area of SHSA               AREA         1607.3       221.6       1.51          6,   1962,   Table 3, Var. 1
         (in   square miles)
                                                                       r1os,itai utiiizaton
                                                                          N   192 SMSAs

                                                -
             Variable Name                          5'nthol                Mean                        Standard                 Coefficient           Source
              (Units)                                                                                  Deviation                    of
                                                                                                                                Variation
            10) % of Labor Force Employed           %TRADE                       18.147.                     2.57                     .14             6, 1962, Table 3, Var.                    314 &
                in Who1ea1e & Retail        0
                                                                                                                                 .



                Trade, 1960
            1l)Mean January Temperature, 1960       JANTMP.                      36.10                   12.03                        .33             6, 1962, Table 6, Var.                    1456
            12) Number of Medical Schools           MSCL*C                         .0147                   .10                       2.13             1; and 7,   Table 2
                in SMSA per 100,000 population                               ∑
                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                              .


            13) ew England dirnmiy,                 NGL                            .057                          .23                 4.03             3
    '
                Ne England = 1
            i14) Non--federal General Practice      GEN                            .51         :
                                                                                                                 .12                  .24             2; and 7,   Table 2
                MDs and Medical Specialists                        .



                in Patient Care, per thousand                                                      .

                                                                                                                                                                       .
                population, in 1967                                                 ,                                                                                           .



            15) The Gquare Root of the              SRHOSP                        3.20                       1.92                     .60             7,   Table 2                  .
                Number of Hosnitals                                                                                     .
        .
            i6) Non--federal Surgical               SURG*                           .35                          .090                 .26             2; and 7, Table 2
                Specialists in Patient
                Care, ner thousand                                                         .

                                                           .

                Population in 1967
            17) % of Males, 10--39) in 1960         1039                         13.73                   .   3.148                    .030        ∑
                                                                                                                                                      5, Table 20
                                                                                                                                                                                        .

            18) % of Males, 40--54, in 1960         4054                         17.147                      1.67                     .096            5, Table 20
.           19) % of Males,    55, in 1960          ZM55                         15.51                       3.145                    .22             5, Table 20.
            20) % of Females, 10--39, in 1960       %F1039                       143.35                      2.81                     .066            5,Tahle 20
            21) % of Females, 40--54, in 1960       7.F4054                      17.1414                     1.57                     .090            5, Table 20
            22) % of Females, ?.55, In 1960         %F55                         17.142                      3.68                     .21             5, Table 20                                 .



            23) % of Population, Female, 1960       MPL                       50.86                          1.16                     .023            5, Table 20           .




            214) % Chance in Population,            %CHGPO2                 2201.0                     7218.14                       3.28             14, Table 63                                ,




                1950--1960, Squared                                    .                                                                                                                    ,


            25) Land Area of SMSA (in square        AREA*C                   559.50                     786.214             .        1.41             6, 1962, Table 3, Var. 1;
                miles) per 100,000 population                  .
                                                                                                                                                      and 7, Table 2
            26) Deaths from Arteriosclerotic        HEART*                        2.51                           .780                 .31             7, Table 2; and 9
                Heart Disease, Including
                Coronary, per thousand                .
                population
                                                       Hosoital (       )llzation
                                                           N = 3.92 SM5As
                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                   r)

Variable Name                                Symbol       Mean               Standard              Coefficient   Source
  (Units)                                                                    Deviation                 of
                                                                                                   Variation


(27) Deaths from Vascular Lesions STROI*                     1.00        .          .27               .27        7,   Table 2; and 9
       affecting Tervous System --
       Strokes oer thousand
     por,ulation
(28) Deaths from !'otor Vehicle              MOTOR*              .2].               .068              .32        7,   Table   2; and 9
     Accidents oer thousand
     Donulation
(29) Deaths from Other Accidents             OTHACC*                                .o6i              .21        7, Table     2; and   9
       erthousand nonulation
                                             SUIC                .11                                                  Table   2; and 9
(30) Suicide rer thousand                                                       ..037                 ∑34        7,
       Doulation
(31) Homicide oer thousand                   HOMIC*              .050           -
                                                                                    .037              ∑74        7,   Table 2; and 9
       noulation
(32) Deaths from 6 Leadin,z        EMERG*                    Li6                    .93               .22        7,   Table   2; and 9
     Emergency Situations
     (Sum of variables (26) to (31))
(33) Insurance X Nu7rher of ton--  HIXMD*                   26.bO             10.58                   .40        2; 6, 1967, Table 3,
     suiqical out-of--hosnital                                                                                   Var. 2, 25, 58, and 60;
      Physicians er thousand             .
                                                                                      .    .                     and 7, Table 2
      oGnulation ((39) x (14)).
(314) Number of Medical Students             MST*C          114.96             32.53           -
                                                                                                     2.17        1; and 7, Table       2
        ner 100,000 opulatton
(35)   Total   Deaths oer thousand           MOBT*           8.91               1.614                 .18 .      7,   Table   2; and 9
       'por)ulation
(36) Live   Births rer 1000                  LB             93.81             i6.o6                   .1.7       5,   Table   20; and 10
       rcn aged 7--}i6, 3.967
(37) Nunbers     of   Medical Students       ST/SH*C        12.98             29.91                 2.30         1; and 7,    Table 2
       per Medical School, oer
       100,000 pou].ation
       (0 if schools =o)
(38) Siuare   Root of 1/nonulation           spor66              .0019              .00079            .42               7,   Table 2
       1966 (noiu1ation not in
       thousands
                                              Hosoital Uti117at1Ofl
                                                 N = 192 MSAs

                                    Symbol       Mean         Standard    Coefficient   Source
Variable    Narie
  (Units)                                                     Deviation        0!
                                                                   -      Variation


(39) Hospital and    Surgical In-   HSB/C         50.51         13.21         .m        6, 1967. Table 3,
    surance Benefits per                                                                Var. 21, 25,  5,   and 60;
                                                                                        7, Table 2;  and 8
    Capita (in dolY.ars)
Ro) Insurance X     Number          HI*XSG*       17.91           6.91         39       2; 6, 1q67, Table 3,
     ot
                                                                                        Var. 2h, 25,  5,   and 60;
          hurfeons er thousand
                                                                                        and 7, Table 2
     population ((39)X(16))




   C                                                      0                                            ()
                                          A-7

                                  Tcble 1\-2


                                      SOURCE




1.    Table   1: "Aporoved "edical Schools and Schools of Basic Medical
                  Sciences." The Journal of the American edieai&ssociation,
                  Education Number, 210 (November 214, 1969), 11462--3.

2..   Table   114: "Medical Practice Data 1w Metronolitan Area."
                  Haug, J.N. and Roback, G.A. Distribution of Physicians,
                  Hostita1s, and Hosnital Beds in the U.S. -- 197 by Reiion,
                  State, County and 'etronolitan Prea. Chicaflo:
                   American Medical Association, 1263.
3.    U.S. Bureau of   the Census' definition of states by region and division.
14∑   U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
                   Census                 1Q60. Vol. I Characteristics o' the
                             o4'Pc'nu].ation:
                   Ponulation. Part I: United States E'ummary.
                   Washington, D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office, 19614
5. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Census of Ponulation: 1060.
               Vol. I: Characteri.tics of the PoDulati on. Parts IT--LIT:
                   [ The statesr. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Prntin
                   Office,    1963.

6.    U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Cointy and City
                   Data Book(s), l62 and 1067. (A Statistical Abstract
                   Supoleinent). washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
                   Printing Office, 1962 and 1967.

7.    U.S. DeDartment of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health
                   Service. Hosnitals: A Count' and Metronolitan Area
                   Data Book    TSPub. No. 20143, Section iT. Rockville,
                   Maryland, November 1970.

8. Reed, Louis S. and Carr, Willine. "Private Health Insurance, Enrollment,
                Prendwrts and Benefit Exnense, by Region and State, 1966."
                                                         -
                Research and Statistics Note No. 114 1968, U.S. Denartment
                of Health, Education and Welfare, Social Security
                Administration, July 29, 1968.

9. Table 9--8: "Deaths from 59 Selected Causes for Standard Metronolitan
                 Statistical Areas of the United States: 1960."
                 U.S. Department of Hea1thBd1ication and Welfare, Public
                 Health Service. Vital Statistics of the United Ctates 1060.
                 Vol. II: Mortality, Part B. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Covernment
                   Printing Office, 1963.
10. Table 1--55: "Live Births by Live--Birth Order and Race, for SMSA's of the
                  U.S.,1967." U.S. Department of !Tealth, Education, and Welfare,
                  Public Health Service. Vital Statistics of the United States,
                  1967. 1101.      I:
                                  Natniity. Washinrton, D.C.: U.S. Government
                   Printing Office, 1970.
                                    7-8


                              SOURCES




11. U.S. Department of Cornraerce, Bureau of the Census. U.S. Census of
                 Ppulation: 1960.     Selected Area Reports. State Economic
                  Jreas. Final Report PC (3) --1A. Washington, D.C.:
                  U.S. Government Printing Office: 1963.
                                                  Table A-2'
                                Hospital and Surgical Benefits Per Capita




           .
                                            Number of Observations,
                                                    41 States
Variable Name                                      Standard   Coefficient   Source for state
        (units)               Symbol      Mean     Deviation of Variation    and SNSA data


A) Endoganous
         Variable

        1) Hospital and                                                     4, Tables 9;'6, 1967
          Surgical Bene--      HSB/C      4l.6S 10.69            .26        Tables 1 and 3,
          fits per capita                                                   Variables 23, 24,
                                                                            25, 58, and 60; 7,
                                                                            Table 2; and 8.

B) Exogenous
          Variables

        1) % of Employed                                                    6,1967, Tables 1
         in 1960, in                                                        and 3, Variables
                              %MANUF      22.81     10.14        .44
                                                                            23 and 24
         Manufacturing
         in 1960
        2) % of Employed                                                    6, 1967, Tables I
          in 1960, White       7.WC       38.92      4.54        .12        and 3, Variables
          Collar in 1960                                                    23 and 25
        3) % of Employed                                                    6, 1967, Tables 1
          in 1960, in
    ∑                         %LOCAL       6.79      1.07        .16        and 3, Variables
          Local Govern--                                                    23 and 58
          inent   in   1962
        4) % of Employed
          in 1960, in                                                       6, 1967, Tables 1
∑
          Federal Go--         %FED        3.92      2.20        .56        and 3, Variables
          vernraent in                                                      23 and 60
          1965
        5) % of Popula-
          tion not In                                                       4, Table 18
                              %NOTSNSA    48.30     24.80        .51
          an SMSA,
          1960

C) States Excluded: (a) No SMSA's: Vermont, Idaho, Wyoming, and Alaska.
    (b) Substantial commutation across state borders: New York, New Jersey,
    Connecticut, Virginia, Maryland, and District of Columbia

D) Weighted Regression (weighted by state's population)
     HSB/C = --38.992 -- 2.5774(%LOCAL) + .7215(%MANUF) + 2.1672(%WC) -- l.3556(ZFED)
                                                     -
                            na1ysis of SMSA Differences inBcd Occupancy Rates
                                                Tablefri ∑-1-
                                                Dependent = LnOR
                                                 N=192SMSAs

                                   1. OLS                                  2. 2SLS
                                                      :       W/ADMS*       (Tab1ei, --4, 2)

V‡riabies                 coef.             t ratio                coef.             t ratio
    ADMS*                .00034              1.44
    ADMS*                                                       .00094                1.30
    BE D S *           --.022               . 3.02           --.035                  --2.11
    SPOP66           --41.177               --3.27         --52.299                  --2.91
    SRHOSP              --.012              --2.71            -- .013                --2.80

    HSB/C                .00054              0.78               .00033.               0.45
    INC                --.0023              -0.18               .00068                0.05
    %NHT                 .oola               2.61               .0017                 236
    %CHGPO              --.00037            --1.69           --.00038                --1.69
    3!NTE!4P            --.0027             --3.28            --.0027                --3. 30

                        --.00061            --1.49           --.0005 8               --1.37
    %FEMAL               .0029               0.13               .013                  0.52
    %M1039              --.017              --0.70            --.0041                -0.15
    %M4054              --.043              --1.58            --.025                 --0.73
    %M55                -- .0091            -0. 36              .0031                 0.10
       10 39                                 0.90               .0094                 0.34
                         .021
    %F4054               .052                1.81               .034                  0.95
    %F55                 .013                0.54               .0025                 0.09
    %SLI3ED              .0004 3             1.34               .00045                1.37
-   %FDBED               .00090              1.44               .0014                 1.65
    %PRBED              --.00091            --1.26            -- .00095              --1.28
    NENGT               --.041              --1.69            --.039                 --1.56
    cons   t.           4.066                3.29             3.481                   2.45


                                    .4346




    SOURCE: Se'e   Jppendix r.
                           Analysis of         SMSA Differences        in Bed Occupancy Rates
                                                         Table         --2--
                                                         Depen cle nt =LnOR
                                                           N   = 201   SMSAs



                              1. OLS                                                  2..   2SLS
            .                                                           W/ADMS* (Table             -5, *2)
                                      --
Variables           coef.                      tratio                        coef.                  t ratio

ADMS*             --.00011                     --0.58
 ,.
ADMS*                                                                       .000 36                   .070

Beds*             --.0016                      --0.37                  --.0079                     --1.04
SPOP66          --34.900                       --2.75.             --46. 453                       --2.70
SRHOSP            --.012                       --2.75                  --.014                      --2.89
HSB/C              .00074                        1.06                       .00063                  0.88
INC                .00010                       0.008                        0023                   0.17
%NWHT              .0018                        2.46                        .0016                   2.10
%CHGPO            --.00044                     --1.98                  --.00048                    --2.10

                                                                                                              0
                                           ∑


J1NTMP            --.0021                      --2.63                  --   .0019                  --2.26
LBR               -.00039                      --0.96                  --.00032                    --0.76
                                  .
%FEMAL             .0097                        0.46                        .016                    0.71
%M1746            --.0088                      -0.39                        .00074                  0.03
%M4761            --.036                       --1.34                  --.020                      --0.64
'M62               .0020                        0.08                        .011                    0.43
%F1746             .017                         0.76                        .0077                   0.31
%F4761             .043                         1.53                        .028                    0.85
%F62               .0044                        0.19                   --.0040                     --0.16
%SLBED             .00043                       1.36                        .00050                  1.53
%FDI3ED            .00046                       0.82                        .00072                  1.14
%PRI3ED           --.0013                      --1.70                  --.0013                     --1.77
NENGL             -.031                         --1.29                 --   .027                   --1.07
const.            3.448                          3.05                  3.113                        2.61

          R2                   .4009


                                                                                                              U
Source: See Appendix A
                                                            ∑c i--I




                            na1ysis of SMSP Differences in Bed Occupancy Rates
                                                 Table i3  --3          -
                                                 Dependent = LnOR
                                                  N = 192 SMSAs

                                1. 2SLS                                               ∑2. 2SLs
                        W/ADMS* (Table / --6,         #1)               W/A1DMS* (Table          --6, t2)


 Variables               coef.               t ratio                          coef.               t ratio

 ADMS *                  .0010                1.39                          .0015                  1.94
 BEDS*                  --.035               --2.11                     --.038                    --2.61
 SPOP66            --53.01?                  --2.92                   --78. 556                   --3.54
 SRHOSP                 --.013               --2.70                     --.016                    --3.26

 HSB/C                   .00019               0.26
 INC                     .0024                0.17
                         .0018                2.47                          .0017                  2.23
 %CHG0                  --.00037             --1.61.                    --.00035                  --1.65
 JANTEtP                --.0027              --3.23                     --.   0028                --3.91
-tBR                    --.00061             -1.46                      --.00055                  --1.22
   FEM7L                 .014            ∑
                                              0.56                          .021                   0.80
  tM1039
                    -
                        --.0036              --0.13                         .012                   0.37
  %N4054                --.026               --0.74                     --.014                    --0.37
  %}155                  .0072          ∑ 0.24                              .016                   0.51
  %F1039                 .011                 0 ∑ 39                    --.0058                   --0.18
  %F4054                 .033                 0.92                          .023                   0.58
  %F55                  --.000052            --0.002                    --.011                    --0.36
  %SLBED                 .00040               1.19
  %FDBED                 .. 0014              1.68
  %PREED                --. 0010             --1. 39
  const.                3. 329                2.33                       3.112                     2.18




( SOURCE:    See 7ppendix
                     na1ysis of SMSA Differences in Hospital Admission Rates
                                          Table -H
                                                                           -
                                         Dependent   ADMS*
                                           N = 192 S1SAs
                                                                                                   T)
                   1. OLS                              2. 2SLS
                                                       W/LnOR (Table                --1 #2)

ariahies           coe f.             t ratio          coef.                   --    -   t ratio
nOR                 --14.029          -0.60
nOR                                                    --365.576                         --3.28
EDS*                 16.952           11.09              10. 703                          3.63
SB/C                        768        1.10                  2 . 379                      2.08
ENMD*               --61.644          -0.71             --86. 295                        --0.67
URG*                226.056            1.88              534.509                          2.67
I*XMD*                1.104            0.66                2.016
                                                             ∑
                                                                                          0.81
I*xsc                --3.442          --1.45                 --9.238                     --2.36
NC                  --15.918          --3.97             --19.934                        --3.30
ANTMP                 --.767          --3.00                 --1.936                     --3.75
SCLtC               --17. 794         --0.54             --37. 462                       --0.76
T/SI-1   *c           - .090          --0.77                      .058                    0.33
TRADE                 2.202            2. 36                      .908                    0.63
NWHT                        307        1.24                      1.032                    2.43
BR                    --   .054       -0.39                       --.257                 --1.20
FEMAL                  --20.   784    --2.89             --24. 660                       --2.31
MORT                       --6.818    --2.38                 --4.769                     --1.12
111039                 --27.429       --3.62             --37.719                        --3.26
M4054                  --29.156       --3.34             --55.118                        --3.66
1155                   --24. 006      --2.96             --33. 789                       --2.75
F 1039                     27.522       3.58                     37.932                   3.22
P4054                      30.2 13      3.26                     58.944                   3.65
P55                        24.798       3.10                     33. 377                  2.77
ENGL                                                     --15 .2 30                      --1.17
onst.               ∑ 1218.73          2.91             2914.57                           3.63
              R2             .6784




                                                                                                   0∑
OURCE: See Appendix A
