                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            Human Capital   Life Cycle of Earnings Models:
                 A   Specific Solution and Estimation

                            by L. A. Lillard




                      Working   Paper   No.    4   —-

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
               National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                                July,   1973

                     Preliminary; Not for Quotation

      NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
 number for conments only. They should not be quoted without written
 permission

      This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
 publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
 by the Board of Directors.
                                    —1—




              Human Capital Life Cycle of Earnings Models:
                   A Specific Solution, and Estimation
                              By L. A. Lillard
                           Introduction and SIary


    The purpos. of this chapter*is to consider bian capital models of
earnings behavior over an individual lifetimee A general class of life
cycle models relating to individual earnings behavior ii developed by
considering alternative formul*ticns of the basic Ben-Porath type model.
An explicit solution to a specific formulation within this general class
is considered in soe detail. An irica1. development of this explicit
earnings function is estimtd using data on a cohort of individuals sur-
veyed at several points during their lifetime. The empirical estimates
are discussed in detail. The estimated earnings function is then used
to predict an individual's discounted present valum of lifetime earnings.

        *
         This essay is one of three to be included in a proposed NER
volume entitled Economic Decision Mak1n, in a Life Cycle Context. The
other two essays are written by James P. Smith and James Heckman. The
volume is expected to be in draft form by Septenber 1973.

        The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant
with the Off iee of Economic Opportunity, Washington, D. C. 20506. The
opinions expressed herein are those of the author and should not be con-
strued as representing the opinions or policy of any agency of the United
States Government.
                                                /
                                                    4-
                       /       -—   —f-'.   -
                                         —2—



               A General Class of Life Cycle Models Relating to
             Earnings Behavior Based on the Human Capital Concept




         This   section provides a set of alternative specifications of life

cycle models relating to earnings behavior        based on the human capital
concept and couched in the calculus of variations optimization framework.

The common element is that the models are concerned         with earnings behavior
over   the   life cyclö   and are logical extensions of   the basic Ben—Porath (1967)
model.    The various formulations differ in their emphasis and the particular

type of behavior question being studied. Some of the forms differ consi

derably in their qualitative predictions while others merely provide the

ground for      theoretical completeness. Some of the     suggested specifications

indicate     problem areas which   may be   studied with the life cycle model, only
one of which will be considered in detail here.
         The life cycle of earnings model is developed by assuming the indi-

vidual invests in himself with the objective of maximizing lifetime utility

represented by an intertemporal utility function.            The individual is

assumed to have perfect knowledge of himself and the world and          faces no
uncertainties. It is assumed that the individual receives no income            from

physical assets and that       he can   produce new human capital   according to a



         'Specifications
                       which affect the basic separability of consumption
and investments and the homogeneity of human capital are qualitatively
important. Specifications concerning homogeneity of direct inputs and loan
market imperfections and subsidies within the separable case are qualitatively
similar even though they may be important factors in individual decisions.
That is, the former affect basic decision rules while the latter affect leva]s
of state variables or nhanoe the completeness of the model while not changing
the basic qualitative predictions.

        This utility function does not contain activities involving           time (or
leisure) or the stock of human capital as arguments.
                                                                                         ,
                                     —3—



production function that requires only some portion of hi. existing human
capital stock and an aggregate of direct inputs. Additions to his stock
of human capital are that amount produced in each period less the depre-
ciation which occurs. From this set of assumptions several functions of
interest are derived in parametric form.
        Consider the formal model: the earning capacity of an individual is

                 'Pf*(a)   R.E(a)

where
                 Y* (a) is the individual's earning:capacity at age a;
                  R is the constant return per unit per unit time on the stock
                     of human capital;
                  E(a) is the total stock of human capital processed by the
                     individual at age a •     a   is the length of time since the
                     individual selected an investment pattern ot began
                     making his own decisions. Be begins his own investment
                     decisions   at a —   0 and his working life ends at a N.
                     At any age, a, the individual bAa the choice        of renting
                     all or   any proportion   of   his   human capital stock   in the

                     labor market.

        The individual attu.pts to             utility within his oçportunity set.
Three   different components of the oçportunity set are distinguished: endow-
ment, market opportunities, and productive opp.vt*mitie.. The time -distri-
bution of endowments is an initial stock of human capital, ' held by the
individual at time a — 0." This initial stock of human capital can be
translated into a stream of earnings which declines absolutely through the


        It is assumed that physical assets 6o not entar the decision prore:s.
There are no earnings from physical assets or endowment of them.
                                                 —4--


life cycle approaching zero asymtotically if no investment is undertaken.

The stock of human capital and thus earnings decline at the rate 6 so

that   E(a)      -    E(a).   Given      that   no investment is undertaken the   individual
iou1d   mami.ize his intertemporal utility function subject to the                wealth

constraint
                              N
                       W=f
                         0
                           ertREtdt
The utility maximizing decision is obviously affected by the market oppor-

tunities      for exchanges of funds for differing dates. If the individual
has no loan market available, he must consume in each period what he earns.
If   the individual has available a "perfect" loan market for consumption

purposes,     he   may borrow     or loan       unlimited funds at the constant rate r. In

this   latter case the individual is free to make interperiod transfers of
consumption to maximize his utility subject to the above wealth constraint.
        Now assume the        individual does invest. Here we consider the productive
opportunities.         It is assumed that the only alternative use of the human

capital stock is the          process of producing more human capital according to

the   production function

                       qEK(a), D(a)]              IC(a) D(a)2                       (3.)

where

        q(K(a), D(a)1 is          the output of new     human capital produced in period   a;

        K(a) is the amount          of   the    existing stock of human capital used to
               produce more human capita].           in period a;

        D (a)   is other educational inputs as an aggregate and purchased at the
               constant price P.
        A is    a Hicks   neutral efficiency index of the           individual's ability to

               produce human capital and assumed            constant over the life cycle of
                the   individual.
                                             —5—


            and 2 are the        respective production coefficients of K(a) and
              D(a), assumed constant over the life cycle.
The net change in the stock         of human capital      at any point in time is that
amount produced less depreciation,

                          (a) — q(a)     —
                                              6E(a)   .                              (2)
        The   individual has      two decision variables, K (a) and D (a). In choosing

to allocate another       unit of    human capital to production, K(a), at any point

in   time   the   individual must    give    up the corresponding     market earninqa it
would   have yielded. Thus RX(a) represents foregone earnings. The aggregate
of   other inputs, D(a), are purchased at the constant price P. Clearly,
these investment decisions will be influenced by the existence of a loan
market for financing purchases of D(a). That is, it will affect the
production     possibilities.

        There     are several possible sets of assumptions. First, there may be
no market opportunities for borrowing or lending at all. The individual
must finance current investment and               consumption   out of current market
earnings. Utility is maximized by selecting the paths D(a) and K(a) which
maximize the utility of the flow             of   earnings,   or equivalently consumption,
over    the life cycle. Investment and consuuptdaon decisions are clearly not

separable. Investment ii constrained by earning capacity, i.e.,

                          R.E(a)      R.K(a) + P.D(a)

         Second,    assume the existence of a perfect loan           market for consumption

purposes      as defined above. Also assume that              the loan markets for   financing
consumption and       investment    in direct educational         inputs   are perfectly
separable      so   that funds   borrowed for on.      purpose cannot be used for the
                                            —6—


other." Clearly, the loan market for consumption affects only inter-
temporal consumption decisions and the loan market for investment in
human capital   affects only productive pmesibilities and                    the   decisions are

separable.   To avoid potential problems let us also assume that in the

loan market for educational expenditures               the individual can only borrow
funds and cannot loan them.
       Now assume that there is a perfect loan market                   for consumption but
none   for human   capital    investment. Purchased inputs must be financed by

current market earnings but consumpt ion may be financed by borrowing.

Investment is constrained by earning capacity

                       R•E(a)         R.K(a) + P•D(a)

The individual maximizes utility by selecting the paths K(a) and                        D(a) which
maximize the present v&lue of, earnings net of educational expenditures,


                       NY(a) —        R'(E(a)   —   K(a))   —   PD(a)
and then selecting the optimal consumption path subject to the wealth

constraint
                       W f
                             0,
                                  N
                                      e   C(t) dt
                                                       0
                                                        f
                                                            N
                                                                et   NY(t)   dt

Clearly, here the rate of discounting net earnings is the rate for borrowing
and lending in the consumption loan              market.

        If there is a separable loan            market      to finance purchased inputs, then

the productive possibilities expand. Investment is not bounded                         by   earning

capacity if borrowing (but not lending) is allowed. The constraint is that




      'This assumption captures the notion that financing investment in human
capital is somehow different from financing other capital since human capital
is embodied in the investor. No loan market is the extreme case but is analy-
tically simplest.
                                   —7—



the human capital input cannot exceed the total stock, that is
                      R•E(a)     R.K(a)

The case presented in the original Ben-Porath (1967) model is that the
interest rates in both markets are equal. In this formulation the markets
are undistinguishable and need not be separable to allow the consumption
and investment decisions to be separable. Again utility is maximized by
selecting among the expanded permissible paths of I(a) and D(a) for those
which maximize the present value of net earnings discounted at the market
rate.' There exists of course many intermediate cases of imperfect loan
markets.
      This basic model may be extinded by relaxing or altering the assumptions
about the utility function, the opportunity set, or the external constraints
faced by the individual. Different constructions may be used to concentrate
analysis on particular issues.
      For example, a simpler and clearer presentation of investment behavior
and the resulting earnings function are permitted if analysis is restricted
to the cases in which investment and consumption decisions are separable.
This is the case when activities involving time (or leisure) and the stock
of human capital do not enter the utility function. The lean markets for
consumption and investment are separable    and   the individual can borrow
and lend unlimited sums for the purpose of consumption at a constant rate



      "Other possibilities include separable loan markets with differing
rates. The optimal decision paths may be different but the same basic opti-
mizing principles apply.

      WSeparable   means that funds cannot be borrowed in one market and used
for another.
                                     —8—



as discussed above. Many interesting extensions may be considered even
within this special case •   The   nodel may be formulated to allow parameters
to vary with time in a known way. For example the rate of depreciation
of the capital stock may increase with age or the rental rate for human
capital R and the price of the aggregate input P may vary exogenously in a
known way. Secondly, these parameters may vary over time in an unknown way
or may simply be unknown to the individual but randomly attained from some
known distribution. For example, the end of working life N, the production
parameter, or the prices R and P may be uncertain. Models of decision-making
under uncertainty or risk can be developed to ascertain the effect of such
considerations.
      The model may be extended to include an initial physical asset .ndov.est
and a timed stream of payments or debts. The individual decision functions
would then include investments in physical assets. As long as the loan
markets for investment are separable from the loan markets for consumption
and a perfect loan market for consumption, is available, the optimal consumption
and investment decisions will be separable. The individual will maximise
the present value of the stream of income frám both physical and human
capital.2' The loan markets for physical and human capital may or may not
be separable but the existence of returns from physical capital to finance
human capital investment and vice-versa will effect the patterns of investment
and the resulting earnings. A timed stream of payments of debts may include
such things as anticipated gifts, inheritance, subsidies and doles. An


      2'The term earnings will refer to returns from human capital rented
in the labor market while income will refer to both returns from physical and
human capital.
                                          —9—



individual may be given a payment (dole) as long as he is in fuiltime
schooling, he may receive a percent subsidyon all human capital investments
or on direct expenditures (excluding foregone earnings) through a reduced
P during fulitime schooling. These subsidies may or may not be accompanied
by a coimitment to pay a percent of earnings in the future (as in the Yale
plan).
         A rather severe asstion is that human capital is homogeneous in
the sense that all units are perfect substitutes in the labor market both
between individuals and over units held          by an individual and thus rent at
the   same rate, R, per unit. Becker (l967.. p. 3) says:

                 The assumption of homogeneous human capital clearly
                 differs in detail rather drastically erom the usmal
                 emphasis on qualitative differences in education,
                 training, and skills . . . these differences, while
                 descriptively realistic and useful, are not required
                 to understand the basic forces determining th. distri-
                 bution of earnings.

         An individual's observed market earnings is the rental rate times the
amount    of human capital     the individual    chooses to allocate_to       the market at   the
time. This       ignores the potentially fruitful        area of differences between occu-
pations.     If human capital were considered a vector of skills              rather than a
homogeneous wilt, then each occupation           could   be considered   as   requiring a dif-
 ferent   "mix" of   these skills.   -
                                         Another important extension,     then,   is to cnnsiderr
a vector or human capital        embodied in    the individual and a vector of direct
educational inputs rather than the homogenouiaggregate of each. The vector
of direct inputs D is a simple extension and is considered later. Considering
a vector of human capital is a more complex matter. Each type of human
capital    has   a different rental rate,     and a   different set of direct inputs.
Since human capital is      embodied in the individual       each   type must be used in
                                      — 10 —



the   production of all others. me      investment decision becouiis much more

complex
        Yet another   way   to develop the model   is   to consider the individual
as endowed with a fixed amount of      time at   any point   in the life cycle and
faced   with the decision of whether to use it, and       the   human capital which
accompanies it, investing or in the market. The alternative used above

considers the individual as possessing a stock of human capital and deciding

where to allocate it.       Once the time   interpretation is specified and

inferences concerning investment, earnings and wages            are to be made,   some

destinction   should be made between various lengths of the time unit,            whether

an hour,   day   or year. Under the time     interpretation     the meaning of "time in
the market" is less clear with the posethility of on—the—job training as
well as outside investment. For example, empirically a destinction should
be made between investment made on-the-job and made off-the-job when              speaking

of time and wages. Whether considering an hour or a day or a we*k will not

matter if all training is on-the-job. The observed wage per time unit

will be the potential wage or earnings capacity less investment. Neither

the potential wage nor the investment time can be identified but the time

unit doesn't flatter. However, if all investment occurs off'the.job the

observed hourly wage will be the potential wage           and a zero wage is observed
for   all training time units. tn this latter case, time invested and potential




        '1The author is currently involved in the analysis of this problem.


      !"This time interpretation introduces questions of whether time and
human capital K enter the production function in the same way or not. This
is discussed in Ben—Porath (1967).

                                                                                             .
                                          — 11   —




wage   can be identified but the time unit is crucial.             Any   combination of
these is also possible but the whole problem is avoided if                 the   problem
is formulated as units of human capital.
           Another potentially fruitful area for development i. the fixed end
points of the life cycle. The individual's investment decisions begin at
a=     0   with the initial endowment of human capital E0 and end at the end of
working life a         N. Certainly, investment in the individual begins at
birth or even before birth in the form of prenatal care during his mother' s
pregnancy. However, investment decisions are not made by the individual
himself during the early part of his life. The investment decisions made
for him by his parents or guardian are surely influenced by parents' attitudes
toward education, income and financial position, number of other children
and dependents in the family, educational attainmeflt and health of the
parents, and other socioeconomic va±iables. During some period the indi-
vidual and his parents make decisions jointly before the individual begins
to make his        independent decisions. All during       his early period, as well as
later,      some   investment decisions   are    influenced   by or even   made by   society.

These decisions are       in   theform of public school       cpaality and   accessibility,

teacher quality, school lunch        program, and especially        cou1sory school

attendance.        An approximation to the point a — 0 is the age when compulsory

school attendance ends. The fact that the individual may participate in
his    investment     decisions prior to a —     0 does not    matter.     If E0 is properly

measured,      it will reflect these decisions in s'ry form.
           The model assumes that an individual selects optimal earnings and
investments paths subj ect to a*           0. Students are legally constrained to
stay in school until age 16 where a — 0.             An   individual could possibly increase
                                      — 12   —




his human wealth by leaving school before that time, i.e., a*           0. mdi—
viduals in     this circumstance will not    be investing optimally. The model
will not predict well for them and the existence of such individuals in a
sample will bias any parameter estimates.
        Many   questions cannot be considered in the models where consumption
and investment     decisions are   separable. The   primary   speCifications   which

make::consumption    and investment decisions inseparable are an imperfect loan
market when the loan market -for-human capit1 --inveatment              is
                                                                   imoerfect
amount of investment in human capital as an argument in the utility function,
and activities     involving   time as an input as an argument in the utility
function. Anyone of      these will make     the decisions inseparable. There are
many constructions of imperfections in the consumption loan markets. These
include increasing cost of funds, limited funds, and even the perfect loan
market for when the loan market for human capital investment is imperfect
and inseparable. If the stock of human capital or investment itself enters
the utility function then clearly the individual        will not   maximize utility
by maximizing the     present value of net earnings. Examples       include the
possibility that education increases efficiency in consumption (Micbael,l972)
and that attending an educational in9titution may be partly consumption.
        A much more complete analysis of theuse of an         individual's (or
family's time) can be obtained by       considering activities involving time      that
enter   the utility function. Time     may be considered an input into the
production of ultimate consumption goods (Becker,        1965).    The most obvious
example is leisure activities. Time and the human capita1-accompaaying it
then have three alternative uses: the poduction of human capital, the
production of consumption activity, and the acquisition of 'earnings (Stafford
and stephans,     1972). These models    where consumption and investment decisions
                                 — 13   —




are   not separable are re coiaplex since they also involve many other
issues affecting consumption behavior.
                                          — 14 —


                                A    Particular Solution

       The particular specification of the general life cycle       of earnings
model used depends   upon the questions to be studied, the degree of

empirical   complexity desired, and the     data available. The particular

specification   presented here was chosen because it allows analysis of
individual investment and earnings behavior while abstracting front con-
sumption and leisure considerations, is capable of being fully solved
analytically which illustrates the simultaneity of schooling and earn-
ings while providing an exact functional form for earnings, and has a
fairly straightforward empirical interpretation.
       The solution presented in this paper is based upon the assumption
of separable loan markets allowing unlimited borrowing and lending at
a constant rate r for consumption but no loan market for human capital
investment   purposes. Direct educational expenditures must be purchased

with current market earnings. Neither the          stock of human capital nor
activities   involving time enter the utility function. Consumption and
investment decisions are separable and the individual acts to maximize
the   present value of net earnings.

        In the early period    the   individual specializes in the production

of new human    capital,   using all of his earning capacity for investment.

The period of specialization is



                                      0    a a*


                                                                                  .
                                  — 15 —




where a* denotes the age at which the individual stops specializing and

begins investing only a fraction of his earning capacity. Specialization

ends when earning capacity ceases to be an effective constraint on

investment. One implication of assuming no loan market for educational

expenditures, and the only qualitative difference from the Ben—Porath

perfect loan market case, is the prediction of positive labor force

participation during the period of specialization. The individual

supplies a constant fraction of his human capital to the market to

finance expenditures for direct educational expenditures, i.e.,

RK(a)    P.D(a).

     For the rest of the life cycle, after the period of specialization

ends, a* < a < N, the individual invests some fraction of his earning

capacity in producing more human capital. Neither foregone earnings nor

direct educational expenditures is a function of the initial stock of

human capital E0. Gross investment declines with age after the period

of specialization reaching zero at the end of working life N. Earning

capacity, observed earnings, and net earnings at any age after a* depend

upon the stock of human capital and the investments at that age. The

equations underlying these statements are given in Appendix A. See

Figure 1 for a geometric representation.
                                  — 16 —



                                                                           .

   U
cflW
4J
•r (I)
ccjc:




   R.E
         0




                                                                      N
                                                           AAjusted age


             Figure 1. Earnings and investment paths and their relation-
                       ship to one another

             Note: The relative magnitudes of RK(a) and P.D(a) depend
                    upon R, ', 2• RK(a) is arbitrarily drawn larger
                    than PD(a).




                                                                           .
                             — 17 —



    The length of the period of specialization is endogenous to the

model. It is determined by the characteristics of the individual and

the optimization criteria. The optimum age to stop specilaizing in

production and begin positive net earning is that point where the

investment paths of the two regions cross. That is, the individual

will invest according to the rule K(a) and D(a) for non—specialization

except when he is constrained by his earning capacity during which

period he will invest all of his earnings capacity. The solution f or

a* as a function of the parameters and initial endowment of human

capital, but not age, is contained in an expression which cannot in

general be solved in closed form for a*. This expression is presented

in Appendix A. The expression containing the solution for a* must be

considered simultaneously with either the observed or net earnings

function to make any inferences about earnings. The expression allows

inferences about the direction of effect of each characteristic on the

length of the period of specialization. The length of the specialization

period varies directly with N, R, and   and inversely with E, P, and r.

The effect of all other characteristics is ambiguous)0


                   Effects of Parameters on Earnings

     Consider the effect of the characteristics ,   E,   a, ?,   2'   5, r,

N, P, and R on observed earnings and net earnings. Figure 1 illustrates11

the position of the decision paths P'D(a) and R'K(a) and of the resulting



     10For a more detailed discussion of these effects, see Wallace and
Ihnen, (see footnote 4).

     11The exact shape of the curves drawn in the figures is arbitrary
but their relative positions and direction of movement are drawn to be
consistent with the solution to the model.
                                     — 18 —



state   variables RE(a) =   y*(a),    Y(a), NY(a), and total investment defined

as



                            1(a) =   R•K(a) + P.D(a)                         (3)



for a given vector of characteristics.12 The effects of characteristics

are in terms of their effect on these paths.


The Initial Stock of Human Capital

     The effect of E is clearly to increase investment during the period

of specialization and thus raise potential earnings Y*(a), foregone

earnings R.K(a) and direct educational expenditures PD(a). Since the

investment paths after the period of specialization, a* < a < N, are not

a function of E, their paths are unchanged. The result is that desired

investment for a* < a < N intersects the maximum amount available, earning

capacity, at an earlier point and the individual ends his period of

specialization sooner but he has a larger earning capacity when he does

end his specialization. His entire set of earnings functions are thus

raised over the entire life cycle. The net result is that an individual

with all other characteristics the same but a larger initial stock of

human capital will have higher earnings over his lifetime and begin

getting them sooner (see Figure 2). The individual's human wealth is

clearly increased by an increase in E.


The Production Efficiency Parameter

     The effect of     the production or efficiency parameter is on

investment in both periods (Mincer, 1970, p. 12). First, during the

                                                                                   S
        12Either R•K(a) or P'D(a) may be larger but RK(a) is drawn larger
for illustrative   purposes. Their relative magnitudes     depend upon the
relative   magnitudes of    and   and P and R.
                               — 19 —




   1
 4J
 OOE
 r4 W




R' E
       o2
R• E
       ol




                                                      Adjusted age

        Figure 2.   Changes in income and investment paths due to an
                    increase in the initial stock of human capital
                                — 20 —



period   of specialization investment the fixed maximum investment is

more productive and earning capacity rises more sharply than before

from E. Each type of investment increases correspondingly. After

the end of specialization investment is still more productive and an

individual invests more in both foregone earnings and direct expenditures.

The investment path shifts up but still must decline monotonically to

zero at A = N.    The increased productivity in the earlier period tends

to shorten the period of specialization while the increase in productivity

in the later period tends to lengthen the period, but, as was mentioned

earlier, the net effect is to lengthen the period of specialization.

Both effects raise the earning capacity of the individual. In the

period after specialization both earning capacity and investments are

increased and the net effect on observed earnings and net earnings is

less clear. Net earnings always begin from zero and with a larger

begin later and so must be lower for some initial period. After a

"catch—up" period, net earnings are larger for a larger .     A similar

statement is true for observed earnings. Therefore, the effect on

earnings of more efficient: production in this sense depends on the age

of the individual, but the effect is to increase earnings after some

"catch—up" period (see Figure 3). This "catch—up" period is very similar

to the year of "overtaking" discussed by Mincer. Mincer describes this

as the time it takes for a trained person to overtake an untrained one

and speculates that it is rather short. This model supports this concept

but restricts it to comparisons of persons with all characteristics

except     the same. In this case a larger efficiency or ability parameter

explains both the length of training or specialization and the higher

earnings after the catch—up period.
                            — 21 —




 1J




RE0




      0                                                       N
           a1
                                                   Adjusted age


      Figure 3. Changes in income and investment paths due to an
                 increase in ability
                                — 22   —




                                                                                .
     Age   enters the earning function as an exponential function interacting
with all other characteristics to determine the "shape" of investment
and earnings   paths over the life cycle. The earnings functions are the

sum the exponential functions of age each weighted by functions of the

parameters. Whether earnings rise or fall as age increases depends on

which functions "dominate." Initially, earnings rise tnonotonically while

the positive terms dominate and then decline monotonically for a period
                                  13
at the end of the working life.


Rate of Depreciation, Deterioration or Obsolescence

     The rate of depreciation, deterioration or obsolescence of the stock

of human capital    affects investment •in both periods. In the period

of specialization less human capital is available to invest since it

depreciates at the rate S. Earning capacity grows more slowly the

higher the depreciation rate. After the period of specialization a

higher rate of depreciation continues to have a negative effect on both

foregone earnings and educational expenditure investments which decline

to zero at some age and becomes a positive effect after that age. That

is, a higher depreciation rate makes an individual place more importance

on earnings and less on investment early in his planning horizon and

more importance on investment later to keep earnings up. This might be

termed a "leveling" effect on investment since a high depreciation rate

shifts investment from early to later periods in the life cycle.




     13The existence of this decreasing portion is dependent upon the
values of the characteristics especially the depreciation rate. If    =
the earnings functions rise monotonically over the entire life cycle.
                                — 23 —




The Rate of Interest

       Thç effect of the marketrate of interest is to reflect the value

of net earnings depending on how soon or late they appear. The importance

of r is reflected iii the dbjective function, to maximize the present

value of net earnings over the life cycle. A higher rate of interest

more heavily discounts future earnings and thus lowers investment after

the period of specialization and shortens the period of specialization.


The Length of Working Life

       Finally, the effect of the length of the working life or investment.

period is to shift horizontally the entire investment curves P'D(a) and

R'lC(a) left if N falls and right If N rises. Therefore, if the working

life increases, both the length of the specialization period and

investment after that period Increase since the individual has longer

to reap the benefits of his investments.


Factor Prices and Production Coefficients

       Consider the effect of the factor prices R, P and the production

coefficients           where R is also the rental rate of human capital.

Given the Cobb—Douglas form of the production function1 the efficient

ratio of investment is given by


                              P.D(a)   =   2
                              R'K(a)       B1


What   matters   for investment purposes with respect to B, B2 is their ratio.

Any change In 8 or        results in a corresponding shift from the less

productive to the more productive type of investment.
                                     — 24 —




      The effect of R and P is similar, but, since R also affects the

return to additional units of human capital while P does not, the result
                                                                                 I
is more complex. If the price paid for educational inputs, P, rises,

there will be a substitution of foregone earnings for educational

expenditures. Overall investment will fall after the end of the

specialization period since the price of -a factor of production has

risen. If the rental rate and the price of human capital allocated to

production, R, goes up, there will be a shift of investment from foregone

earnings to educational expenditures. Both types of investment as well

as overall investment will rise over the entire life cycle 8iflce invest-

ment becomes more profitable. If both P and R are increased in proportion,

then relative amounts of inputs to investment will be unchanged but more

of each type will be undertaken and thus total investment increased by

the   Increase in earning     capacity through R.


Changes     in E and B for a Given Level of Schooling

      A   special case which is of interest is when the characteristics
change    :,Li   such a way that the period of specialization a* is unchanged.
If   one characteristic changes, there must be an offsetting change in

another characteristic. For example, If only 8 and            are allowed to

change, any combination satisfying the expression in Appendix A will

yield the specified value of a*. E and 8 must move in the sane direction

to maintain the same value of a* since a rise in E shortens time in

specialization while a rise in 8 lengthens It          It was shown   earlier
that a rise in either E or 8 tends to raise earnings but only after

the "catch—up" period for 8. When both increase in proportion to maintain

a* the entire earning profiles Y(a) and NY.(a) as well as earnings capacity
                               — 25 —




rise   over the entire life cycle. See Figure 4 for net earnings and

Figure 5 for observed earnings, Consider the changes in two parts.

First increase E from E to E •        The result is to Increase investment
              o       ol    o2

in the period of specialization only and to increase earnings everywhere.

The period of specialization is lowered from a1* to a2* •   Second,

Increase B just enough to raise a* back up to a1*. This will raise the

productivity of investment and thus Investment and earnings in both

periods complementing the effect of E0. That is, persons with the

same a* but differing In E0 and 8 will have observed earnings and net

earnings profiles which lie, one wholly above the other. This result is

verified in the empirical sections.
                                    — 26 —



                                                                             .

  4,1

0)0)
  0)




        R E
          o2
        R E
          ol




               0 a al                                        Adjusted age


               Figure 4. Changes in net income and investment paths due to
                          changes in E0 and which leave a* unaltered




                                                                             S
                                — 27   —




0,4)
r4 U)
I.4

REo2

R'E
    ol




        0                                                             N
                                                          Adjusted age


        Figure 5. Changes   in. observed income   and investment paths
                  due to changes in E0 and        which leaves a*
                  unaltered
                                       — 28 —


                                                                                     S
                     Empirical   Application Of The Model


       The   purpose of this section is to present and interpret    an   empirical
approximation to the earnings function, to discuss empirical counterparts
to   theoretical entities and    to use the model to   study the effect of ability

and schooling in determining the age-income profile. First, the model is
interpreted in the context of a particular research problem and of data
limitations. The data are discussed and model simplifications necessary
for estimation are made. The model is estimated and results presented.
        The research areas to which the model is applied depends not only
upon the interests of the research but also upon available data. The
model requires observation of several points      along each individual's

earnings     profile for individuals with a wide range of parameters. Many
of the parameters are not directly observable and must be approximated
by variables available in the data set used. Other parameters must be
assumed constant over all individuals for estimation purposes.
        An ara of research which is of current interest and to which the
model   applies particularly well is the study of the effect of ability

and schooling upon the age—earning profile. The IRSS—Eckland and NBER—

Thorndike samples contain information on ability measured by a test score,

years of schooling, earnings on Initial full—time job, earnings at the time

of the survey or surveys, recalled earnings for other years and in one case,

estimated earnings ten years in the future.




                                                                                     S
                                 — 30   —




          Interpretation of the Mode]. for irical Purposes
The Efficiency Parameter as Ability
      The meaning and effect of ability have been subjects of concern
for many years and by many authors.14 Definitions have ranged from the
power to do something and the natural equipment to accomplish some small
part of the meaner ambitions to such technical definitions as the
"height" of marginal rates of return schedules. Clearly ability takes
meaning only in the context of the task or objective to be p.rfod.
For the purpose of studying earnings fstctioe.a ability may be defined in
terms of producing earning capacity more or less efficiently.

      A common use of the term ability is the ability to produce earn-
ings. Does this mean observed earnings, net earnings or earning
capacity? Clearly observed and net earnings are directly affected by
current investment. One person may have more earning capacity than
another at the same age but lover observed and net earnings due to
larger investment. Even rankings by observed and net earnings may not
be the same due to different relative productivities of hwaan capita].
                                            8
and direct purchased inputs represented by (J4, all else equal,
                                           82
making foregone earnings different. Even earning capacity is not an
ideal interpretation because it varies over the life cycle and is a


     14For example Mincer (1970), Becker (1967), Hause (1971),
Leibowitz (1973), Grilliches and Mason (1971).
                                      — 31 —




function of past investment and investment by parents in the individual
                                                                                     .
resulting in E the    initial stock of human   capital. Another common
conception of ability is the rate at which an individual can or         the

rate   at which an individual does accumulate earning capacity. The
latter concept is represented in the model by E(a) -         E(a) the actual
rate of accumulation of human capital. The former concept is the rate
at which the individual could accumulate human capital if he used all
of his human resources to do so, i.e., specialized in production. Both
of these concepts depend upon the stock of human capital held in the
individual at the time ability is measured and the rate of accumulation
in either case is influenced by such factors as loan markets and sub-
sidies which should not influence a "pure" definition of ability.
       A definition of ability implied by this model and which is       relatively

free   of the above defects   is the efficiency with which   the   individual

produces   new human capital represented by the production parameters B;

831
       82 That is the index of ability is the relative efficiency with
which an ind.vidual can use a given set of inputs to produce new human
capital.
      Consider more carefully the real world counterpart tO 8. 8 indexes
the ability of individuals to use the same inputs more or less efficiently
given      and 82. In the ptoduction sense 8    measures   the effect of all
inputs whose amounts are fixed and given for the individual. That is
                            a      a2    a                   B
      q K(a) , D(a)1 = (uA1                       1(a)1D(a) 2
                                A2    A3
                                    a
whereB=A1 . A2          A
                         3
                              ::.An                            (4)

and    the A1 are those fixed inputs. The A1 represents the effect of such
                                 — 32   —




factors as manual dexterity, general health, mental ability in several
dimensions such as logic, comprehension, and speed of thinking, and such
constraints as blindness.
      If ability is interpreted as suggested above then it will be
influenced by early family decisions and environment to the mtent
that these determine the fixed factors of human capital production
represented in equation (4). Parents and society can influence the
efficiency with which an individual can produce human capital,15 and
this is correspondingly reflected in the effect of family and socio-
economic characteristics on measured ability. If these early decisions
affect factors which are not later under the individuals influence by
decision they affect his ability. If they affect factors which become
the individuals decision functions later, PD or RXa, then their in-
fluence is reflected in the initial stock of human capital.


Initial Endowment as Early Family and Environmental Bac)çground
      Early family and environmental background of the individual have
been a part of studies of earnings function but usually are a ccntrolR
in the form of dumey intercept variables or separate analysis entirely.
Some of the important factors in recent empirical works36 are race,
country, region of country, father's education, religion, and socio-
economic class. The objective is often to control for these factors


      15These decisions can be considered as early as pre-natal care.
This certainly has an effect on later physical and mental well. being.

       6For example see Chi.wick (1968), Johnson (1970), Manse (see
 footnote 24).
                                           — 33 —


while   studying the effect of primary variables such as schooling or ability.

For   the   purposes of this research, all of these factors         are   represented

either   in their effect on the     initial stock       of human capital. The initial
endowment     is the result or culminated effect of all such factors on the
individual's history     of investment up to the point where he can beqin to

make   his own investment   decisions. The point where he can begin           to make
his   own investment decisions, a o, is for the purpose of this analysis

taken   to be the time   at which an individual can legally leave school,
that is a 0 at age       16 years.    Before this time the individual's invest-
ment decisions are made for him by his parents or guardians and by public
policy. These decisions are not necessarily those which are optimal for
the   individual.
        Public policy dictates that the individual must be full time in
school until he reaches 16 years of age. This might not be optimal for
the individual since he may maximize the present             value of the net income

stream   by leaving school before that time.            General public policy and

the   local political process determine the degree and amount of direct
educational 'penditure subsidy reàeived by the individual through the
public   school system arid   community education environment. At this point,
race, country, region of      the country,       and   local socioeconomic environment

become   important factors    if   there   are   systematic and significant differ-
ences jr direct     educational subsidies to individuals in different

classifications.




                                                                                         .
                                        — 34   —




       Parents   directly determine the individual' $ early investments through
direct educational expenditures and through constraints on the amount of
time and effort, and correspondingly human capita]., the individual invests
in training. Training outside of formal schooling, health care, educa-
tional material in the home, and direct exposure to parents skills in a
loose apprenticeship manner are all part of investment. The parents' in-
vestment   decisions axe   influenced   by such factors as family income and

wealth,   number of dependents in the family, and socioeconomic          status of
the   family   as affecting attitudes toward       investment   in children. To the

extent that these factors are significant and systematic, they influence
the individual's later investment behavior through their effect on               and

B.

       These    early family and environmental factors nifest their effect
in both the initial endowment E and the ability index B. K0 represents
the initial endowment of human capital which the individual will choose
to allocate to investment or to the market. The production efficiency
index B may be influenced by family and environmental factors to the
extent that it represents the level of inputs which are fixed and not
subject to individuals' decision andkiare affected by family and
environmental, factors. That is, the individual may receive certain
types of investments in his which he cannot make himself. These in-
fluences may be considered substantially cclCte and fixed at the time
the individual begins to make his own investment decisions (a o) con-
cerning those factors of production that are not fixed. This indicates
                                        — 35   —




that ability d.fin.d as in     this rsearch        should be measured as close as
possible to    the age when a .0.


Time    in Specialization as Schooling
         Time in full—time schoolinq or training has been the primary subject
of many authors. These models take the length of training as the basic
source of heterogeniety of labor incomes. The models are formulated in
terms of training periods which are completed before earnings begin and
apply therefore strictly to schooling rather than to all occupational
training. The length of time in schooling is the primary decision vari-
able. When post-schooling investments are accounted for in the model,
they are taken as given in each period. In terms of the model presented
in this research, time in specialization in producing new human capital,
a*,    corresponds approximately to time in full-time schooling or train-
ing.     Both time   in specializatioe and post-schooling     investments are

determined in this model by E0 and B. They are the result of individual

choice in optimizing      behavior and the   deter.inants of that   behavior are
clearly    specified. The end   of   schooling, a*, enters the earnings func-

tion through the constant     of integration in the      solution of the model

for    post-schooling earning capacity.      The end of full-time schooling is

that    age at which earning capacity ceases to be a constraint on invest-
ment. Time     in schooling determines the individual's level of earning

at    each age but only   indirectly through and in conjunction     with B and

E.      Therefore, the effect of a*    or   years of schooling is to indicate




                                                                                    .
                                        — 36   —



the end of specialization and the relationship between          and 8   which   yield
the same value of a*, other things constant.

Simultaneity of Earnings and Schooling
       Earnings, either observed, Y, or net, NY, and time in specialization,
a*, are endogenous variables deterR(n.d within the system. The efficiency
parameter representing ability B, the initial stock of huaafl capital
representing the cumulative effect of family and environeental background
and age a are exogenous variables which vary btvs.n individuals • All
other characteristics,     6, r, 8, 82. R,     P, and I, are assumed to be
exogenous parameters which do not vary between individual..
       The observed and net earning, functions are given in Appendix A.
Either of these earnings functions i. determined simultaneously with a*
whose solution i      contained in the expression given in Appendix     A. No
closed form solution for a* is obtainable but th. solution is a function
of B and E. To study the earnings functions, a closed form solution for
a* should be substituted into the equation for net or observed earnings
making either a function of only the exogenous variables a, 8,         and   E.
But since no closed form solution for a* exists, one of th. other
exogenous variables involved in the solution for a* must be eliminated
from the   earnings   functions, that is   B or
                                                   E0.
       To study the    effect   of ability, schooling, and their interaction
on the age-earnings profile E0 is eliminated from the       earnings    functions
by using the simultaneous constraint of a. Substituting the solution
for   E from the expression containing the solution for as into either
                                        — 37 —

the net or observed earnings function yields an       earnings     function having
only ability,   age, and schooling as arguments. The effect of E0 is

automatically accounted for through 8 and a* subject to the simultaneity

constraint. That     is E    would be redundant since a*      and B   are   specified.

                  An Approximate     Form Of the Earnings Function

      The    earnings function must be put in a form which is amenable to
estimation. Since the earnings repOrted in the survey questionnaires
described in the next section correspond more closely to observed earn-
ings than net earnings only the observed earnings function will be
presented.
      To reach an empirically viable form for the observed earnings func-
tion linear Taylor's series approximations for exponential functions of
age and schooling are used.17 Applying these approximations to the ob-
served earnings function results in the empirical form

               Y(a, B, a*)     D1   (8C) +D2(BC) + D3(BCa*) + D4(Bca*a)

                               + D5(Bca2) + D6(BCI*2) + D7(BCa2a*)                  (5)


                               + D8(8Caa*) + D9($Ca2a*2)


where the coefficients D are defined       in Appendix   A.



      170ne reason the approximation is necessary is to separate r and
from the age variable. The general $ielaurjn' s series approximation
used is f(x) — f(O) + f'(O) x



                                                                                          .
                                      — 38   —




The    pirica1 Specification
         Several points should be noted on the relationship between empirical
quantities and theoretical entities. First, what earnings are we speaking
about? Earnings net of direct educational expenditures is the most obvi-
ous choice. Rowever, the earnings appropriate for empirica]. analysis
based on current data sets is observed earnings. We will concentrate on
and study the estimating equation for observed earnings. Obviously any
present value or rate of return calculations *ust be considered as upper
bounds. Secondly, what are the appropriate tine units of measurement for
earnings? Should we use hourly, daily, weekly, yearly earnings? Any of
the latter three units would meem propriat., the smaller the tins
interval the more desirable the mit sinc, the                   is humid on a -
tinuous conce!t.

         To consider the implications for hourly earnings we need more in-
formation. An individual is predicted, after the period of specialization,
to invest a certain fraction of his human capital in producing more and
to use the rest for obtaining observed market earnings. There are two
interpretations of    this   investment activity. One is that this fraction
is    represented by time out of the labor       force.   All   investment is done
outside    the labor market and the   individual is paid        for   100   per   cent of

 the   stock of human capital he brings to the labor market. This kind of
 situation is the one in which the wage rate is a measure of the stock of
 human capital up to a scaler multiple R.
         An alternative interpretation is that individuals work a standard
 40 hour week or standard work day consistent with employer •a rules and
 carry out their investment activity on-the—job. The individual carries
 all of his human capital     to the work   place   but uses some      fraction     of it

 to    obtain earnings by being productive and th. remainder for investment
                                         -39-
in on-the-job training. He is then paid only for that fraction actually
productive to the employer. Payment may be different from the individ-
ual 's product to the extent that       some   of the training i. firm specific.
See Becker (2]. Also the earnings will ref lect a deduction of direct
training costs and thus represent net earning.. In this paf thin
ig-nt    conqit*eied,    and yearly earnings arm uied.

                  The model is obviously based on the individual having full
information    and no uncertainty. The individual maximizes       the present

value   of his net earnings stream based on full utilization of his human
capital stock at any point in time for investment and/or earnings.          This

is obviously violated when the individual i. unemployed.          One way to

handle this    problem is to consider the estimation of full employment
earnings.     That is,   what   would the individual's earnings been if he had
been fully employed9 To justify this we asi that the unloyment

 is totally unexpected by each        individual,   considered as transitoz!, and
 does not affect his future expectations or investment behavior.20


        0nly yearly earnings are available or all age points in the IRSS-
 Eckland    sample and for all but one age point In the NBER-Thorndike sample.

    l9 weeks worked problem is handled si*Uarly by Chi.wa.ck and
Mincer (24], p. 5 of mimeograph. The formulation implicitly asses
elasticity of    earnings with respect to weeks worked in unity.



       20, obviously begs the question of wedc• worked of labor force
 participation being a function of schooling and age and other economic
 variables. This is subject of study in itself. Sea 7. fl.ckean,
 Jim Smith, and J.       Mincer.
                                  -40-
     For the annual data availabla in the sa1es used here observed
earnings should be weighted by the ratio of total weeks to weeks
actually worked. Since the weeks worked data are available for only one
year in each sample this approach is not used here. The alternative
                                             21
assumption Used here is that a small incidence of unmeployment is ex-
pected to be experienced at rindas over the population independent of
age, schooling mobility and is fully capitalized into investment deci-
sions. Actual observed earnings are than used here.
     Schooling and age for estimation purposes are measured as years
of schooling and years of age beyond age 16, respectively. Earnings
observed at age 40 for example are recorded as occurring at adjusted
age 24. Adjusted sàhooling is. measured years of schooling completed
less the years of schooling at age 16 or 10 years.
                                                  22.
     The ability index in the form 8°, where c — l/(l-B1—82), éntrs the
equation as a weight to the right-hand side of the earnings function and
the elasticity of earnings with respect to 8° is unity. The production
coefficients B,     and 82. thus    8° have some inherent scale so that


       21Those experiencing une1oymsut during the questionnaire year
are a small fraction of the total abd the mean weeks worked was approxi-
mately 98 per cent.

      22This definition makes comparisons and predictions relating to
the 1960 Census of Population possible. An alternative definition con-
sidered was that adjusted schooling is the age of the individual when
leaving the last year of full-time formal training. This definition
does not allow calculation of the rate of return to completion of
another year of schooling in the usual sense and has questionable
interpretation since many individuals interrupted schooling to enter
military service and received different subsidies before and after
service. The results are not surprisingly different.
                                         — 41 —


comparisons     between individuals could be made if the scale were known and
the parameters observable. For exampl. a doubling of B would imply that
                                                                                       •
twice as much human capital could be produced for the same inputs. How-
ever, only standardized measures of abilityN are available.
       The measures of ability available for this research are based on
examinations designed to measure reading comprehension, arithmetic
skills,   and in certain cases physical characteristics which are          intended
to   predict success in some training or schooling activity. To the extent

that   the desire   to predict the   ability to acquire training more      or   less
efficiently     has guided the design of the examinations they will be a
good proxy for      BC.   However, to the extent that the   tests   measure the
current stock          capital the measure will be poor and will over-
                  of human

state the effect on earnings of ability. If the tests measure a compo-
nent of skill level fixed to the individual and         not subject   to variation

by   decision then its variation correctly enters the measure         of

        Let   us first consider measured ability as an unknown but exact
(no random error)         monotonic transformation of 8c• Measured ability is
then interpreted as an ordinal index of BCwhich preserves             its ranking

but   does not preserve the          C    1 property.   We cannot say a doubling
of   the measured ability index indicates a doubling of BC          or earnings.23




        23We can however make statents about the         effect of a change in
              ability, recognizing it as such, if all individuals have

                                                                                       .
measured
identical examinations.
                                            — 42   —




If we consider a polyncmial24 approximation
                c                       2                  k
             B a1+m2B+m3B +...+a.B
to the monotonic transformation then the estimating equation becomes25


                       DA+             S+      AS +
                                                         DB+       BA
                                                                                     (6)

                              +        BS +        BSA
                                  D3


where A is adjusted age, S is adjusted schooling and B ii measured ability.
Age and schooling nv enter both individually and in interaction with
ability.26


           linear approximation is used here for simplicity of presentation.
The actual  degree of the polynomial used will be determined on mean squared
error criterion.
       25Note   that    —   a D1, D — it D1,                 ratio
                                                    etc. so that   only   the         can
be estimated and there are four estimates of it and none of the di's.
         The obvious alternative formulation is in terms of experience
     A - S. The relationship becomes

             YD+ (D+D) S+DS2+De+Des+DB                                               (7)
                                                    2
                       +(D+D)RS+DS +DBe+DBes

     26We should note at this point the effect of ignoring ability in the
estimating equation. If the equation
             YC1+C2A+C3S+C4AS                                                         (8)


is   estimated by ordinary least       squares while equation (6)         i. the correct
                                                                   (continued on next page)
                                               — 43   —




       Now let      us consider the problem of measurement       error   in the monotonic
transformation from the production efficiency index to measured ability.
The appropriate relationship is then

               BC =
                       m1
                            + m2 B + e.

Let us assume that

               e.           ITDN(O,


and   that   the measurement error        is   uncorrelated with A, S, B and the error
of   measuring   Y (call it c). Equation (7) now becomes

                      D+ DA+ DS +                 AS      + DB+ BA
                                                                                    (9)


                            +D;Bs+DBsA+ (D1+D2A+D3S+D4SA)e


      26 (concluded)
specification and has the usual desired properties of the error term then
the error term associated with (8) will not.

        Since the omitted terms are obviously positively correlated with
the included variables, to the extent that the variance in B is mnall, the
estimated coefficients C. are biased upward. Also ignoring the interaction
of ability with the included terms will make the variance of the calculated
error term positively correlated with predicted income. For example, meas-
ured ability has the effect of increasing the rate of increase of earnings
over the life cycle at any schooling level, thus causing the predicted
variance of earnings to increase with the age class. If the effect of
ability in this respect is not accounted for the larger variance will show
up in the error variance.




                                                                                            .
                                             — 44   —




Clearly the error term associated with estimating equation (7) when equation
(9) is the true relationship does not satisfy the usual assumptions for
least squares estimates. The combined error term, j, — CD1 + D2 A + D3
S+   D4
          SA) e +    , is normally distributed with mean zero but the covariance
structure is heteroschedastic. The error variance increases with the square
of (D1 +   D2
                A+
                     D3
                          S+   1)4
                                     SA).27 Estimates using this weighting factor are
considered later.

                               Results of irical Estimation
      T samples of cohort data are examined to estimate the empirical
earnings function developed in the previous section. The samples differ
substantially in size, populations from which they are drawn, number of
points observed over the life cycle and supplementary data available.
Each sample ii described briefly before the results of estimation are
presented. The wider range of ages observed over the life cycle in the
NBER-Thorndike sample allow sore detailed analysi. of earnings late in
the life cycle and present value calculations. Inferences from the
IRSS-Eck land sample are restricted to early life cycle earnings behavior.

Results Based on the NBER-Tburndjke Data
      The NBER—Thorndike sample is based on a group of males volunteering
for Air Force pilot, navigator, and bobadier programs in the last half


      27ldentical statements apply irrespective of degree of the polynomial
transformation used if there is also an error of measurement. Estimates
are unbiased.
                                         — 45 —


of   1943. These volunteers were      given   initial screening tests and   a   set of

seventeen tests to measure various abilities, to be described later, in

1943.      Thorndike and Hagen sent a questionnaire to a sample of     17,000 of

these     men in 1955 which included a question on 1955 earnings. The NBER
sent to a subset of these a subsequent questionnaire in 1969 which in-
cluded additional questions. on earnings in later years and questions on
schooling and initial job earnings.
          The data includes five separate approximately equally spaced points28
on the age-income profile as well as the year of initial job, year of last
full-time schooling, years of schooling and seventeen separate measures of
ability.         The age—income points are   approximately initial job, 1955, 1960,
1964, and 1968. The individuals in the Thorndike sample differ from the
U • S.   male population as a whole in several ways •29 First the sample in-
cludes a high ability group. All of the men completed high school or
high school equivalency examinations, and passed the initial screening
for the Air Force flight program. Their general health was better than
the general population30in 1969. They were more homogenous in height


           28
               Any observation which might cause special problems is omitted.
These      include those individuals disabled, unemployed, in the military,
or   who    is a pilot at his major occupation. Particular year observa-
tions for an      individual are omitted if for example the year of initial
job      was   questionable.

           29Many of these comments originated with T. F. Juster who     directed
the      data collection for the NBER.


           30The   model response was excellent with 57 p.r cent, 38 per cent
were      good, 3   per cent fair, and less than 1 per cent each were poor or
non—response.


                                                                                         .
                                     — 46   —




and   weight due to military qualifications. They seem to have a high degree
of self confidence, self reliance and risk preference. They      to be
                                                               tend

entrepreneurs, an unusual 20 per cent work longer hours. Some of these
factors may however be related to the high ability.              -    --

       The   age distribution of the individuals in the sample in 1969 is pre-
sented in Table Al. An annual earnings and year of earnings are recorded
for the five—year intervals 1945—52 (first post—World War II job), 1953—57,
1958—62, 1962—66, and 1967—70. The 1955 and 1969 earnings figures are
current while the others are recall responses. There is then considerable
age variation within these year intervals.
       All individuals have at least a high school degree. The distribution
of adjusted schooling for the sample is presented in Table A2.
       Seventeen different measures of ability, or indicators of likelihood
of success in completing the Air Force training programs, were collected
at the time of    application in 1943. Scores include tests of reading com-

prehension,   mechanical principles, dial and table reading, spacial
orientation, numerical operations, speed of identification, mathematics,
rotorary pursuit, two-hand coordination, complex coordination, aiming
stress, discrimination reaction time, and finger dexterity. These scores
have been combined into an aggregate measure of ability designed to approxi-
mate an I. Q. type measure • 31 The distribution of the sample with respect



        31me aggregate measure was constructed by Al Beaten.
                     — 47   —




                    TABLE   Al
Age Distributio* of the N)R-Thorndike Sa*le in 1969
 Mean Age i. 46.7 and th. StaMird Deviati•n is 3.1
       Years. Non-r.spons. ii .22 Per C.at


                        Miative Frequ.*cy
       Ag.                  (p.r cent)

      <42                          .04
        43                         .22
        44                       10.32
        45                       21.73
        46                       22.42
        47                       15.54
        48                       10.00
        49                        5.73
        50                       4.63
        51                        3.93
        52                        3.60
        53                        1.48
        54                         .10
       >55                         .04




                                                      S
                                  — 48 —


                                  TABLE A2
Equivalent Years of Schooling Distribution for the NBER—Thorndike Sample
       Mean Years is 5.02 and the Standard Deviation is 2.4 Years


        "Equivalent"                                  Relative
          Years of                 Adjusted           Frequency
          Schooling                  Years             (Per cent)

            12                         2                  24.24

            13                         3                  11.46

            14                         4                   7.67

            15                         5                   6.56

            16                         6                  28.32

            17                         7                   5.35

            18                         8                   7.69

            19                         9                   1.17

            20   or more              10 or more           7.53


Note:                  years of education
            High school graduate           12
            Some college training,
              no degree                    13—15
            College graduate               16
            Some post-graduate work,
              no M.A. degree             — 17
            Masters degree or equivalent — 18
            Some post—masters work,
              no Ph.D.                   —    19
            Professional degree or Ph.D. —    20
                                       — 49 —


to   this aggregate ability msasure3     and the   distribution of ability within

schooling classes are presented is      Ta1e A3.     The   overall   distribution is

scaled   to have mean one and standard deviation one-fourth so that results
are comparable between samples. The mean and standard deviations for the
various schooling groups are in Table A4. Table AS presents the means
and standard deviations of earnings over all points observed over the
life   cycle for various schooling    classes and ability classes.
       The   earnings ftinction is estimated from the      NBER—Thorndike data using
all of the age—earnings points observed for each Individual. The degree
of polynomial approximation for age, schooling, and measured ability are
determined by the    data on   the basis of signifigant     reduction of error

variance.    The estimated equations are presented in Table A6. Equation (1)
illustrates that a strict application of the theoretical form, with linear
approximation,                coefficients with the predicted sign. Quad-
                  does result in

ratic terms and interactions of schooling and ability and cubic terms in age
and   their interaction are the resulting "best" equation, equation (7). Eoth
cubic and quadratic equations in age will be considered and the age—earnings
profiles for each are presented in Table Al. The observed age range of the

sample as seen in Table Al is adjusted ages from 3 to 41, but with less than

one pezcent outside the range 3 to 39. Even though the equation cubic in age

Is a significantly better predictor inside      the observed interval, it is      quite

poor   beyond adjusted ale 39. Therefore the equation quadratic in age1Is


         32Al]. earnings are in 1957—59 dollars.
      -'The cubic but not quadratic term in ability is included in the qua-
dratic age equation since it is a slightly better predictor.
                                                                                          .
                                       — 50    —




                                     TABLE A3
           The  Distribution of Measured Ability for the NBER-Thorndike
              Sample and for Schooling Classes. The Overall Mean is
                         1.00 and the Standard Deviation is .25.

                  Overall     Relative Frequencies for Mjuated Schooling Classes
                  Relative    —
Ability Class     Frequency    2      3         4      5      6        7         8     >8

0.0 - 0.124         0.000     .001

0.125 —   0.374      .003     .005   .002     .005   .003   .001   .004
0.375 — 0.624        .052     .084   .085     .039   .055   .036   .030         .026   .023

0.625 — 0.874        .279     .371   .345     .332   .277   .208   .234         .220   .200

0.875 — 1.124        .382     .387   .382     .389   .385   .378   .358         .365   .40].


1.125 — 1.374        .208     .132   .150     .182   .228   .257   .264         .265   .258
1.375 — 1.624        .065     .020   .030     .047   .049   .104   .087         .102   .093

1.625 — 1.874        .011     .001   .007     .005   .000   .016   .023         .018   .026

1.875 — 2.00         .000                            .003                       .003


Sample size          4954     1201    568      380    325   1403       265       381    431




Note: The simple correlation between        ability and schooling is   .2451.
                          — 51 —




                      '*ILE A4
Means and Standard Deviations of Ability for the Various
     Schooling Classes of the NBER-Thorndike Sample


Adjusted                           Standard      Sa*ple
Schooling         Meafl            Deviation      Size

    2              .906               .217        1201

    3              .930               .230            568

    4              .967               .228             380

    5              .989               .234             325

    6             1.059               .256            1403

    7             1.047               .263             265

    8             1.069               .254             381

  >8              1.063               .248             43].




                                                              .
                                       — 52   —




                                     TABLE AS
Mean and Standard Deviations of Earnings Over All Life Cycle
 Points for Various Schooling Classes and Ability Classes
                            for the NBER-Thorndike Sample


                                                  Standard    Sample
                                   Mean           Deviation   Size

Overall                           9434.56          7093.44    15578

     S    —   2                   8025.80          5024.03     3459

     S =          3               9216.74          7464.38     1694

     S =      4                   9511.62          7321.70     1166

     S —          5               9819.96          7502.72     1041

     S —      6                   9933.13          7349.03     4693

     S =          7               9331.96          6905.64      882

     S — 78                       9163.44          6496.23     1302

                                 11619.42          9371.92     1341

   0 < B <             .25        9243.39          6112.84       20

 .25 < B <             .50        8166.55          7407.76      173

 .50 < B <             .75        8681.53          6403.80     2112

 .75 < B <            1.0         9016.06          6748.65     5761

1.0 < B       <       1.25        9744.36          7345.09     4894

1.25 < B <            1.50       10210.08          7428.57     2082

1.50 < B <                       11568.95          8793.34      536
                                         — 53     —


                                      T3LZ A6
         EmpiricalEstimates of th. Zarminqs Function from the N3ER-Thorndike
          Sample Based on 15,578 Aqe—Earaiis Points frc. 4,956 Individuals


                                                  Coefficient
              (1)        (2)           (3)              (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)

                      7291.40       33S.47            2535.49     6671.05    5211.24   21108.50
A                                    —98.84           —141.70     -408.75    —636.00   —3921.20
S                                  —1413.70 —1428.70             —2692.30    —596.62     877.25
SA                                   158.13            432.84      482.88     432.56     148.02
A2                                     1.80              7.62       12.53      21.16     206.09
                                      83.85            164.11      255.24     104.08    —794.20
SA2                                   —2.62             —8.93      —10.03     —14.26       6.87
S2A                                  —15.45            —47.46      —49.70     —54.85     116.42
S2A2                                        .37           .96        1.04       1.94      —7.82


8           4608.60   —3043.90 —1294.80            10073.00        406.47    5934.30 —45197.00
             170.01    165.07         47.43            —27.59      430.96    1060.30   11015.00
BS          —719.87   —549.69        22689            -.248.14    1859.20   —5226.9     4721.40
BSA           42.39     42.42        —37.21           —538.15     —497.07    —266.00   —1820.80
                                       2.79             —7.79      —12.93     —31.86    —594.93
                                     —36.04           —163.27     —272.32     280.74    1065.0
                                       100              13.33       11.96      21.11      83.505

8S2A                                   8.51             84.2*      57.90      61.      —122.05
                                       —.21              1.39      —1.21      —3.52       8.56


B2                                                —6307.40                  —5757.90 28134.00
82A                                                   121.37                —570.03 —6738.40
B2S                                                   490.95                7401.90    —5035.2
B2SA                                                  210.94                —286.40     1435.20
B2A2                                                     4.36                  11.61     371.38
B2S2                                                    42.60                —613.47    —240.65
B2SA2                                                   —5.65                  —5.42     —72.59

82S2A                                                  —26.99                   6.29       5.86

82S2A2                                                    .55                   1.8]        .99



                               (concluded    on aext page)
                               — 54 —




                         TABLE A6   (concluded)


                                      Coefficient
         (1)     (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)     (7)

B3                                                  -.113420        761.58
B3A                                                   —53.97        115.29
B3S                                                  —277.67   —2697.80
B3SA                                                  112.40        217.46
B3A2                                                    4.13          2.53
B3S2                                                   53.78        264.68
B3SA2                                                  —2.99         —2.34
B3S2A                                                 —12.71        —17.62
83S2A2                                                   .28          —.15


A3                                                                           —2.99
A3S                                                                           —.31
A3S2                                                                               .15
BA3                                                                           9.09
                                                                :
BA3S
BS3S2                                                                         —.17
82A3                                                                   .     —5.74
B2A3S                                                                          1.04
B2A3S2                                                                             .03

R2       .2063   .2642        .2693        .2704       .2705         .2710    .2759
                                    — 55 —


                            T%ILE A7.a
   Quadratic   Age-Earnings Prfi1es Eased on the NBER—Thorndike
                  Sampi.. 1rCØ+C1A÷C2A2.

                   Adjusted
Ability (B)     Schooling CS)                0                1            2
                                              -
    .50               0               6831.50             —200.02        6.58
                     2                3752.38              207.41.      —0.38
                     6                 613.26              486.71       —3.04
                     10               1499.65               49.81        9.32
    .75               0               6645.91             —108.30        458
                     2                4152.73              160.14        0.94
                     6                 934.71              417.68       —0.37
                     10                 74.45              302.79        6.30

   1.0               0                6141.31              —31.76        3.73
                      2               4166.52              146.62        2.05
                     6                1097.47              395.11        1.25
                     10               —797.57              499.24        3.88

   1.25               0               5211.40               24.54        4.44
                      2         •
                                      3664.91              178.09        2.89
                      6               1048.66              433.60        1.46
                     10               —932.00              620.34        2.25

   1.50               0               3749.83                55.54       7.00
                      2               2519.04               265.81       3.39
                      6                735.37               548.45       —.10
                     10               —144.45               647.23       1.60




Note: These estimates includó a cubic         but   not   a quadratic ability
term.




                                                                                .
                                   — 56    —




                                 TABLE A7.b
      Cubic   Age-Earnings Profiles Based on the NBER—Thorndike Sample.
                         Y C0 + C1 A + C2 A2 + A3.
                                                 C3



                  Mjusted
Ability (B)     Schooling CS)          0              1         2            3


    .50              0            5543.50        —98.30       1.47         0.12
                     2            8214.34       —678.00      47.29        —0.75
                     6            5831.35       —472.66      48.16        —0.82
                    10           —6851.19       1552.35     —71.99         1.34

    .75              0             3036.13       549.70     —31.21         0.60
                     2             5684.86      —158.12      18.33        —0.28
                     6             7842.77      —897.36      70.59        —1.14
                    10             5814.63      —734.71      60.44         —.84

   1.00              0             4045.50       355.40     —17.46          .36
                     2             5293.00      —118.82      17.14         —.24
                     6             8511.60     —1061.58      80.55        —1.28
                    10            12695.01     —1996.80     136.23        —2.10

   1.25              0             8571.63      —681.20      42.71         —.60
                     2             7038.76      —560.07      43.73         —.66
                     6             7837.82      —965.33      78.04        —1.25
                    10            13790.13     —2233.91     155.37        —2.43

   1.50              0            16614.50     —2560.10     149.30        —2.27
                     2            10922.15     —1481.90      98.11        —1.51
                     6             5821.54      —608.59      63.00        —1.00
                    10             9099.82     —1446.04     117.86        —1.85




                         //
                                      — 57 —

used for prediction in this interval. Comparisons of Cubic and quadratic

estimates are wade later.--'1     Casider the effect on earnings of age, schooling,

ability and   their   interaction. The effect of schooling on the age—earnings

profile is illustrated in Figure 5 for the average ability individual. The

profile for schooling level S0 is included for completeness, but it is a

pure extrapolation since all pers.ns in the sample were at least high school

graduates.    The initial earnings upon entering the labor force are scarcly
affected by schooling while the rate of increase in earnings is enhanced.
Individuals with more schooling initially have lower earnings than indivi-
duals who have less schooling but have been in the labor force longer. The
earning of the more schooled person rise faster to overtake the less schooled


      -'The weighted estimates were attempted for both the Cubic and Qua-
dratic age equations, but were not obtained because the weighted cross pro-
duct matrix was to close to singular to be inverted accurately.

        Even the Unweighted equations are highly collinear due to the correla-
tions   beween the polynomial age and schooling terms, for example
CORR(A,A ) = .983, COIR(A,A3)  .945,     CORR(A2,A'3) =.989, CORR(S,S2) = .974,
COORR(B,B2) =.986 , C0RR(B,B3) ='.951     ,   and CORR(B2,B3) =.989 . Weighted
estimated equations were obtained for lower degree polynomials in ability
using the weight implied by the cubic age equation. Both weighted equations
linear in ability and omitting ability entirely had larger calculated R2,
.47 and .46 respectively, than the R2 for the unweighted equations cubic in
age with R2 = .276 or quadratic in age with R2 = .270. However, these are
weighted R2's. Comparisons based on the squared simple correlation between
predicted and observed values, unweighted R2, indicates that the weighted
estimates are clearly poorer. p2 for the weighted equations linear in
ability and omitting ability ability are .240 and .247 respectively.

        Similar comparisons can be made for alternative estimating equations.
Two   alternatives are compared here, both involve simple transformation of
the   dependent variable. One is the widely used log—linear earnings function
and   the other is one suggested by Heckaan and Polachek (1972). Beckman and
I'olactteck estimate ysuch the Y"Y is the appropriate dependent variable.
They find that y is approximately .33. Equations with both in'! and Y33 as
the dependent variables were estimated as linear functions of age, schooling,
ability and their interactions resulting in calculated R2 of .44 and .39
respectively. Since R2 in these cases represents the squared simple corre-
lation between predicted and observed mY and Y.33 values respectively, they
are not strictly comparable with the estimate based on linear Y. The
resulting squared simple correlation between predicted and observed earnins
are .260 and .256 respectively as compared with .269 for the corresponding
estimate linear in Y.
                               — 58 —




X1f5
30.0




20.0




10.0




                                                                 A
                                                            51
                                                                 F1  —




   •



       F,&u 5 e- C6c Erin"iTht          AGE   Ra,v,d6s PIoF1L-S
           'B*SED oQr,E N8E1THcfPD,Ice SIIm?I foi°
           ¶,cj4oci-saJG LuLSr TIIE AUERG ibU. 'TV LEu€L.



       CTt 1i-          4'.   j957-9 toL?#.
                            — 59 —



                                                                                 .
   .7
xic-'
30.0




20.0
                                                                    C, 2




10.0




                                                                     ADTASTE 0
                                                                51
 0.ei           11     21            31                41




    F-tuzc                  AGEE4LtJINGS l'oFILE
        'I5EO C,J THE Er—Tti              S,ltlll'Le   FO' SLcicL
             ,4o&GJiELATTI4                            LUL.

                                                                                 .
                                           — 60 —

person's earnings at about adjusted age sixteen and remain higher throughout
the observed life cycle. The cubic estimates indicate that earnings begin to
level   off toward the end of the observed life cycle and        decline absolutely
after   approximately adjusted age thirty—four,       exactly when depending on the
level   of schooling. The absolute decline in earnings is not a clear pre-

diction since less than one—fifth of one percent of the sample were observed

beyond age thirty=nine and only nine percent were observed beyond age thirty—

six and since the leveling—off of earnings          later   in the life cycle was not

strong enough to dominate the shape of the quadratic age-earnings profiles,

the quadratic estimates do not turn         down at all."
        These   results can be couched in terms of experience rather than age
where experience is defined simply as years of work beyond schooling.-'
Experience—earnings profiles for individuals of average ability are presented
in Figures 5c and d. Clear'y increased schooling enhances the effect of
experience even for a given ability level. Differences in earnings are even
more pronounced within experience groups than within age groups.
        The effect of an additional year of schooling obviously depends on the

individuals     position in the life cycle. Whether expressed in terms of age
or experience. This is illustrated in terms of age for average individuals
in Figure 6.a. Early in the life cycle, for example, schooling has little
or even a small negative effect      on earnings.V The earnings schooling rela-
tionship becomes progressively stronger         over the life cycle increasing In
both level and     rate   of increase.


                should be noted that the effect of additional schooling is con-
strained to be a smooth quadratic by the functional form. Previous empirical
work indicates that highschool, college and graduate degree, graduates may earn
slightly ure and the corresponding dropouts may earn slightly less than the
smooth prediction.

      'This simple definition ignores the problem of schooling completed
before military service and assunes that military service counts fully toward
experience. A much nre complete consideration of experience rather than age
for working women is attempted by Mincer and Polachek (1973).
        -21Again the relationship        for A—40 is a prediction and is ambiguous    for
the   Cubic age estimates.
I.                                                                  .
                          w
                                      U,                                •1
                          w
                                      —                I,J
                                      IL         i.0   \)                Ui
                                                                        -4
                                      i IL L
                                       3
                                                                        w
                                                       I,p.
                                                 .1
                                      2.                                1

                                                                         p.
                                      Ui     hi


                                             l
                                             -,        vfl

                                                       u)
                                                                        lvi
                                                                        A
                                                                        LL)

                                                 •     Ui
                                                                        j•J
                                                                        ta
                                  •                                      vs
                                         I

                                       .
                                       —
                                                       4
                                                       £
                                                                %

                                                                         w
                                             l•j - Ii.)                  V

                                                                        w-
                              •




                                             I
                                                              -1
                                                                        ;;
                                                       ,      )-,       - -t
                                      '.1)
                                                       ,.!J J
                                             (Q f) •'                   k
                    C
                    '.4
     S r I ' b' 3
                             — 62 —




 x1
 30.0




20.0



 10.0




 ..e1            11         21            31      41        51
                                                       EpERecE


   FlG-4 5,J.     QAb,TI          £X?E..NC€ —Ei,.iuJcc
                      rt/E L/t3çg-'j-       5,PLC- F SE.)EL
        5ctjOOL/#/G         /17   -riie   ,4tIe!4,11TYLL)tL..
                               — 63 —




                                                                        .
     Xl fY




w   .20.0
                                                             =o
                       .                                     A4p


                                                    S
                                                               9




                                                             Io
     rj'3
             1                    6                     10      11

                                                             Sc'ciiiJ

    Fiu Ei&s 4sA Fcr,o& oF OOl LEL
                 FoL   eS(ArarE- ,j /lILIrYI,,JDx



                                                                        .
                                            — 64    —



         The level of ability as veil as age affects the           relationship between
earnings and schooling. Figures 6.bc, and d                illustrate that the positive

interaction between ability and           schooling     increase with age. Ability has

little affect on the earnings        schooling      relationship at early ages, but

increasingly raises the level of earnings in the relationship over the life

cycle.     This indicates a   positive three way         interaction.
         Secondly,    consider the relationship between earnings and ability. The
effect of ability is less pronounced over the life cycle than that of school-
ing and depends on the level of schooling itself.
         Figure 7    illustrates   the   effect   of ability on the age—earnings profile
for high school and college graduates. At high levels of schooling, college
graduates and above, ability increases earnings at every point in the observed
life cycle, and its effect is to increase the rate of growth of earnings,
but   not the initial level of earnings. However, for levels of schooling
below the college graduate, there appears an initial period in which earnings
are actually lower for higher ability persons. The length and magnitude of
this period diminishes with increased schooling. The period seems to lower
earnings most for high ability people. After this initial period, ability
increases the level of earnings and the rate of growth of earnings. This
finding is    consistent with the predictions of the udel, since for a given

schooling level, higher ability persons are              predicted to invest more   at all
points in the life cycle while the absolute               difference in investment diminishes,

with   time        in lower earnings initially. The positive relationship
              resulting

between ability and the simple definition of experience is obvious since schooling
is held constant.
                                — 65




<I
     .0




2.0                                              —




iü.g

                                           p         -
                      .
                                       6                   10       Ii
                                                                4 b5v,reO



     i4€G,b, EAic A5 FuT'o
          Fo't /GEA8tL,fl        O&E ST Dttb bV T,Q,)(' 4oo"
                     A             1G (b)i4    /c ,(c. A:2O(d\A    O,.
                          kLEE iiieb O) TIE CM4K. Ei,,i,iT&-



                                                                            .
                      — 66   —




      3o.3
1


'Ii




      10.0




      0.0 I
                             6   to   ii

       FiG1aE   4Lo
                         — 67




                                                .
                                                    t

      >1
      30.0




iii

      20.0




      ie.o




      e.e
                            6   Jo         11
                                 A D1 %A
                                 C.HGoIh.jJ G



           FiGIA d.A3o



                                                .
                                         —68—




      x13
      38.0
V.,
'S



di


      20.0




      10.0




      8.01              11          21          31         41       51
                                                                 Aostsn I)
                                                                 ftc

       FIGuac7,cL, Cctsic (ctc.') ,tsao Q&o4,ic(b3f) ESTIIPIATED
             4gE_E4g'zjjIIuGs ?IZoF,LES Baneo OCIHC
             S*m?Lr FoP' AuxaAG.e ,46U.sr? ,ia'D      S7AaUDMD

             jAr6avE I4PbBELO*A1 PO UtGRScoot,GcArflA1-cs(tn.\ *,,J
             Cotscçç GauitEs Cs=C.. 5=2 C&aic,
                 —. 69 —




                                               S


x183
30.0




20.8                                  f . S.
                                4.




10.0




       11   21             41        51




 P/E


                                               .
                               — 70• —




     x1
     30.0



Ui



     20.0




     10.0




      8.8                 21             31   41    51
            1      11
                                                   tcrD


            ci 7,c. Ci.
                         - 71


                                                           S



313.0

                                           :: I .
                                               'I -   "0


20.0




10.13




 0.01       11      21          31   41   51
                                                      D




   Fs-iaE 7, d, ADZ(TIL5




                                                           .
                                        — 72   —




        The   earnings ability relationship is very much dependent on        both the

level   of schooling and the level of expexience or age as illustrated in
Figures   8. The earnings—ability relationship for high school graduates is

negative at A = 10,      constant at A — 20,   and positive in the range B >        .7
at   age A = 30.    The relationship is negative even    at    A    30 for very low

ability people      as illustrated in Figure 8.a. For college graduates in

Figure 3.b, the earnings—ability relationship begin approximately constant

at A      10 and   becomes increaseingly positive with age.        By the Ph.D. and

professional level, S = 10       illuatrated,in Figure 8.c.,the relationship

is strongly and increasingly                             37/
                                   positive at all ages.— These         relation-
ships are illustrated in a slightly different way in Figures 8.d, e, and

f with the earnings ability relationship for different levels of schooling

in the same figure.

        Figures 9 illustratesthe comparison of age—earnings profiles when

ability    and schooling are positively and then negatively coirelated over
individuals. Since the two interact positlvely,all effects are exagerated
when the two are positively correlated,and are dampened when they            are

netatively correlated. A point to note is that         the age at     which the earn-

ings of the more schooled individual overtake the earnings of the less
schooled      individual is negatively related to the level of schooling,if

schooling and ability are positively correlated,and is positively related

to schooling,if schooling and ability are negatively correlated. Since

ability and schooling are usually observed to be positively correlated

(.24 in this sample).,the age of overtaking is less Important and the

interaction of ability and schooling is accentuated.



        37'
        —'Again,     the prediction at A 40 is unclear.
                                        — 73 —




                                                                         .
      x
      3:0.0



.zJ




      20.0




          S          .4                 .o 11                      21
                                                               Aau.rrr
                                                               1tJoec

      FlGwE 8 .                   (hA Fcrio.i or-
            ¶juAL                          ,1#JD SCtOCLla%JG

              Coli,4TiotjS, TtfeSE E•               me



                                                                         .
                — 74 —




xl
     0




20 0




10.0




                I.0 11      21
                         I6tL(ry
                         I'Jb EA

         L b.
                     — 75 —




                                      .
\1




20.0




0.0
                               21
                              ALIT-
                              INDEX

     Ftoe8.- S/O..




                                      S
            I-.
                  — 76 —




  1
      •0




•20.0




10.0




 0.0       LiJ!t      11
                           • --L




                            48iT
                                   2,1




  FIL4 8d. f1io
              — 77



                               .
  .7


o.o




                     AB1L,Tr
                      DJ 0



 F Be ,*2O'


                               .
                                        — 78 —



S



         :1




    Lu




         20.0




         18.0




         0.0
               S                                 21




              I'IGt4fE   1-;   1=3O..
                            — 79 —




                                                                  I
30.0




20.0




10.0




                                                           ?IGE


Fi&ui 9,a. Esri,iirEb 4c—EA,.Jwcs UOFL RS4LT/NG
        ,48u...,ry 4JD Sct1.cL/&' 'bEE 1)OS,TIUeL*1l C0.eL11ED.




                                                                  .
                                    -80-




X1L3
30.0




20.0




18.0




 0.B1             11           21           31           41           51
                                                                I4D5TED
                                                                AGE



  Fuu 9.1, E'T1YnYrED ,4c.e                      PIJIMGS P,or-sL6S
        RE5'U.TII'IG &/t4Ef.J ,48ai1i #IJD Sc,coL,,Jc.
        tJEG-ATtU   L     GLATEO
                                         — $1 —

        A   comparison of the cubic and quadratic age-earnings profile .sti—
mates    are   presented in Figure 10.                                                      S
        The    life cycle of earninps   model   as we have developed it, assumes
that the individual behaves in such a way          as   to maximize the present value
of net    earnings, then maximizes an intertemporal utility function subject

to that human wealth constraint. Clearly we need to consider the human

wealth or present value of the observed earnings function we have estimaed.

Clearly the present value of observed       earnings         represents an upper bound on

the present value of earnings net of direct          investment expenditures. The
present value and internal rate of return calculations presented here are
based on the quadratic rather than the cubic estimates of the earnings
function,since      the cubic estimates yield unreasonable predictions beyond

adjusted age 36.-'The end of working life is taken to be N                 50 or chrono—

logic age sixty—six.       The resulting internal rates of return which equate
the present value of earnings      for a given schooling level with the present

value    of earnings for one year less schooling for various ability levels
is   presented in Table 8. The internal rate tends to rise to a peak then
fall off slowly as the schooling level increases at all levels of ability,
except    average ability where it rises continuously. The internal rate

of return appears to be a minimum at the average ability level at low levels

of schooling, below S        4, to rise monotonically with ability

in the middle schooling range, S = 4 to S —             6,   and to peak at the average

ability level at high levels of schooling. The internal rate of return to

a college degree over a highschool degree is 5,40 percent for those persons

one—standard deviation below mean ability, 5.89 % at the mean, and 6.83



            example of an unreasonable prediction is to predict negative
earnings at the level of minus ten thousand dollars or more for all high
schooling levels. The resulting rates of return are all quite negative.
Estimates of rates of return and present values using the cubic equation
and assuming earniug           coustaut after the 4-m at the iixi*um are
presented in Appendix .
                                              — 82 —


                                            TABLE 8
          Internal Rate of Return which Equates the Present Value of Earnings
            for a Given Schooling Level with the Present Value of Earnings
                for One Year Less Schooling for Various Ability Levels



     S
B            1         2        3      4          5      6       7      8      9      10


    .25     6.66      7.63     7.78   6.31       2.89

    .50     4.99      5.70     5.94    5.63      4.64   3.27    1.89

    .75     3.84      4.54     5.06    5.47      5.61   5.52    5.23   4.85   4.47   4.03
L.O0        3.34      4.10     4.90    5.70      6.41   6.98    7.53   7.86   8.07   8.21

1.25        3.71      4.66     5.61    6.79      7.40   8.14    8.77   9.17   9.52   9.67

1.50        6.61       7.76    8.64    9.12      9.27    9.09   8.78   8.40   7.97   7.68

1.75       18.75      22.72   22.97   19.57     14.77   10.13   6.60   4.40   3.10   2.43




Note: These calculations are based on the quadratic age estimating equation
based     on the   NBER-Thorndike sample.
                                  — 83 —




                                                                                   .
X1E13
30.8

                                                               /
                                                                   /        ATC-

                                                           / I
                                                      0

20.8
                                                           '
lee




 8.81            11          21            31         41               51
                                                                   ADtSTED


           10.        CO,,.MQSSOIJ op           AJD
        Fo'. CQLLGtC GLAtAreS CS=6')6




                                                                                   S
                                        — 84 —

for those one—standard deviation above mean ability.         The internal rate of

return to a professional degree, S — 10, over a college degree, S            6, is

4.67% for persons one—standard deviation below mean ability, 7.89%

at mean   ability,   and 9.27% for those one—standard deviation above the mean.

       The estimates of human wealth or the present value       of   predicted

observed earnings are presented in Tables 9 and in Figures 11. The esti-

mated present value is very much dependent upon the rate of discount.

Table 9 presents estimates for rates of discount of four through seven

percent ,while   Figures    11 illuStrate the effect of schooling and ability on

the   present value of rates of discount four and six percent. The present
value of predicted earnings increases with schooling at four percent, but
not   at six percent. The present value will increase with schooling only

when the discount rate is less than the internal rate of return. The inter-

action of schooling and ability is illustrated by the fact that increased

ability increases both the level of the present value—schooling relationship

and the rate of change. For example, the present value Increases with

schooling at six percent for very high ability levels but decreases at

low ability levels.        The affect of ability and schooling are accentuated
by a low   discount   rate,since higher earnings occur late in the life cycle.
       The relationship between ability      and the   present value of   predicted

earningsIs positive at all levels of schoolingand at both four and six
percent as illustrated in Figure 1l.b. The effect of ability is accentuated
at lower interest rates but Is positive even at seven percent. The posi-

tive effect of ability is greater at higher levels of schoolingeven if

the ]avel of the     present value   is not higher as at low levels of ability

at the six percent rate.
                                                   — 85 —


     TI3LL          '-' ?cMr JALU€                 OF F DIClEt, 055E4Q0ED ERP.I.IUJG
                                                                                                        S
                   ¶T(€PstV%    Fg.c ThE Esr,s'IrnreD                      A&E            NJ6
                   TgOFU..ES    Bisers                                     cAnir (ts.J=5O.



Disccu.sr   A DI.r £   )                        U. iTr
IA
             'A
                                             .75              1.00         I.zs
     .q       0
              a
                       139915.63         149703.06          158701.19
                                                            156926.06
                                                                         166651.06
                                                                         167172.88
                                                                                          173290.56
                                                                                          1820.58.19
                       146637.00         150389.921
              4        152637.88         155253.63          162050.69    17111123.69      193765.38
             6         152387.94         160190.00          171066.00    1860111.25       2061/40.69
             8         11114101.19       163239.56          182025.75    2003/43.19       218072.25
             SO        1281168.63        163897.38          193739.94    216133.25        229215.31


     .o&      0        1161133.25        124541 .88         130951.25    135095.13        136406.69
              a            117689.75     120517.00          125047.00    131647.13        141 1i85.06
              4-           119861.88     12127.75           125858.81    1311807.38       111916/4.50
              6            117418.31     122566.88          130332.31    1111587.4/4      1572011.81
              8            108597.81     122570.75          136553.56    150550.06        1 64562.19
             to             93995.44     120741.94          143393.25    1605811.38       170950 .88

     .06      0             98845.69     105603.94          110141.69    111718.88        109595 • 06
                            96065.19      98265.94          101425.38    105862.9/4       111898.13
              4             95544.00      96168.56           99329.63    105873.25        1166411.19
              6             91750.63      5140.31           100753.75    109332.75        12161 8.88
              8             82945.44      93270.13          103812.13    114644.44        125838.114
             10             69636.19      900 -'ii. .411    107429.50    120771 .63       1290611.38


     .07      0             85436.81      91101.81           94273.50     911121 •   19    8981 3.63
              Z             79665.31      811136.56          83653.1 3    86463.44         9001 6.06
              4             77253.19      774314.25          79611.00     8111148.75       9261 2.50
              6             72666.94      74887.94           18998.63     85629 .25        951109.921
              8             64185.80      71907.06           79956.38     88/443.114       971476.63
             10             52235.40      67977 • 06         81456.56     91919.411        98611.75




 l'JorE:             U.1L5i4j            ,9c7-9                                                         .
7i4 9.b.           pfr Vi        OF   feoIreD OBseiueo                      FAorn 7 E,rji,iqreb
         QQ.AVMATIC ,4GE-rI&$(NGS PcILGS BASeD ci HG N8 —Tl4oDig S.4n1PLE .



D,scCMNT 'lILITr                 A's7Et YEAc OF           S Coo, 1MG
RATE
                       0                          4             6          8
  .04       .50    139918.63     146637.00    152637.88   152387.94    144101.19    128468.63
            .75    149703.06     150389.94    155253.63   160190.00    163239.56    163897.38
           I.cO    158701.19     156926.06    162050.69   171066.00    182025.75    193739.94
           1.25    166651.06     167172.88    174423.69   186041.25    20031i3.19   216133.25
           1.50    173290.56     182058.19    193765.38   206140.69    218072.25    229215.31


  .os       ..5 116433.25        117689.75    119861.88   117418.31    108597.81     93996.44
             75 124541.88        120517.00    121237.75   122566.88    122570.75    120741.94
           1.00 130951.25        125047.00    125855.81   130332.31    136553.56    143393.25
           s.zr 135095.13        131847.13    134807.38   141587.44    150550.06    160584.38
           I.5D 136406.69        141485.06    149164.50   157204.81    164562.19    170950.88


   or,      5O      98845.69      96065.19.    95544.00    91750.63    82945.114     69636.19
            .75    105603.94      98265.94     96168.56    95140.31     93270.13     90047.44
           100     110141.69     101425.38     99329.63   100753.75    103812.13    107429.50
           1.25    111718.88     105862.94    105873.25   109332.75    114644.44    120771.63
           I.5o    109595.06     111898.13    116644.19   121618.88    125838.44    129064.38


  .07       .50    85436.81      79665.31     77253.19     72666.911   64185.80     52235.40
                   91101.81      81436.56     77434.25     74587.911   71907.06     67977.06
           1.00    94273.50      83653.13     79611.00     78998.63    79956.36     81456.56
                   94121.19      86463.44     841148.75    85629.25    88443.44     91919.44
           1.50    89813.63      90016.06     92612.50     95409.911   97476.63     98611.75

                               IN j'57—1
                                     — 87 —




fl   .-
                                                                                          .
                                                                             j2
-I
                                                                                  '2'
U)
3    180
2

                                                                                  •


     .140.                                                                        .o
                                                                        (3
                                                                             -I       5

                                                                        r. L.)
      oe.
                                                                        B: .7

      60.
             0                   4            G           8.
                                                         trb cfrOOZI1JG.

          P,c nQE                             0

             E                  F4 E7I/T Q                         .




             ,1.c                                 Ct c    TIlE (6( i2
                            )'1rLc /15,F.'1T,t. r &h'CCL1A)C-,
                 (kt 5                            B- 4'c'- '+NI
                  Pt. Zcj

                                                                                          .
                                     — 88 —




     Even   though ability appears to have a sash effect on earnings rela-
tive to the effect of schooling on earningsthe effect of ability on the
present value of observed earnings is greater and positive over a wider
range of discount rates. This is largely due to the period of foregone
earnings with increased schooling.
                                 — 89 —




,tc.

       228.
                                                                                .
k                                                                      V-




       188.




                                                                            -
                                                                            -

       1 @0.




       60.
                       7.          1 '(DC'                         8
                                                            1481




       r-G11.L,Y                               ?iTb
                    145 A F4 -CTiO,i cp                    Fioi YH(E
               Lri C        DITR_ ,4         —L a1ftJ6' 7'I)iILS
                    'r,ic                            17L
                e       tl r       4                  -



                                                                                .
                                      — 90 —

                      RESULTS BASED ON ThE IRRSS-ECKLAND DATA




        In Springl955, the Educational Testing Service conducted a survey

of   some 40,000 students in the nation's public schools called "A National
Study of High School Students and Their Plans." Sponsored by the National
Science Foundation, the main purpose of the survey was to access certain
aspects of the American Educational System related to the encouragement
and development     of human resources in the sciences. Aptitude tests and

questionnaires     were administered to a national representative sample of

two   cohorts   of students, comprising all the seniors in 516 schools and   the
sophomores in 97 schools, the latter representing roughly 0.5 percent of

the tenth graders in public high schools listed in the U.S. Office of

Education's 1951—52 Biennial Survey.'

        The aptitude test was   constructed   to give equal weight to vocabulary

and   arithmetic   reasoning. The test consisted of 20 items chosen for

proven   validity and reliability in measuring these attributes.
        In Spring 1970, the sophomores were sent a questionnaire entitled
"A Fifteen Year Follow—up Survey" by Bruce K. Eckland through the Institute
for Research in Social Sciences,2/ supported by the National Science
Foundation. Rather than trying to locate the entire group included in the
1955 study, a stratified sample of 42 schools was selected in order to
provide a proportionate representation of schools from all regions of the
country, with variations in school size, social class composition, mean
test scores, and school     dropout rates. About 84    percent of the students


             data from the original survey were reported in two ETS mono-
graphs (Stice at al., 1956 and Educational Testing Service, 1957).
      21Institute for Research in Social Science, University of North
Carolina, Chapek Hill, North Carolina.
                                      — 91.—

in the sample eventually were found. Four mailings were administered between
Spring and Fall of 1970. Members of the final sample received a 36—page
questionnaire asking about their families, educational and career histories,
and   the events that had most affected their lives.

       The basic sample used for this analysis contained 951 males who        were
sophomores in 1955 of which     689 were included for analysis$-' Sophomores

were selected as the primary population because (according to Eckland) (a)

due to attrition between the 10th and 12th grades, they were more epre—

sentative of their total age cohort than were the seniors, and (b) after

an inventory of the 1955 ETS records,     the original answer sheets for the
sophomores were found   to   be more complete; and the data for them were im—

mediately available. All respondents were approximately fifteen years old

in 1955 and thus thirty years old in 1970. The survey questionnaire Included

information on 1969 earnings,' earnings for the first job after schooling

(before 1969), and an estimate or guess of what earnings will be in 1979.

Therefore, either two or three points on the Individual earning profile

are observed. Estimates are made with the 1979 estimated earnings Included.

This income value is the response to "What      would   you guess   you personally
will be   earning ten years from   now?"-'     The corresponding age is a      23.



        An observation was omitted If the respondent failed to answer
questions about his schooling or if the answer about his schooling was
unreasonable. Unreasonable is interpreted as leaving school before 1955
when the first survey was taken or after 1969 when the questionnaire it-
self was completed. A specific year observation for an Individual was
omitted if the individual failed to report that year's income or had zero
income.
      !±VA11 income data are mid—points of income classes used on the ques-
tionnaire. Class Intervals are length ($1,000 upto $20,000 and are $4,000
between $20,000 and $36000). For analysis these income figures are deflated
by the published United States Consumer Price Index with base period 1957—59.
Estimated income in 1979 is deflated by assuming a constant 4 percent, rate of
increase in the Index from 1969 to 1979.
             non—response rate for this question is 17.7 percent, double th
8.6 and 9.5 percent non—response rate of the other two income variables.
                                          — 92 —

        Ability   is defined as the aptitude test score obtained in 1955 trans—

formad to have mean one        and standard   deviation one—fourth. This test score,

based   on twenty items divided equally between vocabulary and arithmetic
reasoning,ls a fairly rough and general ability measure,and is much less
likely to represent the theoretical notion of production efficiency. The
overall distribution of ability and the distribution of ability by schooling

class are presented in Table A.lO.        The mean ability by schooling class is

presented      in Table   A.ll. There does not appear to be any relation between

mean   ability and      adjusted schooling as there was in the NBER—Thorndike

sample.
        Adjusted schooling is defined as the number of years the individual
remained in school beyond 1956, when he would have been age sixteen. This
definition      is a little different from the "equivalent" years of schooling
used with the NBER—Thorndike sample. The distribution of adjusted years
of schooling is presented in Table A.12.
        The earnings function is estimated from the IRSS—Eckland data using
all three of the age—earnings points reported in the         survey for each indi-

vidual.     The degree of the polynomial approximation for age, schooling and
measured ability are determined by the data on the basis of signifigant
reduction      of error variance. The estimated equations including       the weighted
regression      suggested earlier are presented in Table A.13. Again, the signs

of the coefficients of the equation (1) estimated with no intercept are

correctly predicted by the model. The "best" equation includes quadratic

age    and schooling but      linear ability terms and   their   interactions. Both

weighted    and unweighted estimated quadratic age—earnings profiles are pre-
sented    in   Tables   14.   The observed adjusted age range In the sample is from
zero to twenty—three with no observations between thirteen and twenty—three.
Earnings predictions beyond adjusted age twenty—three will not be very good.
                                                     TABLE 10

        The Distribution of Measured Ability for the IRSS—Eckland Sample and for Schooling Classes
                         The Overall Mean is 1.00 and the Standard Deviation is .25


                   Overall             Relative Frequencies for Adjusted Schoo1in Classes
      Ability     Relative
       Class      Frequency      1          2        3         4        5        6        7        8    >8


    0.625—0.674    0.210       0.163   0.200    0.182     0.200    0.284    0.175    0.109    0.394    0.308

    0.875—0.924    0.263       0.260   0.275    0.242     0.300    0.284    0.300    0.304    0.242    0.221

    0.925—0.974    0.148       0.152   0.225    0.061     0.133    0.054    0.250    0.217    0.091    0.154

    1.125—1.174    0.103       0.131   0.150    0.152     0.100    0.027.   0.050    0.065    0.030    0.106

    1.175—1.224    0.155       0.135   o,075    0.212     0.167    0.270    0.175    0.239    0.091    0.115

    1.425—1.474    0.029       0.038   0.000    0.030     0.033    0.014    0.000    0.965    0.030    0.019
    1.475—1.524    0.091       0.121   •075     0.121     0.066    0.068    0.050    0.000    0.121    0.077

    Sample Size    689         289     40       33        30       74       40       46       33       104




S                                                                                                              .
                            — 94    —




                            TABLE   ii
Means and Standard Deviations of ABility for the Various
        Schooling Classes of the IRSS—Eckland Sample


    Adjusted                   Standard     Sample
    Schooling       Mean       Deviation     Size

    1               1.03            .255     289

    2               .969            .223     40

    3               1.052           .260     33

    4               .995            .240     30

    5               .972            .252     74

    6               .974            .205     40

    7               1.009           .202     46

    8               .935            .285     33

    8               .954            .254     104
                             — 95 —




                             TABLE12

AdjustedYears of Schooling Distribution for the IRSS—Eckland Sample
      Mean Years is 4.05 and the Standard Deviation is 3.4 Tears



                                         Relative
                  Adjusted               Frequency
                                            (Per cent)

                     0                       4.93

                     1                  '     37.01
                     2                        5.81

                     3                       5.60

                     4                        4.35

                     5                        1074
                     6                        5.81

                     7                        668
                     8                        5.60

                     9                        5.66

                     10                       3.77
                     11                       5.66




                                                                      .
                                    — 96   —




                                  TABLE A.13

    Empirical Estimates of the Earnings Function from the IRSS—Eckland
      Sample Based on 1825 Age—Earnings Points from 689 Individuals


             —                         Coefficient
                 (I)       (2)         (3)       (4)        (5)       (6)


Intercept                10256.00    3019.97   9066.27    2665.54   2449.45
A                                    429.77               408.36    454.85
S                                    513.77               815.65    1021.20
SA                                   76.14                165.45    129.72
A2                                   —10.12               —13.34    -.14.23
S2                                   —324.66              —524.28   —545.46
SA2                                  —1.56                —2.60     —1.88
S2A                                  25.75                38.91     42.37
S2A2                                 —.69                 —1.10     —1.17




B             4100.40    —5536.40              —5357.90   344.78    640.43
BA            198.20     210.99                373.83     25.81     —39.51
BS            —232.74 —324.13                  329.40     —308.31   —604.57
BSA           28.64      30.85                 83.51      —90.67    —32.00
                                               —8.52      2.96      4.65
BA
BS                                             —288.35    203.79    234.38
BSA2                                            1.90      1.12      —.51
BS2A2
                                               22.56      —13.50    —19.42
BS2A                                           —.59       .41       .58

R2 —                      .2633      .3309     .2957      .3416     .3632


Note:    Column (6) is coefficients estimated by weighted regression using
         the weight suggested in the empirical estimating proceedure. The
            is   correspondingly a weighted value.
                                       — 97 —




                                  TABLE A.l4a

        Quadratic   Age—Earnings Profiles       Based on the IRSS—Eckland

                       Sample Y=C0+C1A +            C2 A2.


                       Adjusted           c               c           c2
Ability    (B)       Schooling   (5)       0                 1


  .75                  0               2924.12          427.72      —11.12
                       2               2607.23          737.75      —17.81
                       6               —6940.89         2048.66     —50.21
                       10              —28374.83        4280.68     —107.97


  1.0                  0                3010.32         434.17       —l0.34
                       2                2743.07         685.37       —16.10
                       6                —5482.98        1797.61      —44.10
                       10               —23964.46       3722.96      —94.18


  1.25                 0                3096.51         440.62       —9.64
            •
                       2                2878.91         632.99       14.39
                       6                —4025.07        1546.56      —37.99
                       10               —19—54.09       3165.24      —80.39


  Note: These estimates include a linear but not a quadratic ability
            term.




                                                                              .
                                                                     )/
                                   — 98 —



                                  TABLE A.14.b.

   Quadratic Age—Ear1inga Profiles Based on the IRSS—Eckland Weighted

                    Regressions   Y—        + C1 A + C2 A2.
                                       C0


                    Adjusted
Ability (B)       Schooling (S)             0                    2
                                                      -


   .75                 0            2929.77          425.22    —10.74
                       2            2586.61          747.88    —18.72
                       6            —6971.89         2060.52   —55.37
                       10           —28360.00        4262.91   —119.62


   1.0                 0            3089.88          415.34    —9.58
                       2            2678.82          702.58    —17.40
                       6            —5609.22         1827.86   —51.28
                       10           —23851.00        3686.52   —109.48




   1.25                0            3249.99          405.46    —8.42
                       2            2771.02          657.28    —16.08
                       6            —4246.55         1595.20   —47.19
                       10           —19343.64        3112.15   —99.34



   Note: These estimates include a linear but not a quadratic ability
          term.
                                        — 99   —




Earnings are predicted to peak before adjusted age twenty—three and to decline
quadratically to large negative earnings toward the end of the life
cycle. The prediction that earnings peak between ages thirteen and twenty—
three   is ill founded,    since no observations are available in that interval$'
The most reasonable implication is that earnings rise more sharply early

in the life cycle and taper off before age twenty three.

        The effect of schooling on the age earnings profile is illustrated in

Figure   12 for the average ability indivdidual. Initial earnings upon entering
the   labor force are fairly constant,while more schooled individuals have
earnings     which   rise more rapidly. The effect of schooling is to increase
earnings     after some age of overtaking which increases with the level of

schooling. The level of earnings increases with schooling after the age of

overtaking, but at a decreasing rate so that adjacent        schooling profiles
are   progressively closer together at higher schooling levels.

        Earnings—experience profiles are presented in Figure 13. The positive

effect of experience on earnings Increases with the level of schooling.

        Measured ability in this sample has a negative effect on earnings.

This is illustrated in Figures 14 for      individuals with adjusted years of
schooling     zero, two, and six. Ability has no effect on initial earnings

but then appears to retard the rate of growth of      earnings.
        The predicted relationships and profiles resulting from the weighted

regression are almost identical. The weighted and unweighted profiles are

not distinguishable when plotted on the same       figure.

        44
        Since there are no observations in the interval 13 < A < 23 no con-
tribution to error variance is accumulated there. The same basic negative
effect of ability is found when the predicted earnings at age A — 23 are omit-
ted and a linear age—earnings profile is obtained.
