               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           A Review of Cyclical Indicators
               For the United States:
                Preliminary Results


                  Victor. Zarnowjtz




             Working Paper No.        6



        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
                   261 Madison Avenue
                  New York, N.Y. 10016




                     July 1973


             Preliminary; Not for Quotation


     NBER working papers rare distributed informally and in
limited number for comments only. They should not be quoted
without written permission.
     This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

     This paper was prepared for the 11th CIRET Conference,
London, September, 1973.
A REVIEW OF CYCLICAL INDICATORS FOR THE UNITED STATES: PRELIMINARY RF.S1TT,TS

                                          by

                                   Victor Zarnowitz

        University of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research


         This paper represents a very early progress report on a new study

  of business cycle indicators for the United States. Our host organiza-

  tion, CIRET, is concerned with research on surveys of economic tendencies

 that    cover   broad areas   of business, irrvestment,   and consumer behavior.
 These    inquiries yield mainly qualitative data on plans and expectations
 of economic, decision-makng units. Such data are aggregated and             also
 in a sense quantified in form of diffusion indexes (the Ifo Business Test
 and    its   components may serve as examples), but they are     basically limited
 to showing only the direction and not         the size of changes in the economic
 variables covered. A major purpose of compiling and                       these
                                                               analyzing
 diffusion     measures is to improve prediction of cyclical movements in

 business activity. This objective is the sane as that pursued in the

 National Bureau studies of quantitative
                                                business cycle indicators--the
 latest of which is the project to be discussed in this paper. Appraisals

 of the predictive records and potentials of these two time-series            data
 sets   (the cyclical indicators and the expectational diffusion indexes)

 are therefore definitely an appropriate subject for consideration in

 this conference. (They have already received much attention in a number

 of CIRET publications.)1


        1See, in particular, the following recent monographs:
        W. Gerstenberger, J. D. Lindlbauer, C. Nerb, W. H. Strigel, Abschwunr'
 und   Rezossion im Spiee1 guantitativer urid cua1jtatjver Statistik, CIRET-
                                      2


     Before turning   to   the outline and some particulars of the new project,

I shall offer a few comments on the comparative strengths and limitations

of indicators, anticipatory data, and some other tools of current business

analysis and macroeconomic forecasting.


                1. Some General Observations on Indicators
                           and Anticipations Data

     Economic change has the different but interrelated dimensions of size,

frequency, duration, timing, and scope--which receive different emphasis

and treatment in time series of (a) levels of economic aggregates and

indexes; (b) the corresponding rates of change; and (c) measures of pre-

vailing directional movement. These types of series also reflect differ-

entially the various (but again interrelated) components of economic

change--the secular and intermediate trends, cyclical, seasonal, and short

irregular   movements. In general, uses of the indicators and diffusion

indexes    focus on the cyclical aspects of economic developments, treat the

cyclical fluctuations as largely systematic, and seek     to   isolate, measure,

and ultimately predict the repetitive elements that typified the broad

movements of the economy in the past.2 In this task, cyclical indicators


Studien, No. 15,   August   1969.
     W. H. Strigel, "Konjunkturindikatoren au.s qualitativen Daten,
Studien, 18 Jahrgang, 1972, Heft 2, S. 187-21'+ (also published in English
as Trade Cycle Indicators Derived from Qualitative Data, CIRET Studien,
No. 19).

           approach implies that business cycles are not th be viewed as
essentially random fluctuations (say, resulting from a summation of random
shocks a la Slutzky). Indeed, the presence in virtually        1l cycles of cer-
tain recurrent patterns and relationships is seen as evidence against that
extreme version of the random shock hypothesis. However, methods of
cyclical analysis do not imply endorsement of the other polar concept
either, namely, that business cycles are purely endogenous movements. All
studies of the economy in movement that are not entirely divorced from             )
empirical observations must deal with the effects and interaction of two
                                          3

 and diffusion series are complementary rather
                                                    than competing inputs into
 the process of analysis and forecasting.

       Diffusion indexes may, of eourse, be derived from actual (ex post)

 data as well as from expected (ex
                                         ante) data.3 Diffusion series which

 correspond to recorded economic aggregates tend to lead the latter at

peaks and troughs associated with major changes in business conditions,

but their cyclical movements
                                 are often obscured by short, irregular fluc-
tuations. In these respects, the diffusion indexes resemble the series

of changes in, rather than levels of, the corresponding aggregatesJ

Clearly,     then, such indexes can be   properly compared with cyclical indi-
cators only    when the latter are cast in form of rates of change or first

differences. Comparisons with series of levels require that the diffusion


sets of factors, the exogenous disturbances and the endogenous
of the economic system. See                                    components
                             V. Zarnowitz, "The Business Cycle Today: An
Introduction," in The Business Cycle
                                     Today (ed. by Zarnowitz), NBER, New
York, 1972, pp. l-3, esp. sec. vi.

      3The   indexes simply
                          show the percentage of series in a given set that
are   expandingin each successive time period. The set may represent a
single economic process or a number of related processes and the type and
degree of disaggregation
                          may vary greatly (the component series may refer
to individual firms or industries
                                   or regions, etc.). In the United States,
for example, d1ffusjo indexes
                                are available, among others, for new orders
(36 industries), profits (about 1,000 corporations), industrial materials
prices (13 materials), and sales of retail stores (23 types of stores).
See U.S. Department of
Chart E3. Diffusion     Commerce, Business Conditions Digest (BCD), monthly,
                      indexes are also computed from sets of data for dif-
ferent variables, e.g., groups of the leading, roughly
lagging indicator series.                               coincident, and

      kThe diision indexes and the
                                         rates of
                                            change, even though as a re
Positively Correlated for the same aggregates, have, of course, quite dif-
ferent meaning and convey largely independent information about two related
but distinct aspects of economic
and do shoii                        change. Their short—term movements can
              many disparities. See Geoffrey H. Moore, "Diffusion
Rates of   Chance, and                                            Indexes,
                     Forecasting," Chapter 9 in Business Cycle Indicators,
Vol. I, Princeton University Press
                                   for National Bureau of Economic Research
(NBER), New York, 1961.
 (net percentage expanding) indexes be first cumulated. The cumulated
 indexes are, of course, much smoother than the uricurnulated ones, but
 they   also lead the corresponding aggregates by much shorter intervals,

 if they lead them at all.

        Leading indicators- -highly cyclical series with early timing

characteristics-_are       typically also very   sensitive   to frequent distur-
bances of all kinds, so that their month-to-month changes (after elirnina-

tion of seasonal movements) tend to reflect the short erratic fluctuations

much more than    their    longer cyclical movements. For the cycle-trend

components to begin to "dominate" the irregular components, such series

must be compared over intervals ranging from 2 to 6 months (or, equiva-

lently,    must be smoothed with 2- to 6-month moving averages). Other
sources    of "noise" in   current observations, notably the errors in pro-

visional estimates as indicated by data revisions, may add, from 1 to 3

months to the total delay in recognizing the "true" cyclical movements

in the series.5

        In practice, then, such effective leads as can be gained from these

data tend to be short; they help to speed up the recognition of major

cyclical changes in progress, but do not generally enable the user to

anticipate such changes early and reliably. However, without the aid
of series with historical lead-time
                                         characteristics, recognition appears
                                    .6
to be considerably more sluggish still.          This means that the data, when


     5See Julius Shiskin, "Measuring Current Economic Fluctuations,"
                                                                     Annals
of Economic and Social
                       Measurement, January 1973, pp. 1-15.

     6Rendigs Fels and C. Elton Hinshaw, Forecasting and Reccnizing
Business Cycle Thrnin, Point, ffBER, New
                                         York, 1968; Geoffrey H. oore,
"Forecasting Short-Term Economic Change," Journal of the American
tical Association, March 1969, pp. 1-22.
 skillfully interpreted, can        prove valuable to forecasters7 and
                                 and do

 also that there is a high premium on any approach that promises to
yield   earlier indications of the economy's course. It would be indeed

advantageous if the leading series themselves could be reasonably well

predicted, whether by means of "causal" factors suggested by testable

economic theories or by means of "symptomatic" factors representing

aggregated microdata on economic anticipations and      decisions.    Unfor-

tunately, important leading indicators, while good forecasting tools,
are   poor   forecasting targets. This is not really surprising: they are

themselves tied to expectations and decisions that are      in   part "auton-
omous," and    it   is ultimately this fact (and proximately their early

timing and    great   sensitivitj, i.e., volatility) that makes   these   series
so difficult to predict.


                    2. Related Findings of Recent Studies

      Several pieces of evidence support and amplify statements made in

the preceding section.

A. On the direct uses of leading indicators,
individually and in combinations

      1. New orders received by industries in which production to order

is important (in the main     durable goods and particularly   machinery and
equipment)    are   good predictors of outputs and shipments of the corres-

ponding products.8 Forecasts of sales in these industries appear to


     70n the evidence of the widespread use of leading indicators and
anticipations data by economic forecasters in the United States, see
Victor Zarnowitz, "N   Plans and Results of Research in Economic Fore-
casting," 51st Annual Report of the National Bureau of Economic
NBER, New York, September 1971, pp.
                                                                      Research,
                                          65-69.
      80n this and. the other points made in this paragraph, see Victor
Zarnowitz, Orders, oduction, and Investment-A Cyclical and Structural
Analysis, NI3ER, New York, 1973, Part I, esp. Chapter 2.
                                        6

draw strongly upon the information contained in advance orders, and they

are   generally   much more accurate than sales anticipations in industries

that produce largely to stock, where such information is not available

or very limited. Company forecasts of new orders for nonelectrical

machinery, a category of products made largely to order, are on the

average quite poor (indeed, on balance less accurate than simple last-

level extrapolations for the quarterly series of corresponding aggregate

realizations).

       2. Estimates of agegate investment commitments (oc), obtained

by adding the value of new orders received by industries producing

machinery and equipment to the value of new contracts for industrial

and commercial construction, have considerable predictive power with

regard to business expenditures for plant and equipment (i). The rela-
tion involves distributed 1as of I behind OC, which average two to three
quarters. It is possible to estimate CC itself fairly well by regressing
it on selected variables such as final sales, capital stock, corporate
profits, and the long—term interest rate, but only when simultaneous
values or short leads of the explanatory factors are used. Moreover,
the resulting     estimates   CC are substantially less effective as predic-

tors of I than    the   actual investment orders and contracts, OC.

       3.   Simple mechanical predictions of GNTP based on regressions with

the composite index of leading indicators compare rather well with the

average performance of economic forecasters, according to some experi-

mental calculations desied to match the annual end-of-year forecasts.1°


      9Ibid., Chapters 9 and     10.
      10Geoffrey H..    Moore, "Forecasting ort-Term Economic Change,"   Journal
of the Aierican     Statistical Association,   March 1969, pp. 1-22 (esp. see
                                      7

Such predictions, however, are to be viewed merely as additional stan-

dards against which to appraise the results    of   true ex ante forecasting

and not at all as optimal applications of the indicators to macroeconomic

forecasting. For best results, the indicators must not be used mechanic-

ally but rather their evidence must be interpreted with the aid of

juduent based on professional training and experience.11 (The same

applies as well to other forecasting approaches including the uses of

anticipation surveys and econometric models. Thus there is considerable

evidence that ex ante forecasts with econometric models, which involve

various types of judgmental adjustments, are on the whole more accurate

than forecasts from unadjusted models, even when these are made ex post

with correct values of exogenous variables. )

B.   On the direct uses of anticipations data

     1. In the United States, anticipated and actual business capital

outlays   are highly correlated on   quarterly and annual bases, presumably


Iv); Herman I. Liebling, Discussion of the paper by D. J. Daly, "Forecast-
ing with Statistical Indicators," in Bert G. HiclQnan, editor, Econometric
Models of Cyclical Behavior, rBER, New York, 1972, volume 2, pp. l197-12O.
     11Some mechanical   uses of the indicators, though instructive, are not
really persuasive because they do not allow properly for the characteris-
tics of these series and the original criteria of their selection (notably
for the sensitivity and the consequent short-term variability of the
leaders as well as the fact that they were chosen for the consistency of
their cyclical timing, not for the correlation with such series as real
private GNP or the like). As an example, consider the treatment of the
indicators in J. W. Elliott, "A Direct Comparison of Short-Term GNP Fore-
casting Models," Journal of Business, January 1973, pp. 33-60.

    2Michae1 K. Evans, Yoel Haitovsky, and George I. Treyz, assisted by
Vincent Su, "An Analysis of the Forecasting Properties of U.S. Econometric
Models," in Econometric Models of Cyclical Behavior, NBER, New York, 1972,
vol. 2, pp. 9'49-1139. See also V. Zarnowitz, "Forecasting Economic Con-
ditions: The Record and the Prospect," in The Business Cycle Today, pp.
197-99, 218-22, and discussion by Arthur Okun and Otto Eckstein, ibid.,
pp. 319-22.
                                          8


reflecting the large amounts of inform.tion that            managers have concerning
their own investment projects already approved and in progress.13 These

investment anticipations are widely used in short-term GNP forecasts

of all types and,     judging   from   past   results, they should be, particularly

the   data from the Department of Commerce surveys and for the manufacturing
sector. However, the quarterly su.rvey figures often contain sizable
errors      due to delays and uncertainties of construction and deliveries

and they are of      little help   at turning   points,   where anticipations fre-

quently lag the actuals by a quarter. Investment commitments (new capital

appropriations and orders-contracts) provide longer effective lead-times

and better predictions of turns in business           capital spending.
       2.    Business firms, especially corporations of intermediate and

large size, increasingly follow formal capital budgeting procedures and

in    any event tend to put much effort into planning and         evaluation of
sizable      investment projects. Consumer intentions to acquire housing,

cars, and major appliances are in principle akin to business intentions

to acquire plant and equipment, but in           practice   they are generally less

firmly budgeted and more vague and attitudinal. For this reason, data

from surveys of consumer anticipations are regarded by many actual and

potential users as having substantially less predictive value than data

from surveys of business investment anticipations. However, evidence

has been presented lately that, in recent periods for which improved

anticipations data are available, both consumer attitudes and purchase


        l3     the
              points made in this paragraph, see V. Zarnowitz, Orders,
Production, and Investment, as cited, pp. k33-2, 1-7O-75, and '1Eine
Answertung von kurzl'ristigen Wirtschaftsvoraussagen in den USA,"
Studien, 1966, pp. 30-33; Michael K. Evans, Macroeconomic Activity:
Theory, Forecastixi, and Control, New York, 1969, Chapter 17.
                                       9


expectations did have definitely a good net predictive record with regard

to consumer outlays for durable goods, particularly automobiles.1

     3. It is a simple and reasonable proposition that expectations should

prove more accurate for variables over which the survey respondents have

substantial control than for variables over which they have little or

no control. This is probably a major reason why business anticipations

of plant and equipment have been mu.ch more useful to economic forecasters

than business sales and inventory anticipations. Comparisons of the

predictive performance of data from the Commerce surveys show clearly

the weakness of sales, and to a smaller extent of inventory, anticipa-

tions as   predictive    instruments)5 Suggestive evidence of related

nature canes from Dun and Bradstreet quarterly diffusion indexes of

manu1acturers', wholesalers', and retailers' anticipations.16 Thus the


    1See F. Thomas Juster and Paul Wachtel, "Anticipatory and Objective
Models of Durable Goods Demand," American Economic Review, SeDtember 1972,
pp. 5614.79, with references to earlier work by Juster, Hans, and others.
It should be noted,though, that the strong positive results are limited
to a short period 1960-67 for which the expectational data (an "Index of
Consumer Sentiment" and buying intentions series, from the University of
Michigan Survey Research Center and the Census Bureau) appear to be much
better than they were before. For a rather critical summary view of
this type of data, see M. K. Evans, op. cit.
     15See   V.   Zarnowitz, Orders, Production, and Investment, as cited,
pp. 58-68 and 360-69, with references to work by 1.1. C. Lovell and others;
also, M. K. Ev-ans, op. cit., pp. 1s.8o-86. Of course, the results of these
surveys, though poor from the viewpoint of  forecasting perfor!nance, can
be valuable as material and tools for research on how business expecta-
tions are formed, revised, and used. For exnple,  reasonable associations
have been observed between errors in sales expectations and errors in
investment anticipations (see Arthur M. Okun, "The Value of Anticipations
Data in Forecasting National Product" in The Quality and Eccr.omic Siif
eance of Anticipations Data, Universities-National Bureau Conference 10,
Princeton for NBER, 1960, pp. l39-2 and references therein).

    l6These are indexes of the familiar percent-rising type, plotted for
four-quarter spans in the terminal quarter; they are shown in this form in
each monthly issue of I3CD, Chart C2 (see note 3 above), along with the
corresponding actual diffusion indexes. The following observations in
the  text arebased on an analysis of these graphs.
                                           10


deviations between these series and the corresponding actual indexes are

much smaller for the number of employees than for new orders, net sales,

net profits, and the level of inventories in manufacturing and trade.

Moreover, the errors for employment are much less systematic than the

errors for the other variables (for sales and profits, the series are

very similar and the anticipated indexes consistently exceed the actual

indexes; for inventories, the opposite bias prevails). Finally, for

selling prices, the indexes show appreciably smaller discrepancies between

the anticipations and the realizations in manufacturing than in wholesale

and retail trade.

C. On indirect evidence from aggregative
forecasts and related inferences

        1. Series that tend to coincide or lag at business cycle turns may

have more recognizable prior signals than series that move early, and may

therefore be on the whole easier to predict. It is consistent with this

expectation, for exairrple, that forecasts of business irwestment in plant

and equipment generally have smaller relative errors than forecasts of

inventory investment.17 The former relate to a rather late stage of a

process which is, as a rule, time-consuming, and they are helped by indi-

cations from the earlier stages (new capital appropriations and commit-

ments). Of course, the relative timing is not the sole relevant factor.

Inventory investment not only requires much less time than business fixed

investment, it also is much more volatile. But in general these and
                           18
other   related findings
                                       .

                                agree with the notion that series in the broadly


    17Victor Zarnowitz,    Appraisal of Short-Term Economic Forecasts,
NBER, New York, 1967, pp. 36-O and 80-82.
    18               .
        Investment
                 in residential structures, which shows some long leads
In the recexi U.S. business cycles, also tends to be predicted with
                                       11

defined class of "leading indicators" help predict the more sluggish
series, while being themselves more difficult to predict.19
     2. Small-scale econometric models relying heavily on selected
leading    indicators   and anticipations data have accumulated relatively
good predictive records, as illustrated by the Friend-Taubrnan model in
which    housing starts, plant and equipment anticipations, and business

sales anticipations serve as exogenous variables to estimate expenditures

on   residential construction and business fixed and inventory investment.20

However, son model-builders       report mixed   (and in large part negative)
results    from the use of such data.21 Since the anticipatory variables
themselves      are viewed as incapable of being accurately predicted (i.e.,
of being replaced with no siifjcant loss by some endogenous explanatory
variables), any short-term forecasting gains from       their   inclusion must

relatively large errors. Here additional difficulties for the forecasters
are presumably created by the presence in the wide fluctuations of outlays
on housing of particular countercyclical elements (due to financial factors
on the supply side: mortgage credit was scarce in advanced expansions,
relatively abundant in late contractions and recoveries). See Zarnowitz,
tUd., and in The Business Cycle Today, as cited, pp. 209-12.

         already noted, there is also a good deal of more direct evidence
to support this idea.

        Irwin                                                •
            Friend and Paul Taubmaii,7 A Short-Term Forecasting Model, ,t
Review of Economics and Statistics, August l96l., pp. 229-36; Herman 0.
Stekier, "Forecasting with an Econometric Model: Comment," American
Economic Review, December 1966, pp. 122-k3; J. W. Elliott, A Direct
Comparison of Short-Run GI'P Forecasting Models," Journal of Business,
January 1973, pp. 33-60.

     21Michael K.
                 Evans, Macroeconomic Activity: Theory, Forecasting, and
Control, Harper & Row, New York, 1969, Chap. 17. On the other hand,
Lawrence R. Klein (with whom Evans collaborated on the Wharton econometric
model) acknowledged that data on business investment intentions and con-
sumer attitudes often did improve the Wharton forecasts; see L. R. Klein,
An Essay on the Theory of Economic
                                   Prediction, Helsinki, 1968, pp. 86-89.
                                       12


be weighed against the concomitant limitations on the model's ability to

serve the purposes of longer-term forecasting and         simulations.
     3.   Anticipations   and   forecasts   often include relatively large com-

ponents of extrapolation in ways that       imply both   heavy weighting of the
nst recent   values and   failure   to utilize much of the predictive content

of the longer history of the series concerned. This helps explain such

common features of expectational data as (a) the tendency to underesti-

mate actual changes   (mainly   increases), which becomes stronger as     the
predictive   span increases; (b) the high proportion of "missed" turning
points, particularly peaks.22 The trailing of expectations behind
realizations at turning points is a widely observed phenomenon (the
Commerce quarterly investment anticipations       and   the Dun and Bradstreet
diffusion   indexes of businessmen's expectations may      serve as examples).
It is characteristic of even the more sophisticated autoregressive
    To be   sure, expectations have other than extrapolative ingredients
as well, which contribute to their     relative
                                            accuracy and other charac-
teristics. On balance, many macroforecasts and aggregates of microex-
pectations show smaller average errors than the corresponding predict1ons
from at least the simpler extrapolative benchmark models, so apparently
the "autonomous" forecast components have some net predictive powers.
Underestimation, while very frequent, is by no means ubiquitous; it
prevails for series dominated by growth trends, but declines are just
as often missed or overestimated and forecasts of highly variable series
show smaller proportions of underpredicted changes. Also, in some business
tendency surveys such as the Dun and Bradstreet anticipated diffusion
indexes, there is evidence of regressiveness (trend reversion) as well
as underestimation. See V. Zarnowitz, An Appraisal of Short-Term Economic
Forecasts, NBER, New York, 1967; Jacob Mincer and Victor Zarnowitz, IrThe
Evaluation of Economic Forecasts" in Mincer, ed., Economic Forecasts and
cpectations, NEER, New York, 1969; and Universities-National Bureau
Committee for Economic Research, The Quality and Economic Significance
of Anticipations Data, Princeton University Press for NBER, 1960 (notabLy
the contributions by A. G. Hart and J. Bossons and F. Modigliani, pp.
205-62).
                                             13


extrapolations and of forecasts with econometric models that make wide

use of autoregressive terms (lagged values of dependent variables as

in Koyck distributed-lag relations, etc.). Judicious use of economic

relationships          among the leading, roughly coincident, and lagging mdi-
cators can          help   counterbalance such tendencies and     improve   turning-point
forecasts.

               3.     The Scope of the New Project: Data and Problems

       The findings reviewed fri section 2 suggest strongly that               economists
have   good.    reasons     for using cyclical indicators and data from anticipa-

tions surveys as joint inputs into the process of analyzing and forecast-
ing business conditions. Most users also combine this information with

models of the economy built           around   the framework of the national income
and   product        accounts; these are   either   econometric models   or, more often,

less formalized sets of relationships.23 These practices are clearly

indicated by the expressed preferences of the forecasters, and they find

general support in the analysis of relative accuracy of both the non-

econometric and the econometric model forecasts (ex ante and ex post).2'

          It follows that the tool box of a good practitioner in this area

should include a rather comprehensive and varied collection of time

series,     namely
          (a) the main aggregates and components in the GNP accounts;

          (b) the cyclical indicators;


         is not quite accurate to distinguish the latter as "judnenta1,"
as it is sometimes done, for judnent as to the use of outside information
and interpretation (possibly modification) of the results typically plays
a large role in working with the econometric as well as the "informal"
models.
      2
          See references in footnotes 7           and 12 above.
                                     111.




      (c)   measures of changes in business and consumer expectations;

      (d) analytical measures such as those of diffusion, rates of change,

            etc.

All these types of data, and some additional ones, are found in the monthly

report of the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
                                                       Economic Analysis (BEA),
entitled Business Conditions Digest (fon-nerly Business Cycle Developments,

in short BCD). Section A includes all major series from the expenditure

and income sides of the GNP accounts, for the
                                                personal, business, govern-
ment, and rest-of-the-world sectors, in nominal and real terms.    Section B
presents about 80 cyclical indicators, classified by economic process

and by timing (leading, roughly coincident, lagging), as well as ten com-

posite indexes based on groups of series produced by this dual classifi-

cation. Section C shows several aggregate series and a number of diffusion

indexes derived from surveys of anticipations and intentions of businessmen

and households. Section D contains series relating to foreigu trade, the

balance of payments, federal government activities, changes in prices,

wages, productivity, and the size and composition of the labor force--

series   that are important for the overall view of the economy but do not

qualify as indicators of expansions and contractions in aggregate econanic

activity because their behavior during business cycles is not sufficiently

regular or consistent. Section E consists of various analytical measures:

actual and potential GNP, ratios (e.g., of output to capacity, inventories


    25Seven "major processes" are distinguished as follows: employment
and unemployment; production, income, consumption, and trade; fixed capi-
tal investment; inventories and inventory investment; prices, costs, and
profits; money and credit. These are further subdivided into "minor
processes" which tend to differ considerably with regard to cyclical
timing.
                                   17


to sales, personal saving to disposable income),    diffusion indexes   based

on selected leading and coincident indicators, and rates of percentage

changes in a few key aggregates and indexes. Finally, section F provides

some international comparisons for consumer prices, industrial produc-

tion, and stock price indexes.

     In sum, BCD assembles approximately 600 monthly and quarterly time
                                                         26
series. Atpresent, most of the charts begin in 1952.          ccept for sec-
tion F, the charts contain shading which indicates periods of recession in

general business activity, according to the NBER cyclical chronology for

the U.S. All data for the current and the last 2-3 years are also regu-

larly presented in tabular form. There is an introductory part explain-

ing the adopted methods of presentation. Appendixes provide descriptions

of series, historical data, seasonal adjustment factors, cyclical behavior

patterns, specific peak and trough dates, arid average variability measures

for the principal indicators.

     It would seem that the general content and format of BCD are very

well suited to the needs of those who are engaged in analyzing and fore-

casting the course of the U.S. economy, and the good sales record of the

publication is consistent with this claim. However, this merely confirms

that business economists and other professionals in this field recognize

the need to be au cou.rant on the changing
                                             expectations, signals, and

developments that find their expression in the large collection of series



     26me main cyclical indicators which appear on the NBER "short list"
(12 leading, 8 roughly coincident, and 6 lagging series) are shown back to
19148, and so are the composite indexes which represent various subsets of
this collection of indicators (D, charts uS and ]7). The anticipations
data in section C are charted from 1957 on.
                                          16


systematically     and   conveniently   presented in BCD; the details of what

should go into this collection and of how the data are to be processed

and displayed are open to many questions and must be frequently reevaluated.

At times, moreover, cumulative changes in the economic system and in re-

lated modes of thought and action are likely to call for a more basic

review of these materials and techniques. Such a comprehensive review

initiated late in 1972, is now in progress at the Bureau of Economic

Analysis     (the government agency publishing BCD) and      at the NBER.27
       The   first selection of cyclical indicators, limited to revivals,
was made at the NBER by      Wesley C. Mitchell   and   Arthur F.   Burns   in   1937,
and   the resulting list was    then extended to recessions and       successively
revised   by G. H. Moore in 1950 and 1960 and by Moore and J. Shiskin              in
1966.28      Since that last review, several important developments have

occurred in the United      States and abroad which make it     advisable and

promising to undertake another comprehensive evaluation of this system

of economic data. The period witnessed strong and persistent inflationary

tendencies and major policy efforts to counter them; a "credit crunch"

in 1966 and a brief but pervasive business s1owdon in 1967; a mild re-

cession in 1970, with some particular features attributable to the force

of continuing inflation; the subsequent recovery and institution of



     27The initiative in getting the project under way belongs to George
Jaszi, Director, BEP, and Julius Shiskin, Chief Statistician, Office of
Management and Budget. Charlotte Boschan is in charge of the work at the
NBER in New York and Feliks Tamm, editor of BCD, is in charge of the work
at the BEA in Washington. The project is under my general direction.

      28w c.    Mitchell
                       and A. F. Burns, Statistical Indicators of Cyclical
Revivals, NBER Bulletin 69, New York, 1938; G. H. Moore, Statistical
Indicators of  Cyclical Revivals and Recessions, NB Occasional Paper 31,
New York, 1950; G. H. Morc, ed., Business Cycle Indicators, 2 vols., NB,
New York, 1961; G. II. 1oore and J. Shiskin, indicators of Business
sions and Contractions, NBER Occasional Paper 103, New York, 19u7.
                                  17


general price and wage controls; great changes in international monetary

and political relations and military activities affecting the U.S. economy

and, most recently (after the abandonment of the post-World War II sys-

tern of fixed exchange rates, two devaluations and a downward "float" of

the dollar), another round of a boom and inflation and renewed price

controls. Such developments test anew the ability of indicators and

anticipations data to help in the diagnosis and prognosis of economic

conditions.

     At the same time, work on improvements and. extensions of time series

representing all types of economic processes continued at a high rate.

Thus, there is need to appraise the indicator qualities of new and

revised data as well as to reassess those of many "old" series taking

Into account their behavior since 1966. The broad objectives here are

(1) to review BCD and other pertinent materials so as to complement and.

update the record and the cyclical analysis and scoring for a large

collection of the series concerned; (2) to reconmiend, on a documented

basis, such changes in form and substance of BCD as appear best calcu-

lated to enhance the informational value of that report.

     The data base for the study is quite
                                            broad, consisting of approxi-

mately 250 time series, about 150 of which are currently in in BCD.29

Recent developments in macroeconomic research, especially on business

cycles and prograimned approaches to their study, forecasting, and econo-

metric models, offer some new ideas and techniques for the task of




     29These include nearly all items in section B and selected items from
sections A, C, D, and E (about the contents of these parts of BCD, see
text above).
                                  18


evaluating these data.3° In particular, the Bry-Boschan computer

programs for cyclical analysis are being used extensively in our pro-

ject, with very satisfactory results.

     Several serious problems must be confronted by this analysis.    Those

considered but not resolved in the preceding studies include:

     (a) Systematic differences in timing at peaks and troughs.      Earlier

research has established that they exist for many series that show good

indicator characteristics.3   However, these distinctions are ignored

in the present classification of indicators (based on measures of timing

at all turns), mainly to simplify the presentation of the data and to

avoid additional difficulties in evaluating the evidence.

     (b) Differences in length of the leads or lags that are characteristic

of the various indicators. These too are often pronounced and significant

 (mainly for the leaders).32 But the indicators are now grouped into three




      30Some of the recent publications that are important in this context
 are: Gerhard Bry and Charlotte Boschan, Cyclical Analysis of Time Series:
 Selected Procedures and Computer Programs, NBER, New York, 1971; Victor
 Zarnowitz, ed., The Business Cycle Today, as cited, especially the contri-
 butions by use Mintz, Solomon Fabricant, and G. H. Moore; Frank E. Morris,
 "The Leading Indicators Revisited," Business EconomicS, September, 1970,
 pp. 11_19; Julius Shiskin, "Economic Policy Indicators and Cyclical Turn-
 ing Points," ibid., pp. 20-28; and the items referred to in footnotes 5
 and 10 above.

      31Thus, of the 72 series classified by timing in the 1966 review by
 Moore and Shiskin, 38 have been found to fall in the same timing class at
 peaks and troughs and 314 in different classes. See Indicators of Business
 Expansions and Contractions (as cited in fn. 28), pp. 314 and 914-101. These
 classifications are based, for each individual series, on the median lead
 or lag plus a probability test applied to the number of leads, rough coin-
 cidences, or lags relative to the number of business cycle turns covered.

      32Edgar R. Fiedler, "Long-Lead and Short-Lead Indexes of Business
 Indicators," Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics Section,
 American Statistical Association, 19G2.
                                  19


timing categories only: leading, lagging, and roughly coincident.33 In

addition to reopening these questions, some new ones must be asked:

     (c) How should the series representing government activities and

policies be treated? Some fiscal and defense indicators are now grouped

separately in BCD (section D3), while the monetary policy indicators in

the form of change-in-money-supply series are included in the section for

leading indicators, money and credit ().    But tbis does not do justice

to the importance of the economic policy indicators and their relations

with each other and with the private sector indicators.31I   It must be

recognized that some activities of the federal government in the U.S.

result in time series that do have cyclical regularities and that they

both influence the private sector and contain endogenous elements in

the sense of being responsive to earlier developments in the economy.35

     (d) Should more attention be paid to the distinction between the

real and the nominal indicators?6 In 1969-70, inflation persisted



     33A series is roughly coincident if it exhibits a significant number
of timing observations that lie within the range of lags (+) or leads (-)
of 3 months or less (i.e., in the range of 3 months). Thus, this cate-
gory overlaps the other two, since a series may simultaneously qualify as
roughly coincident and as leading (or lagging) by short intervals. How-
ever, dual classifications are avoided in the final designations of the
indicators according to timjn (which occasionally differ from those obtained
by application of the rules noted in fn. 31; see Moore and Shiskin, op. cit.,
pp. 3I_t5).

           the papers by Morris and Shiskin cited in footnote 30 above.

     35For some recent discussions of these matters, see The Business
Cycle Today (ref. in fn. 2), particularly V. Zarnowitz, "The Business
Cycle Today: An Introduction," and "Econometric Model Simulations and the
Cyclical Characteristics of the U.S. Economy," and Yoel Haitovsky and
Neil Wallace, "A Study of Discretionary and Nondiscretionary Monetary and
Fiscal Policies in the Context of Stochastic Macroeccnometric Models."

     The real indicators are series in physical units, quantity indexes,
and agreates in constant dollars (deflated). The other indicators are
nominal series--aggregates in current dollars--and price indexes and
interest rates.
                                     20


amidst a decline In production and   a    rise in unemployment more strongly

than was previously recorded. In the United States, this episode is

definitely identifiable as a recession, i.e., cyclical contraction accord-

ing to real aggregates, but it would seem     to   be only a retardation in

terms of the nominal aggregates. This suggested to some observers that

it may be instructive to reconsider the criteria of severity of recessions

in   terms of the relative siiificance of real vs. pecuniary measures of
economic activity.37 This raises some major theoretical Issues which
need   not be fully resolved in this study; but we decided to give the

real indicators much greater weight than they received in the previous

reviews.

       (e)   Some indicators are expressed in absolute or relative changes

rather than levels (e.g., changes in inventories and In money supply),

and the form in which the series are cast tends to affect decisively

their cyclical timing and sometimes also their cyclical conformity.

Comprehensive price Indexes, for example, have never conformed very well

to business cycles and in recent years have conformed poorly if at all;

but the broad fluctuations in their rates of change show a rather close

correspondence with economic fluctuations since 1911.7 when both recessions



     370n this subject opinions differ, as illustrated in use Mintz,
ttJ)jflgAmerican Growth Cycles," Solomon Fabricant, "The 1Recession'
of 1969-70," and comments by Moore and Mintz (pp. 176-82) in The Business
Cycle Today.

     38Qf course, it is the fluctuations in the real measures that are
primarily important in the context of the problem of cyclical unemploy-
ment. Furthermore, for the latter to become severe it is not necessary
that the demand for output and employment decline absolutely, only that
they grow appreciably slower than the labor force and productive capacity
over some sufficiently long stretches of time.
                                   21


and slowdowns are recognized.39 This matter deserves further   study as
does the more general problem of the form in which some indicators are

used and the degree and type of smoothing applied to them.

     (f) Related to (d) and (e) is the important distinction between the

"classical" business cycles--sequences of generalized expansions and con-

tractions--and the "growth cycles," an object of much recent attention.

Economic fluctuations have definitely become milder in the post-World

War II period, in the U.S. and, even more, in other highly developed

market economies (Western Europe, Japan), where slowdowns in the rate of

growth of total spending and income have largely replaced sustained de-

dines in the levels of these aggregates.     However, many features of

the historical cycles in which such declines were incorporated apparently

reappear in those recent cycles that show up only in the rates of growth

or in the levels of trend-adjusted series. Thus, downturns in the lead-

ing indicators generally predict either a decline--recession--or a marked

retardation in aggregate economic activity, and upturns in these sensi-

tive series predict either a recovery or a pronounced acceleration.

This suggests that the system of economic intelligence represented by

the data and analytical measures covered in BD would continue to prove



     39See G. H. Moore, "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices," in The Business
Cycle Lbday, pp. 137-66.

     lOThese developments are variously attributed to changes in (a) the
structure and institutions of the economy; (b) economic knowledge and its
policy applications; and (c) public attitudes and expectations. Some
of these changes, however, seem to have at the same ti.me strengthened the
forces of inflation, which makes them partly destabilizing.

             use Mintz, "Dating American Growth Cycles," in The Business
Cycle   Today, pp. 75 and   82.
                                       22

useful   in a world   in   which the probability of growth cycles greatly ex-

ceeded that of business cycles (of the kind recorded by NBER). But surely

that system, having been devised to observe the latter type of economic

fluctuations, is not as well adapted to observe the former. What is

required, in the broadest sense, is that the methods of cyclical analysis

and   forecasting be reexamined and elaborated with a view to making them
more  adequate for dealing with the recently prevalent patterns of insta-
bility, namely the major fluctuations in the rates of economic growth
and   inflation.

        Some of these problems are rather difficult, especially the last

one concerning the growth      cycles. These movements can   be measured as
deviations   from trends, alternating phases of high and low growth rates

called "step cycles," or rates of change (which usually must be smoothed

with moving averages).2 Thend estimates can hardly be avoided here,

yet they are often notoriously arbitrary and of uncertain value, par-

ticularly in this context where they must be brought up-to-date. Until

recently, no reference chronolor for the U.S. growth cycles existed,

although it was increasingly needed. The pioneering work by use Mintz,

initiatedjust a few years ago, goes far towards filling this need, but
some of her results are based on limited evidence from an analysis that
is still in part experimental. They need further testing and much

       l2Iise Mintzused the first two of these methcds in Dating Postwar
Business Cycles: Methods and Their Applications to Western erinxiy, 1950-
67, NBF.R, New York, 1969, and in "Dating American Growth Cycles," The
Business Cycle Today, as cited. G. H. Moore used smoothed rates of change
in "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices" (see ref. in footnote 39).


                                                                                I)
                                 23


additional work will be required to date the growth cycle phases with

adequate precision on a current basis!




      1It should also be noted that a growth-cycle reference chronolor
of the type developed by Mintz cannot be simply combined with the business-
cycle reference chronolor of the type developed by NBER and used in
BCD: the former is based on major fluctuations in series of deviations
from trend or of properly measured rates of change, while the latter
is based on major fluctuations in the levels of the series concerned.
Useful chronologies that integrate the two dichotomies (expansion-con-
traction, speedup-showdown) can perhaps be devised by dividing the cycles
into stages which might resemble somewhat the stages used in the NTBER
reference cycle analysis (Arthur F. Burns and Wesley C. Mitchell, Measuring
Business cycles, NBER, New York, 1911!7, Chapters 2 and 5). But the division
would probably have to be much more flexible, with variable-length stages
not all of which will necessarily be found in each cycle. A closely
related problem is that of combining such a chronolor with a system of
dating the major changes in the rate (and perhaps type) of price-level
inflation; see G. H. Moore, "The Cyclical Behavior of Prices," as cited
in footnote 39, and John R. Meyer, "On Classifying the 'New ReRlities'
of the Business Cycle," to appear in the 1973 Annual Report of the National
Bureau.
                                   21


                      1. Some Preliminary Results


     At the time of this writing (June, 1973), the Bry-&schan computer

program for dating cyclical turning points has been applied to more than

200 time series and the results have been reviewed by the senior staff

of the project. The collection includes the following broad groups:

   Cyclical indicators (individual and composites)          86 series

   Data from anticipations surveys and other indicators     33
                                                                  "
   National income and product accounts                     21
                                                                  II
   Analytical   measures (ratios, rates of change)          26

   Diffusion   indexes (actual and anticipated)             17

   New indicators                                           28

      The program is a stepwise approach designed to identify first the

major cyclical swings in the series, then the neighborhoods of their maxima

arid minima, and finally the monthly dates of the specific peaks and troughs.

It uses seasonally adjusted data and searches for the turns sequentially

in: a 12-month moving average; a weighted 15-month moving average (Spencer

curve); a 3-to 6-month moving average (according to the number of months



       The first five categories below refer, respectively, to the D
sections B; C and D; A; E; and C2 and E3 (see text above for a brief descrip-
tion of the major parts of BCD). The new indicators (not presently included
in BCD) relate to aspects or components of employment, unemployment, and
labor turnover and productivity; of GNP; of industrial production; and of
manufacturers' new orders and shipments. A complete list of the 211series
is available upon request.

           detail, see Bry and Boschan, Cyclical Analysis (as cited in
footnote 30), Chapter 2.
                                      25


required for the cyclical factor to dominate the irregular); and the series

proper.6 The basic output of this computer program starts with tabula-

tions of the unsmoothed data and the various moving averages and ends

with several tentative lists and one "final" list of the selected turning

points.

      Given this information, large computer charts were then produced, one

for each series, showing the seasonally adjusted data marked to locate

their cyclical peaks and troughs and the corresponding moving averages.

Each chart was inspected so as to determine the correctness of the mechan-

ically selected turns. Wherever judnent dictated deviations from the latter,

the charts were appropriately revised to show only the finally approved

turning dates. Although the process resulted in many changes, by far most

of the computer-chosen turning points were accepted and we consider the

program   as   having performed quite well.

      A few of these charts may     serve to illustrate   the cyclical behavior   of

selected individual indicators (Chart 1) and composite indexes (Chart 2).17

Consider some of the comprehensive "coinciders." The quarterly GNP aggre-

gates have, of course, nearly coincident timing, but note that their

specific peaks and troughs deviate occasionally from the dates of business

cycle peaks and troughs (shown at the top of each chart to mark the be-

ginning and end of each of the shaded areas representing the NBER-designated

recessions). One should recall that the NBER "reference" dates of business



     With      proper modifications, the program is also available for quarterly
series.

           these series refer to the so-called short list of NBER indicators
(see footnote 26 above). The numbers of the series are those used in BCD
for identification purposes only; they do not reflect the relationships
between the series or the order in which the series are presented. The
charts are shown after reduction to regular page size.
                                      26


 cycle turns are monthly and based on the evidence of other series as well

 as GNP. Moreover, in the 1970 recession nominal GNP continued to rise,

 though at reduced rates, while real GNP declined mildly. Industrial pro-

duction shows fluctuations that resemble broadly those in real GNP but

have   larger percentage   amplitudes and somewhat earlier timing at peaks.
This   reflects   the greater sensitivity and much smaller coverage of this

monthly index, which covers manufacturing, mining, and public utilities!8

The rate of unemployment, for which an inverted scale is used to convert

the countercyclical movements of this series into procyclical movements,

is classed as a coincident indicator in BCD. As the chart shows clearly,

however, unemployment tends to lag at troughs and lead at peaks. This is

so because employment usually rises slowly in both the initial and the

late stages of a business expansion, whereas the labor force continues

to grow at a fairly steady rate.1L9



     8These industries have grown less than the U.S. economy as a whole
in recent times as the proportion accounted for by service industries of
all types has increased. Presumably this worked to reduce instability.
Cyclical declines in manufacturing apparentlyno longer drag down the rest
of the economy as promptly as they used to.

            relatively slow increase in employment during the recovery
phase (which starts from low rates of caPacity utilization) reflects the
typically large rise in both the productivity of labor (output per man-hour)
and the average workweek. The retardation in employment growth late in
expansion is due largely to the spread of cost increases and shortages in
seents of the labor market. Unemployment and related aggregate measures
of unused capacity such as the ttGN? gapT' (potential, i.e., full employment,
GNP minus actual GNP) thus provide some of the most important examples
of systematic differences in timing at peaks and troughs.
                                                                   Chart 1
                                                                                                                                               27
                  Selected Indicators of Income, Production, Unemployment, and Credit,
                                                 1918-72
D Roltevi
                                             200. GNP    in current dollara
                         •iuI.Y auo.          UuLYi ap.i      WAy, PU.)                                               (MO V.p IWO v.1
     p   ,                 p     7               p   7         p



   CU?S PLOTTED EELCA
   £E?AR IN THIS ORDER:

   Ker.dcrson Curve
   h-?cr Mv1r.g Average
   2-Tcr Moving Average
   0rgina1 Data

  latest data plotted:




                                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                                         0




   43 19i9 10 95) 95? 1953 195.4     1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961   1962 1963   196.4 1965   196.6 1967 1968   1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974
                                indicates specific peak                                Dopartnt of Coaerco
                                                                                       Social and Econcic Statistics                    Administration
                                indicates specific trough                              Rureau      of Econon.ic Analyoi
                                                                                                                               ;January9, 1973
______                                                                  Chartl                          S
                                                                                                                                        28
CD Reviev                                                             (continued)

                                                    205. GNP in 1958 dollars
      INOV.IOCY.)             JULY) (AUG)           (JULV)q*PL     MAyFs.1                                        WOV.) 0v.)
                                                                                                                     p
T11IIIITT1IIJ!l1llJIl1IjI HJIi
      CURVES FLOrCES EELO.1
      APPEAR I THIS ORDER:

      Henderson Curve
      -.Term Moving Average
      2—Term Moving Average
     Original Data
   latest data plotted: 111/72



                                                                                                                                                   1CC 0




                                                                                                                                                    900



                                                                                                                                                    800



                                                                                                                                                    700




                                                                                                                                                    600




                                                                                                                                                    500




47 194S 1949 1950 1951 1952   1953 1954 1955 1956    1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970   1971 1972 1973 1974
                                     'inc1icatcs    specific peak                        Department of Conrierco
                                                                                         Social   and Economic Statistics Aclmlnistrntlon
                                     Odicatca       npccific trough
                                                                                        --ireau   of Economic a1ysis
                                -.

                                                                                                            .                jjanuary 9,   1971
                                                                  Chart 1
                                                                (continued)                                                     29

                                                     l.7. Induatrie.l production

    . ,ioC'.i                sJUlVI 1AU04
                               p
                                                    (JULYAP.)      IMAYUPCSI
                                                                    pT
                                                                                                                 (NQV.I ov.)
                                                                                                                   p




         C'.tV!S PL',TTIr) DiLCA
         AFIR IN TiIS ORD:
         -'ccr Curve
         12-nth ?aving Average
          )-anth M.ving Average
         W.inthly tita




?C Its
                         !                  i95 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                              ITIliCattj reciItc pk                                 Mcparutcnt of C.ercc
                                                                                     Social   and   onoin.ic St.at1tic5 Administration
                              thitct sc1fjc trough                                  Bureau of       conoic Analyis
                                                                                                                        Docombor 8.1972
                                                                       Charti                                                    30
   ______                                                         (continued)
CD Revftv
                                                     43. Unemployaent        rate,   total
            IWO V.HOCT I        IJUY) Au           LIULV)IAPR.,        IUAVH,tS.                                   (WOV) WOV.
                                                                                                                     p    v
                                                          1 iJll l
                                                         CVES PLCrrTF BELO.4
                                                         APPEAR   IN   THIS ORDER:
                                                         Monthly Data
                                                          3—month Moving Average                                                            2.0
                                                         12—month Moving Average
                                                         Spencer Curve
                                                     latest data plotted: 4/73

                                                                                                                                            3




                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                            5.0
                                                                                                                                                  U



                                                                                                                                                  4.)

                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                            6.0




                                                     1JLLtt1 Ill
 190 943 1919 1950 1951 1952 1953 195.1 1955 1936 1957
                                                         1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 196.4 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                               indicates specific peak                                 Departhent oL Comnrserco
                               indicates specific trough                               Social and Economic  Statistics Acviinitration
                                                                                       iroau of  Economic Analysis
                                                                                                                       Hay 15, 1973
                                                                        Chart 1                                                 31
                                                                      (concluded)
D Rtv1nv
                                            113. Change   in consumer inataliment debt
                                 (iULY) (AUG.)
                                    p     y
                                                    (JUyI(AP.I     (MAVI   E)                                 (NO V.( (NOV.)




   UIt'.t. E!!iI1'_tj c.:.l
  P1PPAR   Ifl TillS Ol(1)F.R:

  5pcncr Curve
  12—month 1oving Itvcrae
   3—month toving Avuroco
   tonthly Data




                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                   4




                                                             lii Iii itt
         1949 2950 1951 1952 1953 195.* 1955 1956 1957 1953 1959 1960 2961 1962 1963 196.4 1965 1966 2967 2968 2969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974
                                                                                          Dopartoont of Coorco
                                      ''indicates specific peak                           Social and Economic Statit1cs Administration
                                             indicates specific trough
                                                                                     -
                                                                                                 of Economic Analyols                          I        .   -
                                                                                         LIrCGU                           1jzuar 3,
                                                                                          I
                                                                                                  I'                                  1973
                                      32

        The change in consumer installment debt is subject to sizable erratic

variations--a frequent characteristic of monthly first difference series--

but these short movements do not obscure the longer cyclical fluctuations

with their large amplitudes and long leads at peaks (short leads or coin-
cidences at troughs). In addition to the declines associated with
business recessions (shaded areas), the change in consumer installment

debt shows about equally large "extrat' declines in 1950-51 and 1965-66.

Such movements, which signalize the much less visible retardations in

the growth of the comprehensive coincident aggregates in 1951-52 and 1966

(see, e.g., the GI'W charts), appear in many sensitive leading indicators.

        The composite indexes shown in Chart 2 combine indicators that have

similar timing but differ greatly in other respects (economic process,

coverage, frequency of observation, smoothness, etc.). The indexes are

constructed by standardizing the per-month percentage changes in each

series so that all are expressed. in comparable units.50 Also, the index

of leading indicators has been "reverse trend adjusted" to increase its

long-run   trend so as to make  parallel to that of the index of coin-
                                 it

cident indicators. This tends to shorten (lengthen) the leads of the former
index   at business cycle peaks (troughs); it also   reduces the timing vari-
ability   for the leading index and facilitates comparisons between the three

indexes presented in this chart.51



     50That is, the average month-to-month change, without regard to direction,
is 1 for each component series and the index as a whole. For more detail,
see Julius Shiskin, Signals of Recession and Recovery, NBR Occasional Paper
77, New York, 1961, Appendix A.

     5J. Shiskin, "Reverse Trend Adjustment of Leading Indicators,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, February, 1967.
                                                     Selected Composite Indexes,
                                                             198-72                                                               33
                                       810. Twelve  leading iixiicat9r3, reverac tr'ind adju5ted
DkcvI(1                                     (eeriea 1, 5, 6, 10, 12, 16, 17, 19, 23, 2, 31, 113)
    (NOV.UOCT4            •JUY) IAUQ)            (JULY,APL)     NAYI.)                                            (NOV.) )NOV.)
                                                                                                                           T
                                                               p
      p




          cuvf31LorTF:D flLLOI
          API FM IN THIS OrWJTh
          Spenccr Curve
          12-month Moving Avoroge
           3-month Moving Avcragc
          nth1y ta
      latest data plotted: 1/73                                                                                                               300




                                                                                                                                              200

                                                                                                                                              180

                                                                                                                                              160


                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                    1C
                                                                                                                                              100   a


                                                                                                                                              90    I.

                                                                                                                                              80

                                                                                                                                              70


                                                                                                                                              60



                                                                                                                                              50




                                                                                                                                               30
           A.
    UI'1,;
           14'? U53 ISSI 195? 193 I94 1955 1Q5 1951 1Q$ 1959 1960 1961   1962 1963   1964 1965 1966 1967   1968    1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                         "G' licateo opecilic
                                 jr.  s'ecI1c 1
                                              tr3Ugl
                                                                                 Deportment of Cornmnrce
                            indicates                                            Social and Econom-ic Stntistic AdjtLtnlstration
                                                                            I.
                                                                                 rcau of Fconi.tc Anzüy:Is
                                                                                                                         March 30, 1973
                                                                          Chart 2
                                                                        (continued)                                                      3)3


                           2O. Five coincident indicatorm, entlinated aggregate economic ctivIty                  — original index
  oviI1
                                                                    (aeries 41, •43, 47, 52, 56)

      IWO V.HOCT.I                 IJULVI (AU.I        IJULY) I APW.I    NAY) FL)                                          NOV4 (NOV.)
           p                                               p              P    T                                             P    T




      CUhV.5 PLOTTID 1flLCW
      APP}R 111 TILlS OItDEJ:
      Spencer Curve
      12-nonth Iloving Averago
       3-month Moving Average
      Dntftiy Data




                                                                                                                                                  1 fl


                                                                                                                                                  120



                                                                                                                                                  100


                                                                                                                                                   90




                                                                                                                                                   70


                                                                                                                                                   60



                                                                                                                                                   ¶0




                                                                          .f
)17 194j       1S49 1950 195i 1Q52 1953 1954 1955 195.6 1957 1953 1959   1960 1961 1962 1963 196.4 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                               Q    inuicatea     peeiric peak                           •Departhcnt 01' Coucrce
                                    Indicates     specific trough                        Social   and Economic     Statiatics Adminiatration
                                                                                         ftroau   of   Economic   knaJ.yais
                                                                                                                      I   December   i4172
                                                                 Chart 2
                                                               (concluded)                                                         35



kvv                                               830. Six legging Sridicatora-
                                                  (aeries 44,     61,      62,   67, 71,   72)

      4N0V.HOCT.)           (JULYI (AUQ.)        fJULYIAPN4       NAY)IPIS.)                                       INOV.) (MOY.)
                              p                     p    y            •0    •                                        p




  CUIt.lS }'L0TTF) [L&Jd
  ArrEAR IN TillS ORI)ER:

  Spencer Curve
  12-month Moving Average
   3—sonth Moving Average
  .onthly Data




                                                                                                                                              200




                                                                                                                                              150




                                                                                                                                              12c




                                                                                                                                              P100
                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                                                               90 c
                                                                                                                                               80


                                                                                                                                               70 -

                                                                                                                                                     C



                                                                                                                                               60


                                                                                                                                               50




                                                                                                                                               30




                                                        I!tI    II,
      194$ 1991950   1951 195? 1953 1954 1955 956 1957 195$ 1959 1960 l961o2 19.3 1964 1965 1966 W67 1968          1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                                  Indicates   spc1fic peak                                 Department of Conmerca
                                                                                           Social and Economic Statistics AdminiotratlOn
                               Indicatca 5pecific trough
                                                                                           Bureau of Economic Analysis
                                                                                                                        January 3, 1T71
                                         36


        The composite index of leading indicators52 has led at every peak and

(though lately by very short intervals) at every trough in the U.S. business

cycles of the post-World War II period. The only other cyclical contractions

in this series occurred in 1951 and 1966, matching the retardations in eco-

nomic growth that somewhat later showed up in GNP and other coincident

aggregates. The leading index has shown no major downturns and upturns at any

other   time,53 andin this sense has givennofalse signals, i.e., unconfirmed

anticipations of a serious weakening or strengthening of the economy.

This statistical construct, then, is remarkably sensitive to business

recessions and recoveries, as well as to pervasive slowdowns and speedups;

yet it is also relatively smooth and capable of being rather efficiently

updated.

        The composite index of coincident indicators had exact coincidences

or short leads at business cycle peaks and exact coincidences only at

troughs. It lagged behind the leading index on each of these occasions,

although often by very short intervals. No major declines are recorded

in this index at any      times   other than the T1BER-designated recessions.55



     52The twelve series included in this index are listed in Table 1,
lines 1-12.

        53The much shorter and smaller declines in mid-1952, mid-1956, and
the   second half of 1959 are all connected with the main strikes of this
era (centering on the steel industry). Such strikes (the last of which
occurred late in 1970) sometimes make the recognition of cyclical turns
in the economy's course particularly difficult.

        The five series included in this index are listed in Table 1, lines
13, lIt, 15,   17,   and 19.

     55The effects of the major strikes mentioned in footnote 53         are
visible in this index,too, but in a very attenuated form.
                                    37

     The composite index of lagging indicators coincided at two and

laggea at three of the peaks, while lagging at each of the troughs in

aggregate economic activity. Thus, at turning points, this index tends

to move for a time in a direction opposite to the leading and then to the

coincident index, which can help verifying the occurrence of a recession

or recovery. Like the coinciders and unlike the leaders, the lagging

series tend merely to undergo slowdowns, not absolute declines, during

periods of retarded growth, and this is clearly reflected in the correspond-

ing composite indexes.

      Since most of the indicators were selected and classified many years

ago, and the underlying data undergo various revisions and sometimes

conceptual changes, the recent behavior of these series provides a fair

test of their usefulness. The charts, especially those for the composite

indexes, suggest that the indicators contirued to perform reasonably well

during the expansion preceding the 1970 recession and also during the

last contraction and the following recovery and upswing. That is, the

series that had been expected to lead did so, and the series that had been

expected to lag did so too, relative to the movements of the group of the

"roughly coincident" indicators representing the main aspects of aggregate

economic activity (employment, production, and income).

         However, such graphical analyses permit only broad and rather impression-

istic inferences. The evaluation of indicators will require a numerical

and. detailed record of how the many     time   series in question have performed.



     6The six series included in this index are listed in Table 1, lines
21-26.
                                     38

Table    1 taJces a step in this direction. It presents measures of central
tendency and dispersion of cyclical timing for all indicators on the NBER
short list and all   composite   indexes currently in use.57 The individual
series   are cross-classified according to the overall timing categories

presently adopted in BCD and according to the distinction between the

real and nominal indicators that was drawn up for this study.8 New

summary timing measures and classifications are provided for the

observations at business cycle peaks and troughs separately.

          In the 1966 evaluation by Moore and Shiskin, an indicator was

classed as leading if its median timing at all business cycle turns

covered was two months or more and if the probability that the observed

proportion of leads could be attributed to chance was sufficiently low.59

The twelve series listed in the first section of Thble 1 all pass this

double test when the observations at peaks and troughs are combined for

each indicator. The overall mean leads vary from 7.2 to l2.1- months for


         See footnote 26 above.       8See footnote 36 above.
       59The probability test was first devised by Moore in his 1950
study (as cited in footnote 28). It is based on the assumptions that
the probability that a series will produce a timing comparison of a
given type at a reference turn is one-half and that the results in
successive cycles are independent. These assumptions can be questioned
but they permit application of the binomial and this simple method appears
to be adequate as a rough screening device. The maximum acceptance level
Corresponds as nearly as possible to the probability p = o.25o (e.g.,
the probability is 0.223 that four or more leads will occur when a leading
indicator covers six turns). The longer the series (the more turns it
covers), the lower the probability for a given proportion of successes
(say, leads for a leading indicator).   Thus, the maximum acceptable
percentage of failuresis directly related to the length of the series.
An exact coincidence is counted as a half-lead and a half-lag; so that
for leads the successes are represented by leads and half the ntunber of
exact Coiflcideices (the other 50 percent of the observations are, of course,
fai1ires; while for lags the reverse applies). See also Moore and Shiskin
(a8 cited in footnote 28), pp. 18-19 and 91.
            0                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                 39
                                                                                            TABLE     1
                                                T4fl0 OF SELTED 2IDICMDRS AND COM1SITE INDEXES AT arsnlESs CYCLE
                                                  PEAKS AND ROUGHS, SuMMARY MEASURES AND CLASSIFICATIONS, 19118-70




                                                             Leads     (-) or      Lags    (÷),           Timing      Leads      (-) or Lags (4.),        Timing           Leads     (-) or Lags
                                                                        in Months                     Classifica—                 in Months             Classifjca-           (4.)   in ont.s
Line      B1)     BCD   Timing Classification                                         SteM.                                                    Stand.                a
                                                                                                              ti0                                                                         Ste.d.
  No.     No.        and   Title of Series                   Median         Mean          Dev.                        Median        Mean        Dev.
                                                                                                                                                               °           Mean             Dev.
                                                              (1)            (2)          (3)                 (14)         ()        (6)        (7)            (8)           (9)            (io)
                                                                      Business Cycle Peaks                                       Business Cycle Troughs                       All    irns
I.    Leading Indicators                                                                                              A.       Real Seriesb
 2.        2.     Avg. work week, prod. wkrs.,mfg.       -13    —12.2                 5.12                    L        -2           -2.8        2.01.          L          -7.5              6.io
 2         5      Avg. wkly. initial claims, unnp. ins.  -13    -16.6                 7.20                    L         0           -1.2        2.148          C          -8.9              9.1.0
 3        12      Index of net business formation                                                             L        -1           -1.6
                                                        —11 1/2                       6.38                                                      2.15           C          -7.2              7.76
 14       17      Ratio, price to unit labor costs, inlg.    —21        -21.8                                 L        -2
                                                                                     12.32                                          -3.b        3.10           L         -12.14          2.3.00
 5        29      New bldg. permits  (priv. bous. units)     -13        -15.14        7.66                    L        -9           -6.8        3.97           L         -11.1              7.46
                                                                                                                      B.       Nominal   and   price seriesd
 6         6      New orders, durable goods industries           -9     -10.0         5.59                    L        -3           -2.8        1.60           L          -6.14
          10                                                                                                                                                                                5.1.6
 7                Contracts and orders, plant and equip.     —12        -114.5        6.98                    L        -l           -2.0        3.22           tie       -7.6               8.13
 8        16      Corporate profits after taxes (Q)f         —12        -10.14        6.12                    L        -2                                      L         -6.8
                                                                                                                                    -3.2        3.43                                        6.13
 9        19                                                 —10        — 8.8
                  Stock prices, 500 comon stocks, index                               2.79                •
                                                                                                              L        -'1          -5.6        2.73           L         -7.2               3.19
10        23      Industrial   materials price index         —10        -12.2        10.98                    L        -2           -0.8        14.83          L                         10.22
1].
                                                                                                                                                                          -6.
          31      Change   in mfg. & trade inventories
  .               (book value)                               —9         —12.6         8.145                   L        -2           -1.0        7.21           L         -6.8               9.76
12       113      Changes 1.n consumer installment debt      -   9      -12.14        8.06                    L        -1           -2.6        3.93           L         -7.5               8.02
II.     Roughly Coincident Indicators                                                                                 A.       Real Servlcesb
13        141     Employees on nonagricultural               —   2      —   1.2                               L            O
                                                 pa3jrolls                            2.79                                         +0.2         0.140          C         -0.5               2.11
114       143    Unemployment    rate, total (inverted)      —   6      —   6.6       3.93                    L        +3          +3.2         3.12                     -1.7               6.o
15        147     Index of   industrial, production          -   14     - 2.8         2.111                                0       -0.8         1.60           C         -1.8               2.11.
16       205      CP in 1958 dollars    (Q)                  - 2        -   1.14      1.62                    h        -2          -2.0         1.90           Lb        -1.7               1.79

                                                                                                                      B.       Nominal and     Price Seriesd
17        52      Personal   income                          +1         + 1.0         1.63                    U        -3          -3.0        0.82            U         -1.0               2.38
18       514      .lea  of retail stores                         0      —                                     U       -2
                                                                            0.7       2.05                                         -2.2        3.27            U         —1.5               2.83
19        6      Manufacturing and trade sales               -   3      -   2.6       1.86                    L            0        0.11       0.1.9           Cc        -1.5               1.75
20       200     (21P in current dollars (Q)                     0      -   0.2       1.09                    C      -2 1/2        -1.8        1.614           C         -1.0               1.58
                                                                                                           TABLE   1

                                                                                                          (Continued)




                                                                 Leads (—)         or        Lags (+),        Timing                   Leads (—)        or Lags (+),         Timing              Leads           Lass
                                                                                 in Months                  Classifica-                            in   Months             Claceifica-                   in 1ontL.s
                                                                                                Stand,                                                          Stand,            a
Line    D                     Classification
                                                                                                                                                                                                J+ (-) orStaid.
                                                                                                                tiona                                                         tion
 No.    No.                                                                       Mean           Dev.                                  Median         Mean      Dcv.                             Mean             Dcv.
                   DandTiming
                          Title of Series                        Median
                                                                         (1)           (2)       (3)               (I')                  (5)            (6)      (7)              (8)              (9)            (10)

                                                                               Business Cycle Peaks                                               Business Cycle        Troughs                     All T\irns

                                                                                                                                       A.     Real    seriesb                               .
111.   Lagging    Indicators
 2].     24-1+     Unemployment      rate,   15 weeks and over       +2            -0.2          21.02                                      +1+       +5.1+     5.00              Lg            +2.6              5.33

                                                                                                                                       B.     Nominal and      Price Seriesd
                                                                                                                                                                                                         .
 22      61        Business expend. for new plant
                   and equip. (Q)                                        0         -0.2 1.09                       C                        +2        +2.0      1.58              Lg            +0.9              1.76
 23      62        Labor coats per unit of output, mtg.              +9            +6.7          3.90           Lg                      +10          +10.5      1.87              Lg            +8.6              3.39
 21+     67        Bank rates on short-term business
                   loans (0.)                                        +1+           +2.2          1+.21          Lg                          +6       +].It.8   17.21+             Lg            +8.5         124.01+
 25      71        Mfg. and     tradeinventories,book value      +       21/2      +2.5          0.50                                  +21/2          +2.7      0.83              Lg            +2.6              0.70
 26      72        Corrss. and indus. loans outstarxling,
                                                                 +1 1/2            +2.5          1+.72             U          •             +3        +24.0     2.245             Lg            +3.2              3.83
                   Large cozms.banks
                                                                                                                                                                                        .                     .
 IV.   Conposlte Indexes
                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                          .
 27     810        12 leading indicators,1 reverse trend
                                                                  — 5               -5.0         2.00              L                        —2        -3.8      2.93               L            —24.1+            2.58
                   adjusted
 28     8]-].      12 leading              prior to trend
                                  indicators,t
                                                                                                 6.311.             L                       -2        -2.2      2.01+                                             6.53
                   adjusthient                                        -11.7
                                                                  - 9 1/2
                   24                                            —   10                          24.95              L                       -2        -2.6      1.62               I.           -6.8              5.85
 29     813              marginal employment adjustinents         1/2 -12.0
 30     811+       1+    capital 1nvesnent cosnnitnentsk    1 -12     -13.2                      5.63               L                       -2                  1.50               Lb           -7.2              6.66
 3].    815        1+    inventory investhent and purchasing -16      -15.7                     10.1+7              L                       -2          0.2     6.11+              L            -6.9         11.51
        816                                                       —       6        -10.2         6.24o              L                       —3        -3.1      3.11+              L            -6.8          6.08
 32                 3    profitability
        817         1+sensitive financial tlows                   -11              -12.0         6.99               L                       —1+       -24.2     3.37               L            -8.1              6.73
 33
        520         5 coincident indicators0                      — 1              — 1.1+        1.86               CC             .         0            0        0               C            -0.7              l.t9
 31+
 35     825         5 coincident indicators, deflated                -    1        - 1.8         1.1+7              C                        0        -0.6      1.20               C            -1.2              1.i47
                                 indicatorar                      +       2        + 2.6         3.32              Lg                       +24       +3.8      1.60              Lg            +3.2              2.68
 36     830         6 lagging

               — leading;  C — roughly coincident; Lg — lagging; U     unclassified by timing. Based on two            (1) median timing (a lead of       criterIa:
 2 months or more for L; a lag of 2 months or more for Lg; -1, 0, or +1 month for C) and (2) probability that the observed proportion of leads or
                                                                               —                  and footnotes 59 and 60.        text
 rough coincidences or lags could occur by chance (maximum acceptance level P 0.250T See

                 bries     in physical units, quantity indexes, and            aggregates In constant prices (deflated).
               C)

                                                                                                               TABL1
                                                                                                               (Conc].uded)

                                                                                                                     C   and L accepted; see footnote 60),           but   the median criterion
                     the probability test alone, the classification would be C/L (both
    indicate. C.
                dAggregates      in current dollars      series) and price indexes and interest rates (price series).
                                                              (nominal
                e0   the probability test alone, the classification would be L, but the median lead (-1) is not long enough (see note a).
                     denotes quarterly series. All series not so marked are monthly.
                   the probability test alone, the classification would be C/Lg.
                   the probability test alone, the classification would be C/L.
                The series in section I of this table (lines 1—12).
                    series 1. and 5 (lines 1 and 2) and BCD series 2 (accession rate,                              mtg.) and   3   (layoff rate, mfg.).
                        series 12, 29, 6, and            10   (lines 3,    5, 6, and 7).
                                                                                                    durable goods industries) and                                           37 (purchased
                           23 and 31 (lines 10 and 11) and KD series 25 (change in unfilied orders,
                        series
    materials, percent of companies reporting higher inventories).

                        series 17, 16,       and 19      (lines t, 8      and   9).
                                                                                              in mortgage                          in money supply,   Ml),   and   112   (change in bank   loans
                3D series 113         (line   12) and         D series 33 (change                           debt), 85 (change
    to   businesses).
                °&D series 1i1,        1e3, 1+7,    52 and 56        (lines 13,       11+,   15, 17 end 19).
                                                                       11e                      aD sort..                                              56D   (manufacturing end trade
                        series   1+1, 1+3,   and   1e7   (lines 13,          and 15) and                    5 (persona]. tncae, deflated) and
•
                                                                                  S
    sales, deflated).
                rThe    eerie. in section III of              this   table (lines 21-26).
                                        12

the   real series in this group and cluster narrowly between 6.1. and 7.6

months for the nominal and price series (col. 9).      The median leads are

in most cases smaller than the mean leads but the differences are not

large. The tinting comparisons show a great deal of dispersion (col. 10),

but leads prevail heavily over lags. At business cycle peaks, the timing

characteristics of these series are entirely unaibiguous (cols. i-1-.).

Here the average leads are 9-12 months or even longer and each of the

twelre series qualifies as "leading (L) under the probability test. At

troughs (cols. 5-8)   the   leads are much shorter than at peaks, with   most
of the averagesfafling in the 1-li. months range. One of the series is

accepted for rough coincidences rather than leads and two others are

rather difficult to classify under the adopted rules.6° However, these

seem to be marginal cases. I conclude that the selection of these 12

series as leading indicators, made in earlier NBER studies on the strength

of the then available historical evidence, is generafly confirmed by the

new measures here presented, for both peaks and troughs and also for both

the real and the nominal data subsets.

           The findings for the roughly coincident indicators in Section II

of Table 1 leave much more room for doubt. The overafl timing averages

fall in a narrow range close to 0, but they are all short leads (varying


         See Table 1, col. 8, lines 2, 3, and 7, and footnotes c and e.
The probability test for the significance of rough coincidences treats all
leads and lags that are longer than three months as failures. Success in
this test does not preclude a series from also passing the test as a leader
(if short leads prevail strongly in the record) or as a lagger (if short
lags prevail). However, such double classifications (c/L and C/Lg) are
eliminated when the median tinting rule is added to the probability test
rule, since the former makes a clear distinction between the three timing
categories in terms of   the   observed median leads or lags (see Table 1,
footnote a).
                                        ".3




from 0.5   to    1.8 months, c1. 9). At peaks, the real series have longer

leads, with medians of 2-6 months, and they qualify as leaders rather than

coinciders.61 Of the nominal series, two (personal income and retail sales)

fail to pass the probability tests, one (manufacturing and trade sales)

passes but as a leader, and only one (GNP) qualifies as a coincider. At

troughs, the unemployment rate is better described as a short lagger than

a coincider, and the median timing of GP is again a short lead (see foot-

note 6i); also, personal income and retail sales fail the tests here as well

as at peaks and must be designated "U" (unclassified by timing).

           The indicators grouped as lagging in the NBER short list (section

III of the table) have sufficiently long average lags at all turns, except

for business expenditures on plant and equipment, which qualifies as coincider

at peaks (line 22). Also, the series on commercial arid industrial bank loans

fails the test at peaks (line 26). All six indicators in this group are

accepted for lags (Lg) at troughs.

           The   composite indexes conform well to the expected timing patterns,
as shown in the last section of ble 1. The index of 12 leading indicators
has variable but on the average long leads at     peaks, short leads at troughs;

the   reverse trend adjusbnent reduces these   discrepancies.62 The indexes    for
the   five leading indicator subgroups (lines 29-33) display similar concen-

trations of long leads at peaks, short leads at troughs.6 The indexes of


          61Real GNP would be accepted for both rough coincidences and leads,
but the median timing (-2) indicates the classification L (see Table 1, line 16).

          62compare lines 27 and 28 in Table 1 and see text and footnote 51
on page 32 above. These indexes cover the leading series from the NBER short
list only.
          6ese indexes are not reverse trend adjusted. Taken together,
they include the 12 leading indicators i'rom the NBER short list and 7 other
series (see notes to Table 1).
                                     lai.




coincident indicators, particularly the deflated one, have slight tendencies

toward short leads at peaks, but there is no doubt about their basic timing

characteristicS.6 Finally, lags dc*ninate the timing record of the composite

index of lagging indicators, but more decidely so at troughs than at peaks.6

        Table 2 presents a different type of suimnary for a larger collection

of time series,66 namely the group timing averages at each successive peak

and trough of U.S. business cycles since 191!-8. These measures confirm that

the real indicators tend to have longer leads at peaks than the nominal

indicators, which reflects inflation in the advanced stages of economic

expansions. The series classified as leading and laggirg in D show the

expected timing (mean leads and lags, respectively) at each of the turns

covered (cols. 1-3 and 7-8). The series classified as roughly coincident in

D do occupy the middle ground between the leaders and the laggers, but they

show a preponderance of leads, particularly the real indicators at peaks

(cols. 1i_6).   The leads are on the whole considerably longer at peaks than

at troughs, and the lags are conversely shorter at peaks than at troughs

(lines 6 and 12).


        61The coincident index includes 5 of the 8 series classed as
roughly coincident in the NBER short list (omitting the quarterly indicators
and one monthly series on account of overlapping coverage; see Table 1, foot-
note o). The deflated index uses constant-dollar rather than current-dollar
series for personal income and manufacturing and trade sales (footnote p).


                 index includes the six lagging indicators from the NB
short list. It may be added that its lags were considerably longer at the
last two business cycle turns (relating to the 1969-70 recession) than
generally on earlier occasions (see Chart 2).
           66                        .
             These are 51t cyclical indicators from section B of D,
including 21 series from the NBER short list (see also Table 2,   IOotnute   e).
                  C)




                                                                                            TABLE 2

                                                              SU!.24ARY OF CYCLICAL       T4ING   FOR 51e   I1DICA1)RS, 1948-70


                                Leading Indicators                         Roughly Coincident Indicators0                         Lagging Indicatorsa

                            Real              and Price All        Real b                 Nominal and           All          Nominal and         All                   All
                                    b Nminal                                         Price Series(12)° Series(21)         Price Seriea(5)°    Seriea(6)          Indicators0
                       seriea(15)      Series (12)C Series(27) Series(9)
                           (1)               (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)        (6)                       (7)          (8)                  (9)
                                                                           Mean    Lead      or       In
                                                                                          (-) Lag (+), Months
      Ret. Peaks

 1.     Nov. 1948          -17.5            -9.4        l4.i               -4.2               -4.0              -4.1              +2.2         +2.2                   -8.3
2. July      1953          - 7.3            -9.6        - 8.ie             -2.2              •-O.5              -1.3              +5.4         +5.0                   -4.o
 3. July 1957              -20.6           -17.9        -19.4              -6.8               -1.3              -3.9              +4.0         +3.7                  —10.9
 4. May 1960               -11.1           -10.2        -10.7              -4.7               .3.4              -4.1              +5.8         ÷4.8                   -6.5
 5. Nov 1969               -15.1            -v.8        -11.8              —3.3               40.7              —1.0           n.o.            -8.0                   -8.2
 6. All peaks              -14.4           -11.1        -12.9              -4.3               —1.8              —3.0              +4.5         +3.5                   -7.6
   Ret. Troughs
                                                        —                   j•],                                0                              +3.2                   -2.5
7. Oct. 1949                .57             5.1                                              40.9                              +3.8
8. Aug. 19514              - 6.4            -7.0        - 5•5              -1.4               -1.2              -1.3           +3.0            +2.8                   -3.4
                           —                -2.5        - 6.7
                                                          1.7              40.3               40.8              40.6           +6.8            +6.3                   +0.04
9. Apr. 1958                                                                                                                                                          +1.0
10. Feb. 1961.             - 1.1
                             1.7            -2.8        - 2.1              +0.8               +4.4              +2.3          +3.2.4          +11.2
11. Not'. 1970             - 0.3            -0.9        - 0.6              40.7               +7.0              +2.7           n.o.            +4.0                   40.7
12. All troughs            - 2.8            .3.5        - 3.1               0.1               +1.7              40.8           +6.6            +5.9                    o.8
                                                        —                  —2.2                                 -1.],                          +4.7                   -14.1
13.     All turns          - 8.             -7.3            7.9                               -0.05                            +5.6
             a
                 Classified as     such   in D.                   bseriea in physical. units,      quantity indexes,    and aggregates   in constant prices (deflated).
                               in current dollars   (nnina1   series) and price indexes and Interest rates (price series).
            dlncludes the   five series covered in column 7 and one real, series not shown separately.
             0lncludes all. 54 series covered in the table. Twenty—six of these series are identifed in Table 1, lines 1, 2, 3, 5, 6,                        8—22,   25, and   as
         conporenta cf the composite indexes for the leading indicator subgroups, in footnotes t through j in Table 1.
  a             0.
                     Z*o   observations.
        Closer reading of Table 2 suggests that the behavior of the

indicators generally may vary in systematic ways   at   the different business

cycle recessions and revivals. For example, the leads at peaks     were   on the

average relatively short in 1953 and long in 1957; the leads at troughs were

relatively long in l951- and short in 1970; the lags were much longer in 1961

than at any other revival; etc. This is consistent with more detailed evi-

dence on the corresponding specific turning points and is associated with

the fact that strong positive correlations are common among indicators within

the same timing category. But the particular cyclical episodes covered would

have to be closely examined to explain the observed differences between them.




                                                                                   )
                                           I7


                           5.   Further   Considerations

         What do we learn from these results? As ever so often, in answer-

ing this question some others must be raised:

     1. at revisions, if any, are to be made in the dates of the business

cycle peaks and troughs?

         One might read Tables 1 arid 2 as saying that at least some of .the

recent   peaks in the NB reference chronology are dated too late, because
too many average leads, which are not always small enough, are recorded
at these turns for the "roughly coincident" indicators. A review of the

reference dates is indeed needed and is now in progress. It requires more

and different measures than I was able to present in this paper. There is

no way to derive   an acceptable chronology mechanically from one or a few
selected series; rather, the procedure must involve a combination of judgment
and working rules of cyclical analysis.6'?' Since both the structure of the
economy and the relevant statistical information are changing, reappraisals
of the evidence are necessary in matters        of selecting the proper indicators

of"aggregate economic activity" and their turning points, the methods and
weights to be used in combining these indicators, etc. It is convenient
to   have monthly reference dates,   but of course,    these can only be workable
approximations   and should not be taken to be highly precise (claims of close


                reasons are discussed
                                    in V. Zarnowitz, "On the Dating       of
Business Cycles," Journal of Business, April 1963, pp. 119-99.

          The decisions must often consider a wide range of problems,
e.g., the adequacy of seasonal adjustments, the effects of strikes and
other "random events," the consequences of using some quarterly series
in addition to the monthly ones, and so on.
accuracy in this context would necessarily be spurious).6 Where      turning
points   in the major indicators of macroeconomic activity are closely

clustered, the approximations are better than where these turns are    widely
scattered. In the latter cases of relatively flat turning zones, the NEER

practice is to place the reference date toward the close of the transition

period, unless economic or statistical considerations indicate otherwise.7°

Some of the propensity to lead in the timing of the roughly coincident

indicators is attributable to this    rule   of late dating.

         We are reviewing the NBER business cycle chronology for the United

States since l91.8 by a close analysis of a set of 19 important indicators

relating to aggregate employment, income, expenditures, and sales. Histori-

cally these series tended to have the overall properties of roughly coincident

indicators. As many as 12 of them are real aggregates or indexes. Distri-

butions of specific cycle turns, diffusion indexes and their ctmiulative

versions, and composite (amplitude-adjusted) indexes--all these methods of

distilling the relevant evidence are applied to this selection of series

as a whole and to its real and nominal subsets. This work is not yet

completed but the drift of the results is already emerging. Briefly, the

shifts in the present reference dates that may be indicated are small and

mainly limited   to a few peaks.   Some of them are well supported by the


                is   therefore fortunate that "the consequences of errors and
shifts in reference dates for the analysis of timing relations among inter-
dependent economic processes are not very troublesome. A common reference
point [date 1 offers a convenient short-cut device for measuring these re-
lations, but the latter are independent of it" (Zarnowitz, "On the Dating
of Business Cycles," as cited, pp. 181i._185). This is so because obviously
the sequence of turning points in specific series is not affected by the
selection of a reference date.

         T0There are some arguments against this rule, but those for it are
believed to have been stronger in the past (see ibid., p. 19-i-).
                                           14.9



 evidence,   others are stifl doubtful.71

     2. How should we interpret and        use    the differences between (a) the

 timing patterns at peaks and troughs; (b) the cyclical changes in real and

in nominal and price series?

          There are important systematic elements in each of these distinctions.

They would not be significantly affected by any changes that might realis-

tically be made in the U.S. business cycle chronology.           There is need to

place more emphasis in cyclical analysis on this double dichotomy and less

on overafl measures that cut across these divisions and conceal the system-

atic differences involved.

          There are several reasons for the well-observed
                                                                 peak-trough timing
differences. In late stages of expansion, production in many industries is

supported at high      and   even rising levels by the backlog of unfilled orders

accumulated earlier during the business upswing; hence, output and shipments

can continue increasing for some time after the downturn in demand (i.e.,

in currently received orders). In contrast, at the end of a contraction,

orders backlogs are depleted and capacity reserves plentiful, so that

when current orders turn up so does output with little delay.72 In general,

forces of growth help to prolong the expansion in aggregate economic activity

in its late, faltering phase even though declines had already occurred in

many partial indicators (economic processes and sectors); but the same forces


          71Ecamp1es   of    the former are: a change of the November 1911.8 peak to
October   1911.8 and a change of the May 1960 peak to April 1960 (perhaps also
the shift of the July 1957 peak date to August 1957). The two
larger and more uncertain changes would be: a shift of the Julysomewhat
                                                                 1953 peak
to flay 1953 and of the August 19511. trough to May 19511..

         T2Substantja]. evidence that tie leads of new orders and contracts
are longer at peaks than at troughs is assembled in
                                                       Zarnowitz, Orders,
duction, and In-resi2neflt (as cited in footnote 8), Chapters 14 and 11.
                                       50


also   help to shorten the contraction and hasten the transition to recovery.

            The real indicators are being given a large total weight in our

study, particularly in determining the time-reference framework of the

analysis. There are special reasons for this emphasis in the present era

of sustained inflation, but these variables always deserved and attracted

much attention in business cycle studies, including those of the National

Bureau. However, nominal and price series must continue to be included

in these studies as well. Separate chronologies and other summary measures

for the sets of real and nominal indicators should be useful and will be

prepared in the course of this research project, but there is no good reason

to base the concept and the analysis of business cycles on the real indicators

only.

       3.   How is the current list of the main cyclical indicators to be assessed

in the light of this review?

            The leading indicators on the NBER short list performed in recent

years (including the 1967 slowdown, the 1968-70 sequence of inflationary

boom and recession, and the recovery and expansion since 1971) about as well

as in the past.73 Of the roughly coincident indicators, one or two seem to

be doing      poorly. In particular,   personal income did not decline during either

the    last   (1970) or the previous (l9&)) recession. The series, wages and salaries

in manufacturing, construction, and mining, would appear to be a better choice

for the short list, despite its narrower coverage, since its record as a coin—


                    significant deviation seems to be that the investment in
            73The only
(change in value of) manufacturing and trade inventories has been unusually
sluggish in the 1971 recovery; its upturn lagged behind the cycle trough in
November      1970 by a full year. This 1s an interesting episode, which however
may    well be rather   singular. It does not, of course, detract from the
importance      of this series as a representation of one of the major cyclical
variables,      and the overall record of this indicator is still good (Table 1,
line II).
                                        51


 cident indicator is very good.1
                                      Finally, the selection of the main lagging
 indicators retains its validity on grounds of both the economic theory of

 cyclical processes and the usefulness of statistical
                                                          applications, but it is
important to bear in mind that as many as three of the six series in this

group failed to show cyclical declines throughout this period.75

        To sum up, most of the series now identified as the principal -indica-

tors continue to meet the required standards, but in some cases substitutions

of different series within   the   same economic-process and timing categories

may well prove desirable. Since the ongoing review extends to many other

indicators (including, but not limited to, those presently published in BCD),

there will be many moDe additions and deletions to be considered.

        Much further work is needed in several areas to which I already re-

ferred, notably on the concept, dating, and    indicators   of growth cycles, on
the relations between the ?tobjectivett indicators and the "subjective" anti-

cipations data, and on the economic policy indicators. These are promising
                                                                                    -


as well as important subjects to which
                                       we hope to make some contributions,

but their exploration in depth will    obviously   require far more research than
can be undertaken within the scope of this project.


              drastic reduction in the fluctuations of personal income reflects
the increased weight of
                        relatively stable or even countercyclical types of in-
come (including the effects of fiscal and other
                                                ttautomatic stabilizers"). How-
ever, inflation is also a factor: real (deflated) personal income did decline
during each of the five U.S. recessions of the post-World War     II
                                                                 period.
Similarly, sales of retail stores, measured in current dollars, show no cyclical
decline that can be matched with the
                                     1970 recession, but the corresponding series
in constant dollars does show such a decline.

        75These series are: business expenditures for new plant and
book                                                                 equipment,
     value of manufacttring and trade inventories, and the index of labor cost
per unit of output in manufacturing.
