                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SCHOOLING, ABILITY, NON PECUNIARY REWARDS,

                    SOCIOECONO(IC BACKGROUND and the

                    LIFETIME DISTRIBUTION OF EARNINGS



                             Paul Taubman*

                      Working Paper No.      17




CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF hUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                 261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                             November, 1973


                     Preliminary; Not for Quotation

      NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
 number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
 permission.

      This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
 publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
 by the Board of Directors.

     *University of Pennsylvania. The research reported herein was per-
 formed pursuant to a grant from the National Science Foundation to the
 NBER for research in the area of income distribution. The opinions
 expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect
 the views of the National Science Foundation.
                                      — 1-


I. Introduction

     All   individuals   or families do not receive the same income or earn-

ings. This inequality, the most indisputable fact about the distribution

of income, has been found in capitalist and socialist economies, in dem-

ocratic and dictatorial countries, and in Biblical through modern times.

There are other characteristics of the income distribution that are

nearly as well documented for modern countries. For example, the

distribution is not symmetrical but has a longer right—hand tail             ,   and

both average income and its variance generally increase with education and age.1

     Why inequality occurs and why the distribution has its particular

characteristics is a matter of concern to many people. Certainly society

and government have expressed a desire to establish a minimum floor for

members of society — though the level of the floor and the means of achieving

it are matters of debate. Besides a direct interest in the questions of

the sources of inequality, how to achieve income redistribution thd the

efficacy of various policy tools, economists are also concerned with establishing

how various labor markets operated how rational individuals are, and how

important are individual effort, chance, and predestination.2

     Spurred on by these questions economists have constructed various

theories that purport to explain the ncorne distribution. Some aspects

of these theories have been tested against empirical observations.3 This

study will extend the range of such tests. In addition, we will generate

some new facts that a complete theory         should   be able to explain.


     1For international comparisons see Lydalif 30]. For the U.S., Millerft3].


     3See, for example, Mincer    [
     2These terms will be defined more rigorously below.

                                             }.
                                       —2—

The Personal Distribution of Earnings

     Personal income is equal to the sum of labor earnings, returns to

capital, and transfer payments. Transfer payments are determined by

political and societal forces and will not concern us in this study. While

the distribution of income from capital is partly determined by economic

forces, it will not be the primary focus of this study —      partly   because of

the paucity of data in our sample. Earnings from work, to which the

Introductory statments on inequality also apply and which will be the

primary focus of our study, currently constitute about two—thirds to

three fourths of national income.

     Most theoretical and related empirical work on the distribution of earnings

fall into the "human capital" or"stochastic" theory categories or a blend

thereof. The human capital model assumes that people are paid a wage equal

to their (     real)   marginal product which varies over individuals because

of differences in inherited or acquired skill levels. The stochastic- theories

assume that an individual's earnings over time depend on the cumulative

history   of   random events.

II. Supply and Demand for Labor

     A traditional method of analyzing labor markets is via supply and demand

curves. Suppose for the moment that all people are homogeneous with respect

to skills that determine earnings. Assume that with a given quantity of

capital and other factors of production, the marginal product of labor decreases

as the number of employees increases. In a competitive labor market (        with   no

on the job training) employers will hire that number of workers at which the

marginal product is equal to the real wage rate, W/P(for convenience we

il1 set P at 1 and henceforth speak of wages only). This demand curve is
                                       —3—

 given at DD in Figure 1.

      In Figure 1, the supply curve for the population is SS which is

assumed to slope upwards because it takes higher wage rates to induce

people to forego leisure. The equilibrium wage rate of W will clear the

market and everyone who works the same hours will earn the same amount. This

conclusion, which is, of course, contrary to fact depends crucially on

the assumption that each person has the same skills but this study is
                                                                      to
a large extent based on the proposition that
                                                      many different skills —   inherited
and acquired —      help determine earnings. It is fairly easy, however, to
incorporate many types and levels of skills into the above analysis if what

is known as an "efficiency units"
                                      model js valid. Suppose individual one,
who has a particular complex of
                                    skills, is designated the "standard" person.
Let capacity be designated as C.      As long as C/C1 always equals b. we can

state that the th person is equivalent to b. standard workers.

                                   Figure 1

    \dTIJ&    c
                          U                       S




             V/c,




                                              0




                                Supply and Demand for Labor
                                              —4—




                                                              to     hiring person 1
          -
                Since the employer would be indifferent

at a wage of say            or person j at wage of bW0 the demand curve in Figire 1

can be redrawn in standard worker units. The supply curve                can   also be drawn

in efficiency units as        where     is the quantity of labor the th
person would offer at a particular standardized wage rate. In
                                                                this efficiency
nodel a person who is 110 pçr cent of standard capacity will always
                                                                     receive


a   wage 110     per cent   of the standard wage, but the equilibrium level of the

standard       wage will vary with the     supply   and demand curves.

                An important   set of questions that arise with this model are: what
particular        skills determine capacity; are these skills inherited or acquired;

and,is        the quantity of acquired skills consistent with the amount economiStS

would define as optimum? Before considering these questions, however, we
                                                                                  not fixed
will examine briefly a model in which relative capacity, C/C1,is

but varies.

                 The world of work is subdivided into many different occupations which

 are associated with different tasks and levels of responsibilitY. For example

 the Dictionary of Occupational Titles differentiates thousands of occupations.

 Some occupations and tasks require physical strength, some mental ability,

 etc., and some require combinations of particular skills. A person's

                               remain   constant within an occupation but vary over
 relative capacity may

    occupations.4 Thus a person's observed or effective relative capacity

 would depend on       the   occupation he would work in which in turn depends in

    part on the occupational wage structure which can vary




                  4Even this need not be true. For example, different types of skills
    may   be   more or less ioiportant depending on the types of machinery used.
                                    —5—




  over time. Though this model jS
                                          comnlicated irk principle it is still
 'possible to formulate and solve it as
                                          a general equilibrju model, in which
  ndivjdua1s choose that Occupation which yields them    the   highest income or
            5,6
 Utility.

        One particularly Important feature of this occupation—ski model is
 that some skills may not be at all useful in
                                              some occupations. Suppose
 for example the only two occupations are manager and manual, worker and that

 intelligence received such a high wage in managerial work, that all people

with an I.Q. above 110 are managers. Assume also that physical strength

 Is of no importance as a manager but that among manual workers strength

 increases capacity while I.Q. doesn't.    Finally assume all those with I.Q.
greater than 110 have above average strength
                                                (though the correlation is
not perfect). Then for people with I.Q. above 110, variations in
                                                                 strength
would not affect earnings while for those with lower I.Q.'s and less

strength only variations in strength would affect
                                                     earnings. Thus in this
example each skill Is redundant in one
                                          occupation and only a portion of
the distribution of each skill determines
                                            earnings. This analysis, of
course, suggests that it may be necessary to examine
                                                       earnings functions



   5.
              &i1
    Tinbergen,'has formulated this type of model and Redehas examined
some features of such a model though he   uses somewhat different terminology.

   6lndeed the usual general equilibrium models admit of the
that each individual Is a                                    interpretation
                          separate factor of production because he has his
own bundle of skills.
                                                 —6—




within occupations and that in the whc1e sample the effect of a skill may

have upper and lower limits.
                        -
                            We     will return to this question but for now let us
                                 efficiency units mcdcl. At the end of our previous
return    to the      simpler
discussion      of    this iodel we raised certain questions about what skills

determine  earnings or capacity. At a general level we can classify these
skills as cognitive1 affective, physical, and psychological. Cognitive
skills include learned facts and information, asweI                dcsion making

abi4t4s.            skills include leadership and social behavior.
               Affective

Physical skills include strength, coordination, and dexterity while
psychological skills include extroversion, reaction to stress, and degree
of neuroticism, etc.
          At   this   stage   of   our knowledge, we hardly know which particular

 skills           earnings or capacity since no saniple contains reliable
           determine

 measures of all feasible skills and few samples contain direct measures of
                                                                       7,8
 even    a representative skill from each of the categories mentioned.

 However, several studies have shown that certain aspects of intelligence

 and     of leadership are valid. See Taubman-WaleS (], Griliches and
 Mason (ifl,       Wise     (j].    and   Featherman tic].


                                                                       have not yet
     Indeed for        some possible skills, appropriate measures
    7-

 been designed.

    Perhaps the Terntan sampl           the most information but it is
                                             contains
 small and limitedt popie with I.ç.'s (as children) of 140 and over.
 The Project Talennd to a lesser extent   the Little_Scwella1Ple have
                                       when   their respondents were in
 more skill information for the period
 elementary and high school, but currently  little  in the way of earnings
 data since the people graduated high school no    earlier than 1958.
                                            —7—



            Suppose, however, that we had measurements on an exhaustive list of

skills for each individual. We co'üd then estimate an earnings equations

such as

(1)              Y=aX1+bX2...cX+u
where Y is earnings, X1 ...
                              X are   the N measures of skill, and u is a

random error representing ttlUCktt   or   inititutional phenomena.9

           Each coefficient in the equation indicates the effect on earnings of

Increasing the associated X by one unit. It is worth noting that the

coefficients may not be stable over tiie. For example suppoe there Is

a big increase in the supply of any X. In the efficiency units model,

this will lead to shifts in the supply curve (in efficiency units) and a

decrease in the standard wage rate which in turn would decrease all

coefficients proportionately. In mor complex models, the effect on the

coefficients of an increased supply in any one skill level depends upon the mdiv—

idual     supply and demand elasticities for each skill as well as cross




          9AS equation 1 is written, all skills have an independent, linear
effect. This reDreentation was chosen for simplicity. Interactions
between skils should not be assumed away in empirical work especially
because Roy'3tias demonstrated that if skills affect earnings multiplicatively,
symmetric skill distributions yield asynmetric earnings distributions--an
Important feature of the observed distribution. See also MandelbrotD..LJ
                                            —8--




elasticities     of nand.    But   in general the coefficients will not change
                   10                                                           -.

proportionately.
          while estimation of equation 1 with many skills would represent a
major achievement, our task woitid not be over since we would then want to
know what deterci. the level of each X or what policies could affect the
distribution of earnings.

Inherited   and Acouirc;d Skills
            The level of any skill or attribute a person possesses at any point
of time is determinc3. by his genetic endowments
and by his environments As         we are using the term "environment," it      in-

cludes all post-conception events that influence the individual. Thus
it encompasses forrral and informal training for all the skills discussed
earlier, pre-natal diet) expenditures on heaith which determine whether               ills
can be used, and random events. A huge literature has been devoted to assessing
the relative importance of nature an&.nurture for particular skills and
attributes.2 As we come closer to estimating equation 1 this literature



            9here is                  case to note. It is possible that only
                        one other special
skill differences relative to the average matter, e.g., the brightest lawyer
may receive twice as much per case as the average lawyer. If all lawyers
received more training and increased their legal skills X per cent, none may
receive more earnings. However, the effect on earnings on legal brightness
between lawyers should be given by the coefficients in (1).

            II
           The genetic effect can be both direct and indirect. For example
a persons knowledge level can depend on ir.nate ability and on educational
attainment which is partly determined br innate ability.

             See    for example Jinks and Fulker (   j.   ),   Burt   (   ), Cavelli-Sforza
 (   1) or .iittler (3/ ).
                                           —9—


—will become more important in economics, but at the current time, it does

 not seem necessary to summarize it. It is worth noting, however, that

 the relative importance of nature and nurture can vary over time as the

 distribution of genetic endowments and of environment changes. In par-

 ticular new environments such as better schooling, day care centers, and

 prenatal diet could have large effects even if nurture was not important

 for older cohorts.



Training

             Since we have not measured all the possible skills nor know   their
nature-nurture combination, we will not estimate equation 1. We will,

however, make use of a modified procedure. Suppose each of'      the X'S is
represented as a function of genetics and environment. If for example

(2)
                  X1 = cG   +
                                dN1
where G is genetic endowments     and N is environment, and i   is the individ-

ual, we can then rewrite equation 1 as

(3)
             Y1   = a Cj G Z.j a d      N =   e G1   +f1 N
Equation 3    represents progress primarily because we do have measures of
several aspects of environment (as well as a few G's
                                                          as approxiitated by I.Q.).
             People learn or increase their skill levels in many   ways with   some

methods better for some skills than others. However some of the most im-

portant "training" Institutions are the family,      peer group, school,
military,   and work.
                                       —10-

       The family can affect the child's cognitive, affective, physiological

and psychological
                         development by a variety of subtle and obvious means
including: the      behavior and attitudes of parents and Biblings; material

and nonmaterial      goods and services provided to the child; love arid affection;
and degree of permissiveness in rearing. It would              be most useful and convincing

                                                             material goods,
if we could incorporate measures of parental behavior, love,

etc., in our equations. We don't have such information and are reduced

to    using prcxies      which are more or less crudely related to the true variables

we wish to include.

        There are several difficulties in interpreting the coefficients of a

proxy. A proxy, by definition, is assumed to be correlated with the true but

unobserved variable. But the proxy may be insignificant, though the phenomena

it    tries   to represent is important, because the proxy is too crude a measure, i.e.,

has too low a correlation with the true variable.                Alternatively the proxy

used may be correlated with several true variables whose separate effects we

may be interested in. For example, fathers education may be related to his

 earnings, his methods of child rearing and certain genetic ( and thus partially
                                13,14 Fortunately If    several   proxies are used, it    can
 ;nheritable) abilities.

 be   shown that each proxy will tend to reflect         the   underlying   variable to

 which it      is most   highly correlated.

        We    will use   proxy variables such as family        income and wealth, religion,

• urban or rural residence, parents' education and occupation ,              which are all often

 available and made use of. We will supplement this list with other


        3See Kagan[1jfor         the.last. Some   of   the former are discussed in Sewell, et al.

      The child will get one half of his genes from one parent and in a world
 without either assortive mating or dominant and recessive genes will on average
 regress towards but not reach the mean of innate ability.
        15
             See CrockettL 3..J"Technical Note."
                                               —11—.



proxies that we think are related         to   child rearing techniques and family

atmosphere.       It is worth emphasizing that         family status   coefficients in

an earnings equation only     represent    the direct effect of such status.

Generally, there is also an indirect effect since family               background   helps
determine the level of educational attainment (and other parts of "environment").
a person acquires.
             The peer group can also affect the amount of schooling a person
acquires and can directly affect all broad skill categories through its
attitudes and reward structure, but we have little or nódata on.the:peer                    group.

             Both sociologists and economists have incorporated formal schooiing

into the earnings equation. For reasons that will be              clear later it must
be    emphasized that schooling can affect cognitive, affective, physiological,

and    psychological skills though there- is no         reliable information on which
of    these changes determine earnings.16 The           rnost common though obviously

very    crude measure of education   is   years    of schooling. However,following
the   lead of   Solmon and Wachtel (9'/) who       used   the same sample, we will also

incorporate certain measures of college quality.17
            The Arur may make   men but we will not study the question in this book

since   all the people were in   the military. While all the people in our

sample worked, the amount and type of work and of learning on the job has
varied by individual and can affect earnings. Indeed a major innovation
in the earnings distribution literature is Mincer's theory of investment



         16For evidence on some noncognltive effects as well as the mechanism
by which education causes these changes see Simon and Ellison (1).
              prob1e with
            17A                  of these taires is that they seem nore
related to cognitive development than the other skills. However certain
information on type and size of college may be related tononcognitive changes.
                                    —12—




in on—the—job training, which is described below in more detail and sub—

.ject to empirical verification in Chapter


Human Capital Theory

      The economic definition of capital is any thing that will yield

benefits over some future period. While under this definition a person's
                                                                               -

genetic inheritance is as much "capital" as is financial inheritance,

the economic literature on hunan   capital   has relegated this "conceived

stock" to a secondary role and concentrated on schooling, health expendi-

tures and other means by which a person can acquire or maintain skills.

In part this emphasis occurs because if a person must invest to acquire

a set of skills1it is possible to ask both what factors determine how

viuch investment a person will acquire, and Jhat    the otimal   mountof Luvest—

ment a rational person should make in any time period. In additionit is

difficult to obtain measures of the elements of the conceived stock

(with the partial exception of intelligence).

      It is possible to examine the consequences of art   investment   func—

tionon the level and distribution of annual and lifetime earnings with

due allowance for the distribution of the inherited abilities as is

brilliantly done by Becker [5], and by Mincer [35.

Becker's   schooling model assumes that each dollar spent on education-—

through tuition, governnient subsidy, or earrtings foregone from not working——

viii increase skills, attributes, etc. These new     skills   and attributes

viii yield both a new, constant level of earnings and nonpecuniary returns

to the individual. Becker then asks what heSitribut1on. of;earnings.
                                            —13—




wøuId:be.     if each person were a rational irvestor who is certain of hiz
yield      fron education.18 Assuning that     nonpecuriiary returns are zero,
Becker shows that the equilthri.usn conditions is that r.                  in.   where r.
                                                                    3       3           3
 is the marginal rate of return        on and iu. the financial         cost of schooling

 for the th person. Becker assutes r is .subject to diminishing returns
and varies with the pelson's ability while m is assumed to increase with
                                                   19
education       and depend on family resources."        Becker then derives the

earnings distribution under alternative assumptions and shows, for

example, that the distribution can be skewed to the right. The particu—

lar answer, however, depends on the distribution of (the functions of)

m and r and their covariance.2°

           This schooling   model assumes that the      extra   earnings from education
would be constant       over time but in fact extra earnings increase with age.
Within the       context of the    hxnan capital model, these changes could be due
 to maturity (with an interaction with education) but available evidence
would suggest that from age 20 to 50, naturity per se is not important
 for changing the level of most cognitive and affective skills. Mincer

however has demonstrated that the human capital analysis can account for




       Or is risk neutral if there is uncertainty./
     18                        .




    '9This may not be as true in our sample since the G.I. Bill provided
 for tuition up to $500 a year and a stipend of $100 a month. These pay-
 ments in effect reduce the interest rate to zero and sharply reduce
 tuition and forgone earnings.

     2.Q
     -.
           For example he concludes that the distribution depends on the correlation
of         and in.   over Individuals).
     r3
                                    —14—



a rising age—earnings profile, which vary by education level, if people

invest rationally in "general" on-the-job training (QJT).     By defini-

tion, general training is that which is as useful to other eitployers as

the one giving the training. But since training is embedded in the

worker, after being trained he can offer his services to any employer

(in the absence of enforceable long-term employment contracts). There—

fore in a competitive labor market the enployee would receive wages

equal to his new, higher marginal product, or in other words all the

benefits of the training.

        The xodel, at this point, is indistinguishable from a learning by

doing model. Nincer, however, takes the analysis one very important

step further. Specifically Mincer argues that a person will choose that

occupation which offers him the largest amount of lifetime earnings, dis-

counted to the present. Suppose therefore that occupation A involved

training and occupation B did not. Also assume that initial wages were

the same in both occupations, hence, occupation B would offer the larger
                   22
discounted stream.      In this case workers would leave B for A and new

entrants would choose A. As the supply of workers for A increased and B



   21
     His model can also explain a changing age profile of the variance of
earnings.

   22
     The occupation definition in this case is broadef than in our 'normal
use since it encompasses a whole occupational career moving from stock
boy to president.
                                       —15--




decreased, the starting wages in A would drop and those in B rise. This

adjustment would occur till the discounted value of the lifetime earnings

stream would the same. Note that as a result of the adjustment process,

wages in A initially will be below those in B and later above. The

(unobserved) drop in wages in the first year of work is the investment

in on—the--job training In that year.23'24

        Denote Y as the individual's earnings with no learning by doing and

      as the percentage of earnings invested in any year. Mincer generally

assumes that X declines with years of work. One form he often uses is:



(4)



where A is a scalar that varies iver persons, b is the decay rate that is

the same for all persons, and t is the time since beginning work.



  23
     The rational investment in human capital concept can be applied to
any portion of the environment which produces or maintains skills. For
example one interpretation of the observed effect of family SES on earn-
ings (education, wntal ability, etc. constant) is that more and better
training that augments earning related skills occurs in families with a
high2r SES. But the rational investor model would suggest that parents
allocate their time so that at

                               Mu(X)
                                           P
                               MU(Y)

where Wi is marginal utility, X is the (discounted value) of the child's
extra earnings from a unit of parent's time, while Y is any other use of
time, and I' and P are the respective prices.


        calculating the investment costs in other years, an adjustment
would have to be made for returns on prior investments.
                                         —. 6—




•       Depending on the investment function, Mincer derives a human capital

earning function such as:



(5)             1nYlnY+eS+ft

where S is years of schooling, e is the rate of return on S, f is the rate

of return on OJT and Y is determined by genetic endowments and the other

elements of the environment that affect skills and earnings.

           Another way to view Mincer's model is that earnings only change over

time because of continued investment in the on—the—job training.25 His

earnings model, therefore, can be rewritten as:



(6)             Y        (l+r E At n      A)
                    t
                             n'l


where A is defined above andY is the constant stream, determined by

genetic endowments and all aspects of environmet except OJT. As long as

A decreases over time, earnings will increase with age. Mincer, moreover,

demonstrates that in his model the variance of Y and of log Y need not

be constant over time but may increase or decrease inonotonically or even
                                   -26
follow non-inonotonic paths.



      25
     This is not quite true in the sense that Mincer allows for transitory
events in any year and for maturation and senescence. But these can be
ignored at this point.


        See [           ] pages.
                                            —17--


       -
             Mincer's   theory is in the tradition of much of economic analysis

 of competitive markets and has the attractive feature of being consistent

with such observed regularities as rising      age earnings profile and with nearly
arr   age   profile of the variance of earnings. Moreover as Mincer has noted

 it is possible to obtain estimates of e and f, the two rates of return,

within a decade of individuals entering the labor market.

             M1e the model has all these advantages, it has several particular

disadvantages. First of all, the model assumes that because of individual

actions tie market always generates the type of equilibiu he makes use of.

But consider for a moment the informational requirements
                                                             necessary for
this market to function. On the schooling side the individual must estimate

the expected increase in his earnings for each year of his working life. 27

This is a formidable task--especially if education interacts with characteristics

such as drive or particular types of innate ability in producing earnings

capacity.

             For the OJT investment model, the worker has to be able to calculate

the increase In skills or the general learning by doing contained in any

occupation. In addition in both instances the worker will have to estimate

if the current information that he can obtain, say from Census data, is

applicable to the future or if an equilibiurn situation is about to become

disequilibrium or vice versa. These are severe




            2If the person is not risk neutral, he will also have to examine the
variance (or other measures of dispersion) of the extra earnings. If Mincer's
model is correct only the constant earnings difference, ,need be estimated
but the worker ould need to read Mincer to know how
from available data.
                                                        to
                                                        calculate this figure
                                             —18—


informational requirements which may result         in labor   market   failure,
i.e.,   the market may   not   act as predicted.

           Even if the information requirements are met, equation (5) may not

hold nor be interpreted as above because of nonpecuniary returns to edu..

cation. That is, evidence at least as reliable as that on earnings

indicates that education has nonpecuniary rewards. Similarly, the OJT

model should allow for such nonmonetary returns as pride and status as,

e.g., in the professorial labor market. Yet the rational investor model

requires these nonpecuniary returns be included in the r that is to be

equalized to n. Thus the coefficients on S or t in an earnings equation

need not equal the rate of return on investment.

            Finally the models assume that a unit of schooling or OJT always

emits the same capacity as a person         ages and that variations in earnings,

with wage rates fixed, must reflect changes in capacity from maturation,

illness, or OJT, etc. As explained below such an assumption seems invalid

for some labor market situations.

            It is difficult to construct a definitive test of the schooling

model because nonpecuniary returns and the individual's cost of financial

capital cre seldom known. It is possible, however, to test Mincer's OJT

theory   since   as expressed in (6) his model predicts that those below average

In earnings early will be above average later and will have a faster growth

rate in earnings.                   Below we will expound on this in greater detail

and perform the indicated tests.
                                     —19—




 Sorting and Signalin1 fodels

       There are some occupations such as fruit picker and commissioned

 salesman) in which it is possible to determine
                                                  quickly and cheaply the
 Inareinal product of an individual worker and in which the success or

 failure of one worker does not determine the marginal product of other

workers in the firm. In these occupations, a firm should be willing

 to set a piece rate and hire anyone who applies for a job. There are

other jobs such as a position on an assembly line in which it may be

possible to determine the number of bolts tightened and not tightened

by a worker but where the failure of any one worker on the line will

reduce or destroy the output of other workers.    In this interdependent

situation, the firm would be able to mcasurea person's
                                                          marginal pro-
duct, but as long as it can not collect for the destroyed units the firm

Eiay find it profitable to try to minimize the number of people with less

than the necessary skill level needed for the job. Finally there are

some jobs such as manager in which it is difficult to measure both the

actual and potential productivity of any worker and in which there are

interdependencies. Here again the firm may want to sort people into

groups which have more or less of the skills associated with success on

the job.

      Within most firms there are a number of "career leaders" within the

semi—skilled, skilled, and                          categories with some
possibility of going from one ladder to another. When the firm does not

know a person's productivity and when a complex and difficult to measure
                                            —20—



set   of skills    are   needed for success, it is possible for firms to use variOus
"signals" to assign a person to a particular job and then monitor his.performance
to determine whether to retain, promote or fire the person. The sorting model

suggeststhat the extra earnings from education need not be constant over time
even if his potential capacity is. This is especially true if Mayer and Lydall's
observations on span of control, capacity and hierarchical organization are
valid.
             While    firm learns of the individual's talents, the indivdaal
                     the
can also receive training and knowledge which Is specific to the firm.29
As shown in Becker (        j ) part of specific training shows up in higher wages
of the trainee. Specific training can         occur   in a   world without signalling.
But the chance to acquire or the capacity to benefit from specific training

may   be   related to position in the firm, which is dependent on signalling.
             The   sorting and signaling   models, which can be based on profit
maximizing behavior, would still imply that earnings depend on inherited
and acquired skills but the coefficients would have different interprettioflS
than in the Becker-Mincer model. The models also have different Implications
for the relationship between annual and life-time earnings since those who
are more skilled will always have above average earnings.


Taste for Risk and Nonpecuniary Rewards
          The models we have been examining explain earnings by differences in
skills. It is possible, hoever, to explain some features of the distribution
by differences in tastes towards work or nonpectiniary returns from work.

 Friedman (1    () for example, has suggested that skewness arises
                                                              30
                                                                   because while

 most persons are risk averse, some people are risk lovers.              Those in the




              29Several people including Arrow () and          Spence ('-1$) have examined
 signaling models.         Taubman and Wales have constructed a test for the use of
 education as a signal and have concluded that perhaps one-half of the educational
 earnings difference are due to increased producitivity produced by education
 and the ramaindcr is due to signaling on in their terminoi3 screening. In a
 sense the sorting model is implicit in some Markov schemes, but Wise has
 explicitly made use of such a sorting model to explain how earnings may vary
 with education. Reder has also suggested that the amounts and types of firm
                                                                     allocate
 specific training may vary by type of job while signals are used to
 people to initial jobs.

           0AlternativelY he has also suggested that people are risk averse to
 small changes but are willing to anble to achieve       gains.cor
                                   —21—


 latter group may initially choose an occuoatjon in which there is a small
 chance of a very high incce. Since success is not won
                                                           overnight, eventually
 we observe some of these who oucceed and
                                            over time the average earnings of
 the Winners grows ore than those who were risk averse. There is no
 corresponding group of people with large losses
                                                  because, as Lebergett (')
 points out, the inept (risk lover) generally can't raise enough financial
 capital as the succesful ore. Lebergett, in
                                               fact, presents some evidence
 that for the nonselfemployed the
                                   earnings distribution is nearly symmetric--
 though of course this needì not follow from the above model since there are
 some risky salaried occupations such as stock broker.

           Friedman's model is closely aligned with that of von Neumann Morgenste]
 in which a person bases his decisions on the expected value of the utility of a
 set of outcomes, defined asP u(Aj) where
                                                is the probability of the
 event occurring and U(Aj) is its utility. Consider two alternatives A and B
where A has only one possible outcome A1 and B a whole set but an average
outcome . Suppose A1 equals . Then
                                       it can be shown that if person has
diminishing marCinal utility he will attach more utility to and choose A. In
other words he is averse to risk.
                                   Alternatively if his marginal utility
exhibited increasing returns, he would be a risk lover and choose B in the
above example.
           Whilein principle it is possible to Conduct controlled experi-ents
in which people choose between various alternatives to try to determine a
person's utility function and degree of risk aversion, we do not have that
option. Instead we v-ill use a question dealing with preferences for employment
versus self-employment and desire for job security. Certain problems inherent
in the use of these questions will be discussed
                                                later, but one is important
enough to merit attention now. Most peoDle imPlicitly assume that an individual
who is risk averse in one activity such as managing his financial portfolio
will be risk averse in all activities (Friedman need not assume this since he
has the same individual as risk
                                averse and risk loving depending on the span
of the outcome). This is a very restrictive assumption that one suspects is
not true. The word"susoects" is used because most examples that come to mind
of apparent contradictions, e.g., college professors with conservative financial
portfolios engaged in risky research on the frontiers of knowledge, incorporate
opportunities as well as taste. In other words the exoected navoff from
                                                                         this
risky research nore than compensates for bur±n the    risk. Still the author
is uncomfortable
                 with a once risk averse, always risk averse model.
                                               —z-.

             The difference in average earnin's of th' risk
                                                                     averse and those
neutral towards risk can be thought of as a nonpecunarY reward,
                                                                 called peace

of mind, received by those who
                               dislike risk. There can be many other positive
                                  attached to jobs. Those rewards are important
and negative nonpecuniary rewards
                                                 distribution because non-
in our study of the determinants of the earnings
                                                                           rewards.31 The
pecuniary rewards can induce offsetting changes in monetary
                             nonpecufliary rewards can be treated in the general
choice between pecuniary and
                                                              that tastes or
framework of utility maximization. It is possible, hever,
the parameters of the utility function are partly determined by family back-
ground or by education in which case the          extra earnings attributed to say

education are inadequate as a measure
                                      of          the     total returns to education
                                                          32
     if tastes   are also included in the     equation.
         There    are also substantial problems in quantifying the trade—offs
                                                        The two   major   difficulties are
     between monetary and nonmonetarY returns.
                                            nonpecuniary returns are relevant and
     determining which of all possible
                                                            In the data set we are
     second measuring differences in preferences.
                                          nonpecuniarY rewards to examine and have
     using we haveonly a few possible

     not had to choose. Our measures are crude nd relate primarily to whether
                                                                         The
     a particular reward was operative at a time of occupational choice.
                                   with these measures are discussed in chapters
     many problems associated

Luck
                                               of Friedman, the above theories assume
             With the partial      exception
      earnings reflect individual differences in skills or
                                                                          tastes. Some
 that
                                              distribution at a point of time
 economists have suggested that the earnings
                                                   from an initial distribution
 reflects the cumulative history 0±' luck starting
                                                      of these theories can be expressed as:
 based on    skills. For example one version
                                                 t
 •               (6)         =      +   e=Y    +k=oek
                                    uncorrelated with                     and all other ekf S•
     where e is random erro that is

                                                               intrOspectlofl, some economists
                 3For    e:ple, reasoning fron pers-D:2l
     have explained t'nusly    the los; earnings (and rate of return on educational
     investment) for Ph.D.'S and theologians.

                 32
                      See for example            and McConnell, Trow      and yonge.L    iJ.
                                         —23—


In    these models      can be determined by skill levels but over time these

skills    should become less important determinants of earnings and the
distribution should approach that of er_k. Depending on certain assump-
tions   — including     if Y   is replaced by lnY — the stochastic theories
can    generate (    asymptotically)   lognormal, Pareto or other skewed to the

right earnings distributions.33 Below we will see if the implied

assumptions on the distribution of the growth in earnings are correct.

Also we will test the proposition that systematic determinants become less

important as people age.

III. The NBER Sample

        In this study our empirical work will be based primarily on the 5,100

men in the NBER—Th sample. In this chapter and associated appendices,

we will discuss the main features of the sample and give an overview of

the distribution of earnings in several years.34

        The sample was drawn from a group of some 75,000 men who during 1943

volunteered to enter the army air force's pilot, bombadier and navigator

training progam. The people in this group obviously had to meet the health

and physical requirements to be in the Army. Also according to Thorndike

and }lagen (TM) to enter this program, "a man first had to be single, be

between the ages of 18 and 26, pass a fairly rigorous physical examination,

and pass a screening aptitude tests the Aviation Cadet Qualifying Examination.


        33See Champernowe [    /0   ),Aitcheson and Brown[ .1   ),or   the excellent survey
of    Mincer [ 3.5 ].
        34Much of the descriptive material is drawn from Taubinan and        Wales,Chapter
4 and from B. Wolfe's unpublished dissertationEj15
                                        —24—

 This examination was primarily a scholastic
                                                  aptitude test, though perhaps
 with a slightly technical and mechanical slant. The qualifying score
                                                                      on
 the screening test was set at a level that could be reached by approximately

 half the high school graduates, the country over'.'35 The men who qualified

 and volunteered for the
                           program were then given a battery of some seventeen

 tests which measure various types of mental and physical skills. These

 test scores as well as certain biographical
                                                  information on hobbies and
 family background determined which of the men were accepted for the Air

 Cadet program.

      Thorndike and Hagen deáided in 1955 to undertake a study of the use-

 fulness of the seventeen tests in predic ting vocational success with the

hope of being able to aid the vocational
                                               counseling and choice of high
school students. They drew a sample of 17,000 men who had taken a given

battery of tests between July and December 1943.
                                                       Beginning in late 1955
nd throughout     1956, TH received responses from some 10,000 civilians

and 2,000 men still in the military. The
                                               questionnajr they used, which
is reproduced in Appendix B, contains among other things an earnings occupation

history from World War II to the date of the questionnaire. It is impor—

tant to note that because of their vocational
                                                   emphasis, much care and
attention was paid to assigning occupation codes.36

     In 1968 Taubman and Wales(TW) contacted
                                                  Professor Thorndjke and
learned that he had retained a printout of the test scores, earnings and

a few other items for 9,700 people who were civilians in 1955 and the


      Thorndjke and Flagen, [ L    ],   pp. 8 and 9.
    36See their description on pp.
                                      —25—

completed questionnaires for about 8,600 of these men. With the concurrence

of the air force, Professor Thorndike kindly agreed to make available

all this Information as well as the address list as of 1956.

    It was recognized almost immediately thatit was possible to update

addresses via army serial numbers and the V.A.'s life insurance and claims

file.37'38 Thus John Meyer an Thomas Juster of the NBER quickly agreed

to conduct another interview using Bureau funds. This questionnaire, which

is reproduced in    Appendix B, was eventually answered in 1969 and early
1970 by some 5,100 out of about 7,500 people for whom good addresses were

available.39 TW initially used the detailed information on education,

ability, family background, and personal characteristics from the two

surveys (   for   about 80 percent of. the men) to examine the rate of return

to education and the use of education as a screening (     signalling)   device.

     The respondents had been promised summaries of the results of

the questionnaire. When mailing these summaries in 1971, the NBER included

a short questionnaire to try to resolve some of the puzzles raised by TW

and others. Some 3,000 people responded to this one mailing. When funding

was received from the NSF for this project, another large questionnaire

dealing with more aspects of family background and other matters was sent

Out and was returned by 4,474 people.4° These last two questionnaires are

also given in Appendix B.

     37
       The V.A. graciously provided new addresses at no charge.
     38Additional updated were obtained by checking phone books of the city
of the last known address.
     39Initially we had felt that 2,500 responses would have qualified this
survey as a success.
     40
        The N.S.F. funds also enabled the NBER to extract more information from
the TI! questionnaire including the details on the job and earnings history.
                                  —26—

     In a moment the sample will be compared with the U.S. population of

the same cohort. But first we wish to note that TH found little in the

way of response bias in 1955 — perhaps because they employed expensive

means such as the Retail Credit Corporation —   to   locate men. Taubman

and Wales have shown that in 1969 the mentally more able and educated

were more likely to respond. However, TW also showed that there was

no significant difference in the 1955 earnings equations between those

who did and did not respond in 1969; thus, the data can be used for

structural analysis.

Sample Characteristics

     The qualifications needed to be a potential member of this sample

quarantee that the NBER—TH sample, will not be representative of the U.S.

male population of the same age. About one quarter of the men fall

into each of the categories of high school graduate, some college,

bachelors degree, and at least some graduate work.42 Also a person

had to be in the top one half of the I.Q. distribution to enter this

program and the average ability level has been heightened by the af ore—

mentioned response bias.

     The average age in 1943 was 21 with three quarters of the men aged

19—22. At least in 1943, the programs' qualifications assure us there

men were, on average, in better mental and physical health than the U.S.


     41For the post 1969 questionnaires we have adopted the practice of in—
cluding a "no response" dummy variable. Since this tends to be significant
over time the more successful are continusing to respond more.
     42
        This is a much better level of education than among World War II
veterans — even if we restrict ourselves to high school graduates. See
Miller [3L/
                                 —27--


male population aged 18 to 26. Given that these men volunteered to train

for flight duty, it seems likely that they areless risk wverse than the

population as a whole, which may be a partial explanation of the high

percentage of people who are self employed in l969. We do not know

how many nonwhites if any are in the sample though the education and

test aptitude qualifications suggests to us that whites probably make

up 99 percent of the group.44

     In her dissertation B. Wolfe has compared this sample and the

corresponding U.S. age cohort of white males on a number of characteristics.

She finds a higher percentage of ews and smaller percentage of Catholics

in this sample. The aen in this sample have fathers with above average

education ( and occupational status) and father—in—laws with even higher

educational attainment. Also the people in this sample have above eaverage

earnings in each year studied , even if the comparison is made with white

males of the same education and age with the differentials greater at

a later age and at lower levels of education C where the sample is less

representative of the population. See below, or T.W., chapter 4).

     It is of some interest to compare the earnings inequality in this

sample with that of the random sample of white males aged 45—59 (in 1966)


     43The high percentage may also be due to the availability of V.A.
guaranteed loans, better financial position of parents and in—laws, or
business competence.
     44However, several of the highest ranking black Air Force generals in
1972 were in the Air Cadet program in World War II.
                                           —28—

 studied by Kohen, Parries and Shea        [         They find   for   example that
 the share         of total family income received Li 1968 by the bottom 2c,50

 75 and 95% is 14,35,62, and 89%
                                         respectivLLy. In the NBER—TH sample each

 of the corresponding figures are smaller by 5 to 6 percentage points.

 Thus despite having a more restricted         ran   1n mental ability, education
 and    risk   aversion, the NBER—TH sample has cicre   inequality in family
 income than a nationwide cohort of about the same
                                                   age. This result
 may    be due to the heavier concentration of self employed in NBER—TH or
 to    the heavier concentration of people in the:    NBER—TH in the right hand
 tail   of the earnings distribution.

        Clearly      the sample is not representative of the U.S. population and
in    the case of education and I.Q.. does not have any members of a large

portion    of the population. Moreover some of the dimensions in which
it
                                                                                 -


      is nonrandom will be hown to be related to earnings. The nonrepresentative—
ness    and truncation of some variables will mean that the distrjbjton of

earnings should not correspond to that for the U.S. population. Still

the sample can be thought of as a random stratified
                                                            sample in which the
weights      for various strata do not correspond to the population weights.45

It is well known that such
                                  unequa1 weighting will not affect the unbiasedriess

of coefficients estimated from the data.          Thus we can use this sample to study
the effects of education, ability,
                                          etc. on various aspects of inequality.
We can      not,   however, extrapolate the results to those levels of education

       45
       The reader is reminded that TW
                                      rejected the hypothesis of a success
bias over and above the
                        response bias by education and           ability
                                                               level.
                                     —29—

and ability not included in our sample. And as noted above measures of

inequality, such as variance, should not be the same as in the population.

However, such inequality measures calculated within education and ability

groups or the changes in the measures over time can apply to the population.

IV. A Summary of the Determinants of Earnings at Various Points of Time

     This section is designed to summarize the results of earnings equations

for 1955 and 1969, presented in the appendix, by comparing the relative

importance of various variables both at a point of time and over time.

It is important to realize that we are discussing partial regression

coefficients in which all other variables in the equations in the

appendix   have been held castant.
     In examining these results he reader is reminded that our underlying
theoretical model is that pecuniary and nonpecuniary rewards depend on
a person's marginal   productivity. The various skills and talents that

determine   productivity as well as tastes towards risk   and nonpecuniary

rewards are partly inherited and partly     acquired from schools, friends,
family, etc. We would like to determine both the skills or processes that

   determine earnings and their relative importance. We also wish to

quantity the trade of fs between monetary and nonmonetary earnings.

     Several measures of importance can be used. In this section we

will be primarily concerned with those related to the range and the

variance in earnings. Later we will consider issues connected with

skewness and kurtosis. An obvious measure of importance is the R2
                                       —30—

 or the amount of the varianceexplained
                                              by the set of variables.46 Of
 course the R2 in our sample may not generalize to the U.S. population

 because our sample is truncated in
                                        educati arid ability and is drawn more
 heavily from some strata than others. S1.nc we do not know all respects

 in which this sample differs from the U.S. Population nor how to
                                                                  extrapolate
 the results to the truncated
                              portion of the population, we will not try
 to calculate a weighted R2. Many of these problems are less severe

 when we compare total or partial R2's for the same people but in different

 years.

      The variance explained by a set of independent variables combines

 two elements —   the   predicted value of the dependent
                                                           variables, Y1, as
compared to the mean of Y, and the number of
                                                   times each Y1 occurs. An
alternative measure of importance is the .difference In the average leyel

of earnings, Y1—?2, caused by a set of variables. This range measure is

related to the Y—Y portion of the variance but does not indicate how
                                                                     many
people are at each y1

     For ease of exposition, we will discuss the 1955
                                                      and 1969 resulti
for one variable at a time. Unless
                                        otherwise noted, these results are
drawn from equations in which many other variables have been included.


          is well known that it is difficult to measure the contribution of
one variable versus another to the total R2 when the independent variables
are not orthogonal.

     47However, the range and variance only indicates the direct effect
of a variable. There can also be indirect
Income can determine educational attainment.effects, for example, parental
                                    —31—

The variables which have been held constant include: education, mathematical

ability, various measures of socioeconomic background of the respondent

and of his wife, information on self employment and on teaching, a crude

measure of risk preference, age, and work experience, health, hours worked

marital status, and attitudes towards noripecuniary rewards. We never

explain more than 45% of the variance in earnings. Some of the unexplained

variance must be due to unmeasured but systematic variables. The coefficients

of any included variables will be biased if it is correlated with any
                                              48
omitted variable which determines earnings.

        Because of computer capacity limitations, we were forced to drop

some variables which were consistently nonsignificant in preliminary

runs. In the equations presented,, therefore, all the variables are

either significant in one or more years or were significant in either

the next to the last runs or in the Taubman—Wales (TW) equations from

which this analysis commenced. When we cite coefficients for variables

not in the last equation, the numbers are taken from the most complete

versions of the final equations in which the variable appeared.

Formal Education

        Formal schooling can affect physical, cognitive, psychological,

and affective skills.49 It would greatly increase our understandinL of

        48
       Formally, if the true equation is Y = Xci + ZtS + u where u is a random
variable, the expected value of the ordinary leat suares estimate of 5
obtained when Z is omitted, is : E(a) = 6 + E(X X) XZ 6 = ci + 6.       is equal
to the coefficient in Z = XB. The bias is 6 which is zero only if       or 6 is
zero.

     49See, e.g., Simon and Ellison[ '1k), or Yonge, McConnell et alt ).J
for some evidence on the noncognitive developments.
                                         Table      1

                 The Increase in Earnings from
                                                 Education in 1955 and 1969




rcentage Increase from
                                                         Time Period
ucation for Average High
hool Graduate, Not Self
ployed, if Obtained and
                                                   1955       1968      1969
:ended the Quality of
lege of the Average                                Average    Average   Average
son with Just Some Col1ee.                         Age 33     Age 46    Age 47

         Some College                              05%        08%       08%
         Bachelors Degree                         liZ         25%       20%
         Some Graduate
                                                  08%         22%       18%
         Masters Degree                           06%        23%        29%
         Ph.D.
                                                  13%        32%        43
         L.L.B-                                   06%                   53%
      M.D4                                        71%                   82%


      Source: Equation 2 in Table

             In equation     this variable was also included, in Ph.D. group.
      Moreover these are salaried people only.
     *     Not S1gnificjan at the 5% level.

     The variables in tle  equation which have been held constant include:
     education, mathematical ability, various measures of Socioeconomic back-
     ground of the respondent and of his wife; information on self
     and on teaching; a crude measure of risk preference,           empJoyment
                                                          age and  work experejence
     health, hours worked, marital status, and attitudes towards
     rewards.                                                    nonpecuniary
                                    —32—

how and schooling does if we would identify the particular skills that

affect earnings and measure the change in all skills produced by schooling.

But since we do not have such measures nor even knowall skills which

should be measured, we will have to be satisfied with crude measures

of quantity and quality of schooling.

     We represent quantity by level of education obtained. We use dummy

variables for various responses. Earnings in 1969 generally increase with

education. But despite our having included variables to hold constant

nonpecuniary rewards including those associated with pre college teaching,

risk preference, and self employment, those with just a bachelors degree

earn more than those with some graduate work. As shown in table 1 the

increase in earnings from education for the average high school graduate

ranges from 8 percent for some college to 82 percent for non self employed

M.D.'s with bachelors degree holders receiving 20 percent more.50'51 (We

have standardized by the average non self employed high school graduate's

earnings of $10,300).

     Essentially the same percentage increases are obtained from equations

using the log of earnings. If we adopt Mincer's model [(     ], these   percentage


     50These   calculations assume that all post high school graduates attend
a college of   the average quality of people who had only had some college.
The quantity   effects are slightly larger when quality is omitted, but never
by more than   $200.
     511f self employment variables were not included the increases would
be: 14 percent for some college; 28 percent for bachelors; 80 percent for
L.L.B., and 110 percent for M.D.'s. These increases are less than those
given in TW primarily because of the introduction of self employment variables
though the graduate level coefficients were much smaller before we introduced
some variables related to nonpecuniary returns.
                                    —33—

 changes divided by the associated number of years of education beyond

 high school are an estimate of the rate of return from education which

 is less than 6 percent at all education levels.

      In 1955 the same general pattern
                                         emerges except that the effects of
 education are uniforinally smaller —   for   example, obtaining a bachelors
 degree or some college would add 11 and 5 percent more to the $6,000

 (1958 prices) received by the average non self employed high school graduate —

 and not always statistically significant.
                                                However, our self employment
 variables are onlymeasured in 1969. The resulting measurement error has

probably caused us to overstate the relative
                                                  returns to education of the
not self employed in 1955.52

      The total effect of education may be understated if one of the mechanisms

by which education alters earnings is measured after the completion of

education and is also included in our equations. One such route would

be the Occupation the person was in.     The variables on occupation we have
used in these equations are teacher, self
                                               employed businessman, and professional,
and business assets. The teacher variable is included because we felt

that teachers reteive more nonpecuniary rewards as a substitute for
                                                                    earnings
than is received in other occupations.53 The various self employment

measures are designed to eliminate all of the return on financial capital

included in the earnings estimate; rewards
                                               for bearing the extra risk of


            the self employment information is omitted the 1955 differentials
are: some college 11 percent; bachelors
and M.D. 82 percent, which                degree 14 percent; L.L.B. 14 percent
                           are very close to those given in T.W. If we
adopt Mincer's interpretation of the log equation, our estimates of the
rate of return to education are less than
                                           5 percent ( except M.D.).
     53However, the variable could mean that on some unmeasured
                                                                 aspect of
the ability, teachers are less able.
                                     — 34-.


entrepreneurship; and   perhaps   unmeasured attributes that lead to being

a successful businessman. However, it is possible that these measures

have incorporated some of the influences of education. If these variables

were not included, the bachelors, some college and masters degree

coefficients would all be smaller.

     It is also possible that a person's tastes for nonpecuniary rewards

or risk bearing are partially formed by education. The inclusion of

the so called nonpecuniary variables caused the some college and bachelors

level coefficients to decrease and the graduate level coefficients to

increase in both years.

College Quality

     As a crude measure of college quality, we have included for each

person's undergraduate school the Gourmari Index ( of Academic Quality)

which is described in more detail in chapter 4 in [/iJ. Because the

index is scaled arbitrarily, we initially included it and its square

in the equations. Since these two terms together are never significant

and do not explain more of the variance of earnings than the linear term,

we use only the linear term.

     In 1969 we find that attendance at a school that ranked 100 points

( the standard deviation) higher in the index is associated with a $450

increase in earnings. After our usual standardizing, the effect of the

100 point difference in college quality of 4½% is about half the size

of the effect of obtaining some college. In 1955 a 100 point increase

in undergraduate school quality leads tc      $140 increase in earnings or

2j after standardization. Once again this is about half the size of
                               Table   •2


                Increase in Earnings in 1955 and 1969 from
                           Ability Differences



Percentage Change in
Earnings from Ability
(Bottom 1/5 to 1/5th
Shown Divided by the                             Time Period
Nbt Self Employed
High School Graduates
                                       1955              1969
Average Earnings)
                                       Average           Average
                                       Age 33            Age 47


2nd 1/5th                               05%*                 05%

3rd 1/5th                               05%                  07%      :,

4th 1/5th                               09%              14%

top 1/5th                              14%               19%



* Not   significant at the 5% level.


The variables in th e equation which have been held constant include:
education, mathematical ability, various measures of socioeconomic back—
ground of the respondent and of his wife; information on self employment
and on teaching; a crude measure of risk preference, age and work experience,
health, hours woked, marital status, and attitudes towards nonpecuniary
rewa rds.
                                  —35—

the coefficient on the some college variable.

     It is interesting to note that the introduction of the quality

variable causes a 5% to 10% reduction in the coefficients of the Jewish,

year of first job, attendance at private high school arid attendance

at private elementary school variables as well as a 10% increase in the

pre college teacher dummy in 1969 and smaller changes in 1955. These

shifts are indicative of the fact that college quality can be both determined

by ( or correlated with) and act as a proxy for other personal attributes

that determine earnings. The quality index may still be acting as a

prxoy for unmeasured attributes but we would hnpe that it in part

measures the extra value added imparted by better schools.

     The quality index used is ob,viously not the only one possible but

we have not studied this problem in detail since it is the focus of the

work of Wales [ 5, and especially of Solmon     I 3].
Mental Ability

     In TW it was found that the seventeen tests taken by the people

in 1943 contained at least four factors, but only the first factor which

was denoted mathematical ability but which probably correlates well with

a standard I.Q. measure, was a significant determinant of earnings.54

     In both 1969 and 1955 we tested for an interaction between mental

ability and all other variables by computing separate equations within

each ability fifth. Using analysis of covariance, we could not reject

the hypothesis that the effects of all variables, including education,

were independent of the level of ability in each year.


     54No attempt was made here to reinvestigate the usefulness of the other
factors. Since we convert the test score data into dummy variables for the
different fifths of the factor score distribution, we are assuming that post
test taking events C not otherwise measured) do not change the fifths of
the ability distribution a person would belong to in each of the paricular
years studied.
                                   —36—

      In both 1955 and 1969 as shown in table 2 the coefficients on each

 of the top four fifths are significant. These coefficients are not

 sensitive to the inclusion of the self employment related variables.55

 The effectsof each fifth increase in ability adds a greater percentage

 to earnings in 1969 than in 1955, with the differences more pronounced

 in the top two ability fifths.

      The numbers in Table 2, which are divided by the average earnings

of the not self employed highhool graduate, can be compared directly

with those in table 1.   Thus the average difference in earnings between

those in the top and bottom fifths of ability ( 14 and 19% in the two

years) exceeds the effect of obtaining a bachelors degree in 1955 and

is nearly as large in 1969.

      A person's test scores generally depend on his innate ability, the

quality and quantity of pre test schooling, and differences in other

aspects of "environment." Often we would like to know what portion of

test scores ( and associated earnings) are due to genetics and to

environment. Suppose that the measures of religion, parent's and own

educational attainment, occupation, and income etc., included in our

earnings are the only environmental differences that determine test scores,

then ability coefficients in the earnings equation would be net of the

environmental influences.56 Of course, if other aspects of environment


     55Since people had to be in the top one half of the ACGT to be
able to volunteer for the program, these fifths are more like tenths.
     561f this true equation is Y = a ( innate ability) + bX but we estimate
Y = a*(innate ability + CX) + b*X,, then our least squares estimate of a*
and b* are identical to those for a and L — ac.
                                  —37—

affect test scores, the ability coefficient will still be a mixture. We

examined the genetic! environmental problem in [/L7] and conclude that

in the tests we are using most of the variation in scores is due to genetic

differences( or other nonmeasured dimensions of environemnt). This

finding in no way tells us innate ability is more important than learned

knowledge since we have not examined the effects of various types of

learned knowledge on earnings.

     Since the sample only includes the top half of the I.Q. distribution,

it seems safe to conclude that ability is a more important direct

determinant of the range of earnings than education for those who are

at least high school graduates. Even when self employment information

is not used, the same conclusions. are reached though the differences are

smaller.

Family Background

     An individual's "socioeconomic background" can determine earnings

for a variety of reasons including being a prnxy for : genetic endowments;

differences in "training" which increase cognitive, affective, physical

and nonpecuniary rewards; and business contacts, "pull" and nepotism.

     The measures of family background we have analyzed include: father's

education and occupation; mother's education and labor force participation;

wife's education and her parent's education and occupation; various data

related to family income, wealth, and size while the respondent was growing
                                   Table.-3

                         Increase in 1955 and 1969 Earnings Associated

                               'with Various Socioeconomic Measures



Percentage Increasein
Earnings compared earnings
of the average, non self
employed high school                           1955                       1969
graduate, from differences                     Average                    Average
in various SES characteristics                 Age 33                     Age 47


Father's Education
Attended High School                           6%*                        7%*
Attended College                               4 %*

Father's Occupation
Business Owner                                 2%*                        5%*
Teacher                                                                   —8Z*
Mother's Education
Attended High School                           3%*                        3%*
At tended College                              2%*




Family Never Moved before H.S. Grad.           —l *
Jewish                                         33%                        40%
Protestant                                                               —9%

Religious School Several Times/wk.             —9%                       —11%
Never Went to Religious School                                           _3%*

Biog   2nd   Fifth and
Biog   3rd   Fifth                              4%                       .05%
Biog   4th   Fifth and
Biog   Top   Fifth                             11%                       08%*
                                      Table   3 (conti'd)




                                              Percentage Change in Earnings
SES Characteristics                             1955             1969


Father—in—law Education(per year)               1%                   iz
Mother—in—law High School or College          1Z*                    6%

Private Elementary School                      4%*                   27*
Private High School                            25%                   29%




Time Spent on Sports—                           4%*                  10%
             "   " Choress:                                          —10%
        'I        Hobbies                        3%*                 .6%*
U       It       H Part-Time   Job'             5%                   11%



* Not   significant at the 5 percent level.

    Difference between spent most time and      hardly   any time.


The variables in this equation which have been held constant include:
education, mathematical ability, various measures of socioeconomic back-
ground of the respondent and of his wife; information on self employment
and on teaching; a crude measure of risk preference, age and work experience,
health, hpurs worked, marital status, and attitudes towards nonpecuniary
rewards.
                                  —38—

up; how the respondent spent his time while growing up, age at entering

school and religious preference.57

     In TW the two measures of SES used were father's education and the

so called biography variable. This biography variable Is based on the

respondent's family income and education, his hobbies, sports and interests,

and his pre test education and gradee as reported in 1943.58 The weights

of this index are based on how well the items predicted success in

pilot and navigator school.

     It was, of course, a bit frustrating that a variable made up of so

many disparate items with unknown contributions determined earnings. Thus

we are happy to report that Inclusion of information collected in 1969

and 1972 similar to that collectad in 1943 has substantially reduced tle

size of the biography coefficients, but the top 2 fifths are still sig-

nificant and the coefficients are monotonic. It is interesting to note

that the big shift in the 1969 and 1955 coefficients occurred only after

we included information on tastes towards nonpecuniary rewards and a

proxy for family wealth, implying that these are the components in the

biography variable that influenced earnings.    The differences between

the top2 and the bottom fifth are 11% and 8% in 1955 and 1969. This is


     57mis is a wider list than that used in most previous studies, and
some of the variables require justification as SES measures but almost
all of these variables are significant in 1969 and 1955. Several of the
variables have been used at one time or another by others; see,'for example,
Blau and Duncan [
     58
                     ), and Sewell et al [ J.. ].
       The original items, which were collected by the military, are not
extant though much information has been recollected in 1969 and 1972.
                                   —39--


one of the few variables that has a smaller percentage affect in 1969.

      Additionally, the effects of father's education are reduced to

insignificance in both 1969 and 1955. Part of the reduction of the

importance of this variable occurs when the father is an owner variable

is introduced. But the reduction in the size and significance of the

coefficient is primarily associated with the introduction of the respondent's

business asset variables. Since this variable is not often used in other

studies, there is a suggestion that fatherTs education is a proxy for

family   wealth and business ownership.
      There are other SES variables which are significant. Perhaps
the   most interesting of the new measures are the Jewish and Protestant

variables.59 Compared to Catholics, (as well as aetheists, agnostics and

others who all earn about the same amount In the various years), Jews

received from 33 to 40 percent more earnings than the average high school

graduate and Protestants from 3 to 9 percent less.6° The reader is reminded


       50
       In 1969 the respondents were asked to indicate their religious
preference by checking one of Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, None, Other.
It is possible that different answers would have been obtained if "the
religion you were raised in" was asked. Compared to the U.S. white population
the NBER—TH had 1.7 percent more of both Jews and others and 5 percent fewer
Catholics. However, the differences from white males in the particular
cohorts who were at least high school graduates would probably be smaller.
     601f self employment and M.D. are not held constant, Jews earn even
more. The asset variable is measured imperfectly, but it is difficult
to attr[bute a difference of $4,000 a year to this. There are relatively
few aetheists and agnostics and others.
                                   —40—

 that these differences are not of the influence of education(
                                                                 including

M.D.) mental ability, self employment, and various other personal attributes

and family SES dimensions.61

     At least for the generation being discussed, it seems likely that

those who are Jewish had more of a taste for acquiring knowledge and

as shown in chpter     achieve more education and go to better schools,
                                        62
given ability and other SES measures.        Hence for given levels of

schooling and mental ability in 1943, Jews may have acquired more

knowledge useful in earning a living.

     We cannot, however, rule out the possibility that some unmeasured

genetically determined characteristics are related to religion. Unfor-

tunately, since we do not know whTat nonmeasured attributes are important

determinants of earnings, we cannot usefully examine the genetics literature

to see what if any differences exist by religion.


          a study of college graduates of the first half of this century,
Hunt [ZO] also found similar qualitative results. Also using the same
basic data source as Hunt, Haverman and Wes.t [17] found that being Jewish
was the most important determinant of earnings of people who graduate college
in the first half of this century. Featherman I i5 j also found Jews to
earn more and some Catholics, such as French, to earn more than the average
Protestants. Both the Hunt and Featherman studies hold constant education
and mental ability as well as other variables.
     62
       For example, Bruce Eckland, Academic Ability, Higher Education and
                                   ,,



Occupational Mobility" American Sociological Review , 1965, pp. 735—746
finds that for given test scores and social class, Jews go to higher
quality institutions for learning. This would Indicate either hIghr tastes
for education, more motivation and drive, or lower costs relative to returns.
He also finds certain ethnic groups of Catholics to do better than the
average Protestants. Given the education cutoff to be in the program,
it seems likely that our Catholics come heavily from these successful
ethnic groups.
                                        —41—

      We also cann,t rule out the possibility that the Jews and other

nonProtesl:ants are a more select group of their respective populations.

However, given th nature of the Air Force work they volunteered for,

it might be argued that     those   who volunteered could include more people

who wanted to gain revenge on Germany or to inflict destruction in large

doses quickly. But the revenge motive would seem to suggest that Jews

and to a lesser extent Catholics would be a more random (less select)

group of their religious compatriots.

      That religious upbringing or the different environment in families

or various religions can mold the individual receives some further support

in the sample. That is, we find that those wbo remembered attending

religious classes (   not   parochial- school) several times a week earn 9

to 11% less than those who attended once or twice while those who did

not attend earn 1 to 4% less.

      Another set of variables which reflect both the type of family and

affective, physical and cognitive, and psychological attitudes that can

be formed by the family and peer group is contained in the question (aked

in 1972) of "   indicate    how you spent your time while growing up".63 The

categories examined were sports, hobbies, chores, part time job, reading

and   other.   The last two groups were never significant and will not be

discussed here except to note that reading is related to the ability measure

and educational attainment. The remaining categories were significant in


           is for practically no time spent and 5 is for the most time spent.
                                    —42—

1969 but only part time job was significant in 1955. The difference in

earnings of those who spent prctLcally no time and the most time on

part time jobs is 5% and 11% Lu 1955 and 1969. It seems likely that

the men who came from poor fainLLles needed money for themselves and!

or valued financial success greatly. Thus these men would be willing

to work hard and apparently have succeeded with success being cumulative

over tune.64

        In 1955 and 1969 those who spent much time on sports while growing

up, earn 4 and 10% more than those who spent practically no time.65

Several explanations of this result are available. First, activity in

sports may show up in later life as better physical fitness and as

shown below healthiness is related to earnings.    (   in   this explanation

1955 has a smaller impact because of less health deterioration at that

age). Second, most sports involve both a competitive and cooperative

structure which are also found in many work situations. That is, a

boy's play is training for the man's work. Third, activity in sports

may be indicative of energy and aggresiveness that pays off in the

business world.66 Finally, there is some indication in Thorndike and Ilagen


     641f we are right about the type of families these men came from,
I would expect them to have a high rate of time preference , and less
access to capital early in their lives; thus, I would find it hard to
interpret the growth in earnings over time to an investment theory as in
Mincer.
          is doubtful that this result is due to people becoming professional
atheletes since it was primarily baseball players who were highly paid
then ( and Ted Williams was in the Marines) and the sports which recruit
from college graduates would have had to gamble on rookies aged 25 or
more.
     66Related to this last viewpoint is the idea that people who play
sports may be more able to make decisions quickly. If intellectualism
Is taken as evidence of the opposite personality, it is interesting that
the Phi Beta Kappas among top management earn substantially less than
other people. See Taubman—Wales[, ] appendix on Liewelen.
                                  —43—

that in 1955 that sports distinguishes company presidents and vice presidents

from treasurers. This suggests that sports itt the 1920's and 1930's was

an indicator of family wealth and availability of leisure time, or an

indicator of attitudes such as risk taking.

     The hobby variable has practically no effect in 1955 but in 1969

those who spent the most time on hobbies received 6% less which is

significant at the 10% level in the final equation. The:znost obvious

explanation for this finding is thatmany though not all hobbies represented

the opposite of sports and that the effects should be reversed.

     The last and perhaps most difficult of these to explain is the chore

result. Those who spent much time on chores earn 3 and 10% less in

1955 and 1969 with the former not.. significant. Initially I had expected

chores to be a proxy for "willingness to take on responsibility" and to

have a positive effect. Merton(3J however, argues that families who

insist on their children doing chores are lower middle class and are

very interested in conformity. He further argues that these families

will produce "tame" individuals who make the Ideal bureaucrat and who

receive less earnings than people In riskier jobs ( see below). I might

add that Merton only refers to one piece of empirical evidence which,

he acknowledges, is not very compelling.

     As might be expected time spent on chores and on part time job

are positively correlated (R2 = .13) but the differences in emphasis

of paid and family work reflect different types of environment and

different types of men.
                                   —44—

      Thus far we have included SES measures which are strongly related

to family upbringing and taste formation. Parental income or wealth

can also influence a child's earnings by being used to purchase goods

that produce marketable skills, by being a proxy for nepotism, or by

being a proxy for genetically determined skills.

      One possible proxy for family income is father's education, which

we have already indicated is not significant once business assets are

included in the equation. Another possible proxy is father's occupation

but this also does not explain directly much of the differences in

earnings, with the other variables held constant. There are, however,

several caveats that must be attached to this conclusion. First father's

occupation, ( and resulting income) has an indirect effect on earnings

through the amount of schooling the respondent receives. Second and more

importantly, father being an owner is significant when the self employment

variables are not included. Third, in 1968 father's occupation and education

have a much greater impact on the range in family income than on earnings      4




of   the head. This suggests that income inequality is perpetuated through

generations directly through financial inheritance( including business

assets) and indirectly through educational attainment. The biography

variable also includes some parental wealth indicators though it's not

clear what aspects of the variable determine earnings.

      Two extremely important determinants of earnings which appear to

be proxiesfor large amounts of parental wealth, are type of elementary

and of high school attended. Those who went to private elementary school
                                    —45—

earned 13% more than those who attended public or parochial schools

or a combination of schools.   (   The difference is divided by the earnings

                                            of high school as is done
of the average nonself employed graduate

with the variables). The coefficient on private high school is positive

but not significant, probably because 22 of the 29 people who went

to private elementary school went to private high school. Thus the

elementary school coefficients only measures the extra earnings above

private high school. Those who attended both private elementary and

high school in 1955 earn 29% more than those who always went to public

schools. In 1969 those who went to private elementary and private high

school earn 56% more than those who didn't go to private school.

      Since private schooling is both different from and more costly

                                            schooling, it might be argued
 to the respondent's parents than public
                                           differentials. But if this
 that these results are due to quality

 argument is accepted, it is difficult to explain why in chapter

 neither type of private school is significantly related to our ability

 measure, which contains some learned knowledge.

      Our explanation is that those who went to private elementary schools

 in the 1920's came from very wealthy families, who provide a good home

 environment and/or genes or who used pull to aid their sons. The pull

 argument seems to be the most likely since the variable is primarily

 a proxy for large amounts of weath.67


       67lndeed when we include a crude measure of net worth in our equations,
  the private school variables become insignificant and much smaller.
                                         —46—

       We are still left with explaining the change in the coefficient bet-

ween 1955 and 1969.        I would argue that a screening sorting explanation

 C   as in chapter    )   is   relevant since even if nepotism is involved, you

want to see how good the person is before you give him an important job,

 though of course a person can probably become vice president quicker if

his father owns the company.68

       Another interesting finding in our equations that suggests nepotism

is that father—in--law's education, measured continuously in years, is a

significant determinant of the respondent's earng in both 1955 and 1969.69

A primary explanation of these results is that business and social contacts

provided by father—in—law are important. But there can be other explanations.

For examples daughters from good--social backgrounds may have the necessary

graces —   not   learned in school —    which help to promote their husband.

Alternatively, women ith successful fathers may be able to spot and marry

men with those characteristics that made for their father's success, or

push their husbands into achieving success.

       Interestingly4 mother—in—law's education also is positively relate

to earnings in 1969 with the high school variable somewhat greater than

the college variahle though the two are combined in the final equation.

This finding makes ft less likely that women are marrying men who are

like   their fathers and suggests nepotism.

       681n Liewelen's    sample of top corporate management, the men who can
be identified as related to the family who founded or have controlling interest
in 50 or the 70 largest industrial corporations are ( the
                                                           same age as/younger)
than the other people in the same or comparable positions.
        Thummyvariables br father—in—law's occupation and spouse's education
are not, significant.
                            Table



           Age, Experience, and Hours Worked



                                      1955          1969
  Coefficients on

                                      .08           —.11
Age
Year of first full time job          —.11           —.15
                                                •
Hours worked, first job, 1969         .0l             .07
Hours worked, second job, 1969       —.03           —.12
Weeks lost Illness, 1969                            —.18




* Not significant at the 5% level.



The variables in this equation which hav been held constant include:
education, mathematical ability, various measures of socioeconomic back-
ground of the respondent and of his wife; information on self employment
and on teaching; a crude measure of risk preference, age and work experience,
health, hours worked, marital status, and attitudes toward nonpecuniary
rewards.




                    I
                                   —47—

     The other dimensions of SES we have tried but found to be insignificant

include: whether the respondent was the youngest or oldest sibling,

additional crude proxies for family wealth based on type of house, the

labor force status of the respondent's niother when the respondent was

less than 5 arid less than 14 years old; being reared on a farm; size of

city or town he grew up in; the region of the country in which raised,

and age at time of entry into school. These variables may be insignificant

because they are too crude proxies for the underlying mechanism being

sought.

     Thus far we have been concerned with the effects of individual aspects

of SES on earnings. Except for religion none of these has an impact

as large as ability or education'on the range of earnings in 1955 or 1969.

But it is possible for a person to fall into the top or the bottom category

of all SES measures. Using the significant coefficients only, the average

differences in earnings for such "extremists" would total about $14,000

or 140 percent or the average earnings of the not self employed high school

graduate in 1969 and $5,500 or 90 percent in 1955 and far exceed the

direct effect of ability or education on earnings.70

Maturation and Work Experience

     A well—known and docuniented result is that (real) earnings increase

with age till at least age 40. While we do not have data for all ages,

the results for 1955 and 1969 certainly are in accord with this finding.


     70m1s onky includes items in table 3, business assets and some other
variables may be partly determined by SES.
                                  —48—

The general explanations for the upward sloping age earnings profiles

are (1) as people age, mental and physical maturation increases those

skills that determine earnings,(2)work experience and learning by doing

Increase earnings related skills,(3) people are promoted on the basis

of performance on the job and/or seniority ,(4) beyond a certain age

senescence sets in or skills depreciate.71

     Without distinguishing for the moment type of work experience, time

on the job can be represented as TJ      (Age —   Year of First Job — H)

where H represents such things as time not working because of illness,

unemployment and departures from the normal period of time to complete

a given level of schooling. If maturation is important than age should

have a separate effect from TJ. -.

     Both age and year of first job are significiant in 1969 though
apparently senescence or depre ation has set in since age in table 4

is negative, but the separate age effectis nearly zero in 1955. The

year of first job coefficient can be treated as the negative of the

experience coefficient. Thus contrary to most findings the absolute

value of the experience coefficient is greater later in life, i.e., the

function from 1955 to 1969 is not concave, even though we have deflated

by the CPI. However, between 1955 and 1969 the effect of years exper.ence

has only risen about 50% which is less than the percentage increase in

 average earnings of nonself employed high school graduates or people with


      71
        It is also possible that age is a proxy for particular cohorts. While
 most people are within 7 years of one another, the youngest people did not
 begin work till after serving in the military while many of the older
 people began work before World War II.
                                      —49—

any other education level. That experience is more important than maturity

in 1955 is not surprising given the evidence in Mincer. It is somewhat

surprising to find large senescence effects in 1969 since the discussion

in BloomLZisuggests little changes in intelligence and other skills before

age 50 and since weeks lost through illness have been held constant.72

However, the results may also be due to discrimination an account of age

for those who were fired in 1968 or 1969.

     To try to refine the work experience measure, we included information

on military service after initial discharge, and type of work experience.

We find that the additional military experience data do not explain

Earnings, perhaps because military experience is a good substitute for

civilian experience or because, contrary to the above, experience on the

job is not important. In [ LI 7   ]   we find that the earlier people enter

into high paying occupations, the more they earn in 1969 and that some

1955 jobs are better preparntions than others, depending on one's 1969

occupation. These results suggest that some some training is not general

and that some people were in wrong jobs in 1955 if they wanted to maximize
                           73
their lifetime earnings.

     Earnings depend on houriy wages rates and hours worked. Unless

there is a backward bending supply curve of labor, higher wage rates

will lead to greater hours worked and more earnings.74 In 1969 each


            we have not included those with zero earnings which would include
those (if any) retired or unemployed or mental or physical health reasons.
     73
       The ranking of occupations is about the same in all years; hence, if
you are going to be a manager in 1969, you should choose to be one earlier if
you have the option.
     74Earnings = WH.  Earnings/aW=H(1+c) where a=W3H/HaW. While this
is the usual way of viewing the problem, our equations relate Earnings to H.
aEarnings/H=W(1+1/a). With backward bending supply curves,a might be negative.
                                 —50—

additional hour per week on the first job adds $70 to annual earnings.75

If we use an average hourly wage rate per week of $350, i.e., $l4,000/2,000

hrs. times 40 hours per week, we would estimate a in the footnote as about

—1.2. Each additional hour on the second job is associated with a $120

decrease in earnings apparently because some of those people with low

wages rates want higher material standards.76 Thus both results, which

rely on perhaps erroneous estimates of hours suggests that the supply curve

has some backward bending sections.

     Despite the fact that the hours data refer to 1969, we included them

in 1955. The hours on second job are still significantly negative whi]e

the hours on first job have become negative and insignificant. It appears

that moonlighters work hard over long periods of time since hcurs on

second job is negatively related to recalled estimates of initial earnings

and to wife's working in 1968.

     Weeks lost through illness in 1969 has a negative impact on 1969

and 1955 but only the 1969 coefficient is significant. The $180 per week

lost would indicate a $9,000 a year job if the figures exclude paid sick

leave, but we have no way of knowing if th is is how the question was inter-

preted. Incidentally, this variable caused the self assessed healthiness

variable used by TW to become insignificant.



     75However, part of this earnings increase represents the substitution
of material goods for leisure. Unfortunately, the ho urs data which were
only collected in 1969, do not mesh perfectly with the earnings data since
the earnings in 1969 are those on main job only while we have separate estimates
for hours on first and second job. However, the 1968 earnings data, which
includes second job, gives similar results so that this caveat need not be
important.
      76
       Secondary labor force particiipation Increases strongly with hours
worked on second job ( by the respodnent.).
                                    —51--


Nonpecuniary Rewards

       There are monetary and nonmonetary rewards from a job. Since we

expect people to base their job choice decisions on the total of pecuniary

and   nonpecuniary rewards, those occupations which pay heavily in a non—
pecuniary form should have a compensatory change in wage    payments. We
do not have availabe measures of the nonpecuniary aspects of various

occupations, but we do have some crude information related to the

preference of individuals on specific nonmonetary aspects of a job. For

example the respondents were asked," assuming that you thought that

the financial possiblities were about the same, would you prefer to

work for yourself or for somebody else or no preference?"77 In 1955 fhose

who preferred to be salaried earn 6% less than the average( nonself

employed) high school graduate. See table 5. In 1969 the people who preferred

to be salaried earn 11% less. It is important to realize that these results

are from equations which hold constant being self employed and amount

of business assets.

      We are interpreting the answer to the question as indicating risk

preference. Is this a reasonable interpretation? We discuss in some

detail in [ 1/ 7 ] how this variable could correspond to an econombst's

definition of risk aversion. We conclude there that in a formal sense,

if respondents thought like economists, the question would distinguish


          additional question was asked in which" about the same" was re-
placed with "slightly favorable if you worked for yourself". This second
question was never significant given the first, but the first question always
yielded significant coefficients In the earnings equations of variou years.
                                         —52--


between risk averters and fisk lovers. In a less formal sense people

may simply be responding to their belief that this occupation is risky.

This question was asked in 1969. It is possible that people who failed

in their work now choose the salaried answer because of their failure.

But in [ L/   7   J in chapter    we show that this variable is not related

to a (self reported) measure of the difference between actual and expected

financial success. However, an alternative explanation of the question

might be that those who value being their own boss would earn less, eEpecially

since those who prefer independence in working do earn less(see below).

The results do not support the being your own boss explanation but this

may mean that this explanation does not dominate the risk interpretation

in this sample. While the resu1ts do not prove the risk interpretation

result, there is, however, some other evidence that bears on this issue

that tendt to corroborate it. As discussed in chapters                in [ y7].

this same variable determines schooling, the amount of business assets,

and returns to capital in a manner consistent with risk preference.

Finally it is also worth reporting the variables is significant and has

the same sign in nearly all within occupation equations. Moreover, Wolfe

in her dissertation [            ],   has found that those who prefer to be salaried

have less children, given income, etc., i.e, appear to be less willing

to risk having children.78



     78These examples all assume that risk preference is a trait which is
exhibited in all acitivites. This assumption may be wrong. For example
some college professors may be risk lovers in the field of ideas but risk
averters in other matters.
                              Table .   5


                   Nonpecuniary Trade Of fs with E.irnings, Relative
                      to Salary of Average High School Graduate


                                            1955          1969


Prefer to be Salaried                       —6%           —10%
Teacher                                     —10%          —18%

Reasons for Taking 1972
Occup. Field when Starteda
     Prospects of Future fin, success       —9%           —17%
     Chance for Indep. Work                  5%*          11%
     Person—to—Person Contact               _2%*
     Chance to Help Others                   8%            8%
     Represented a Challenge                13%.           —10%
     Job Security                             8%           13%    -

     Free Time                               —1%*



Ia Each coefficient refers to a "no" for an answer ; hence, yes and the
no responses are the omitted group

*   Not Significant at the 5% level.


The variables in this equation which have been held constant include:
education, mathematical ability, various measures of socioeconomic back-
ground of the respondent and of his wife; information on self employment
and on teaching; a crude measure of risk preference, age and work experience,
health, hours worked, marital status, and attitudes towards nonpecuniary
rewards.
                                 —53—

     Another set of questions asked in 1972 was "as best as you can remember,

what factors influenced your decision to enter the occupational field

you are in at the present time? Check yes or no to each of the following

and indicate factors that were of special importance."79 Since we felt

that the first three and last item in the footnote did not represent

nonpecuniary job aspects, we did not use them, nor any of the special

importance categories. In our equations the dummy variable for each

factor used was set at one if the respondent answered "no".

     In 1969 the salary, person to person contact, and free time variables

were not significant though salary nearly was. The other variables

indicate that those who were not worried about future financial success

received 17% less than those who, were worried (   or didn't answer),
those not interested in independent work earn 10% more, those who wanted

to help others earn 8% less, those who wanted to have a    challenge

earn 10% more, and those interested in job security received 13% less

earnings.8' In 1955 when many of the people were in different jobs and

even occupations, nearly all the same variables are significant and

all the signs on the variables significant in 1969 are the same though

the magnitude is always less than in 1969.



     79me factors were: type of training in school, type of training in
military, personal contacts, salary offered, prospects of eventual financial
success, chance to do interesting work, chance for independent work, chance
for a lot of person to person contact, chance to help others, represented
a challenge, job security, provided a lot of free time, and always liked that
kind of work.
     80The denominator as usual is the earnings of the average nonself employed
high school graduate. Ifthe current salary variable answer is included,
the coefficient is 10%.
     81Tor those who want to tryto replicate these findings in other studies,
it is important to note that several of the variables, e.g., independence,
and helping others, were not significant by themselves but became significant
after the financial prospects variable was added to the equation.
                                   -54

     Intuitively, all these results sern quite p1asible, and each one

is internally consistent with one another. But there still is the

question of whether these variables are related to nonpecuniary preferences.

This issue was discussed in detail in [ (717 ] wherL we concluded that

thevarjbles were probably related to preferences. This conclusion is

reinforced by the findings in chapters         in   7) that the variables

have effects consistent with the above interpretation in other equations.

Moreover, the introduction of these variables has a big impact primarily

on the various graduate education variables, which seems quite reasonale

since we often think that Ph.D.'s etc. choose nonpocuniary rewards such

as independence in work or helping others.82

     The basic threads running through these findings are that pepole

who are willing to work hard on difficult or risky projects will end

up with substantially more earnings while those who are more interted

in the intrinsic rewards of the job will receive less. While this is

hardly a startling conclusion, I know of no other study which has been

able to obtain significant impacts after holding constant such things

as education and ability. Moreover, the consistency of findings between

1955 and 1969 suggest that the 1972 vurvey responses are not expost

rationalizations and this is confirmed by the finding in chapter

that responses to these variables are not a function of exante/expost

differences in monetary success.


     82For a few of these variables, the answers may represent an individuals'
recognition of his own limitations. For example, those who like to help
others may not have the aggressiveness to be a successful manager. But
then the variable represents skills that determine earnings.
                                       —55—

      The trade off s of earnings with nonpecuniary returns is quite large.

Excluding the teacher dummy which is discussed below, but including all

the other significant soefficients in table 5, we find that the difference

in earnings due to various nonpecuniary preferences could be as high as

55% or $5,500 in 1969 and 40% or $2,500 in 1955.83 Since many of the

attributes or tastes involved could be correlated it is not clear that

we actually observe the extremes in this sample, but if we do then the

eféects are greater than all education differences except M.D.

      The last nonpecuniary related variable we have used is being a

pre college teacher. We find that these people earn 10 and 18% less in

1955 and 1969. The premiumpaid to be a teacher is even larger before

the nonpecuniary variables are introduced, which seems reasonable. We

can not, however, rule Out the possiblity that teachers earn less because

they are less able.

Business Assets

      The respoddents were asked for their "earnings" without the concept

being defined. But we would expect the self employed to report their net

income from their business since most people would ftnd it difficult to

separate earnings derived from labor from those derived from capital. To

try   to   hold constant the returns from capital, we have included a dummy

variable for self employed businessman, another dummy for self employed

professional, and most importantly a continous variable on amount of business

assets.84 All      of   these variables were only measured in 1969. The extra


     831n this calculation we add together the absolute value of all the sig-
nificant coefficients.
          also includes nonresidential real estate and other nonspecified
items. The variable Is crude since people were only asked to check one of
8 categories including "don't have" and over $80,000.
                                         —56—

measurement error involved in using these variables in 1955 undoubtedly

affects the comparability of our answers and our R2 though comparisons

of 1955 and 1969 equations which only use data available in both years

indicates that general conclusions on           are not affected. We shall

interpret the coefficients on the buisiness asset variable as the rate

of teturn on financial capital invested in business.85

        In 1969 the coefficient on the business asset variable, which is

an estimate of the before tax rate of return, is .12. Such a figure

is not unlike the 7 to 10 estimates usually found in studies such as Kravis
    —
[   o's.     ]. 86,82ihe   dummy variable for self employed businessman is

still significant though assets and hours worked are included in the

1969 equations, and equals 10% of the standardized base. The self employed

professionals, who may not have much in the way of financial investments,

receive 31% more than the nonself employed professionals, (though the

denominator is too low since for comparability, we have divided by the

average earnings of high school graduates).


        85
       This interpretation, however, may be wrong for several reasons. Consider
the results obtained from regressing a person's earnings which equal wage
income plus returns from capital( assuming that education, etc. is held constant
by sample design). That is, we regress W + rk =cK. The expected value of
c would be equal to EE(w+rK) (K)IZK2=r + E(wK/K2). If wage income and business
assets are not correlated ( linearly) the coefficient on K will be an unbiased
estimate of the returns from capital but if people with more capital also have
higher wage rates ( education, etc. constant) then c is biased upwards
as an estimate of r.
     86so the asset variale must be measured with error since people only
checked categories into which their assets fell and because the data was
taken from an asset breakdown and real estate holdings could be included
in the business asset line.
     87Christenson [ 1  ] has argued that because unincorporated businesses
do not have to pay the corporate income tax, a 7 to 10% return is consistent
with the 15% before tax return made by corporations.
                                  —57—

     In 1955 the coefficient on 1969 business assets is still highly

significant ( a "t" of ll)at .03 even though the growth of assets

must not have been uniform during the period and some people must have

changed their self epiploytnent/salaried status. Probably because of the

increased measurement error involved in using the 1969 asset and hours

variables in 1955, the 1969 self employment businessman dummy is as

important in 1955 as in 1969. On the other hand the 1969 self employed

professional dummy is not dignificant presumably becasue many of these

people were salaried in 1955 and not had a chance to display their true

worth to their employers.

     Since we have only health related data from 1969, we will not compare

the results for variois years though the interested reader can consult

the equations in the appendix.

Conclusion

     The many and varied comparisons made in this section lead to several

important conclusions. First the effects of nearly all variables change

during a person's life cycle and in general display a profile that increases

with age. Second the profiles are steeper for the education variables

than most other variables though as shown in more detail below the steepest

profile is for those who attended private elementary school. Third, even

after holding constant a wide variety of variables, we still find that

education leads to large and statistically significant differences in

earnings. These differences, however, are relatively small in comparison

with those arising from the conglomeration of family background, attitudes

and nonpecuniary preferences and are no larger than the differences due
                                           —58—

 to ability.      While we   will   return to the topic below it   is   also important
 to   realize that a brge portion of the differences in annual earnings are

due    to   unmeasured variables and random events.

V. Inequality: Extent and Causes

       In   this as in most samples, the distribution of earnings is skewed to

the right.88 Since most people assume that something called "ability" or

capacity is     normally   distributed, much attention has been paid to the

question of     why earnings   exhibit a skewed distribution.89 Becker and

Mincer [     ?5 ] have demonstrated      that such distributions can be generated

by "acquired" human capital models. Mandelbrot[ 3 ii        explains      skewness

solely in terms of many different inherited skills. Champernowe[ )C

Aitch2son and Brown[ t_ ], and others have shown that stochastic processes
                                                                                  ,
that   operate continuously     can enerate skewed distributions.90 In Friedman's

model, skewness     arises   from behavior towards risk rather than differences

in abilities. It is appropriate for us both to test various hypothesis

generated by each theory to determine if the theory is correct and to

estimate the contribution of each theory or(more realistically) a set of

variables to earnings inequality.

Ineualitv in Earnings

       The inequality in earnings can be measured in several ways.91 One

important measure is the Lorenz curve, which indicates the percent of

     88See Lydall.[     or Kravis[ 7          I for
                                            surveys of other samples. Lebergett
suggests that among full time males who are not self employed, the earnings
distribution in 1959 approaches normality. For some purposes, however, the
self employed and unemployed should be included in the earnings distribution.
       89
       There is little direct evidence on the diltribution of capacity. I.Q.
scores, for example, are generally scored so as to be normally distributed.
       90For an excellent summary of all these models, see Mincer [
                                                                              3 I.
       91See Atkinson [ 3 1, Mincer [             j,
                                               Kravis[
       bc
LL(LITI i
                                       7ij:
                                       flfLAI[
                                                                                     T iF:
                                                                                     H
                                                                                                    —
                                                                                                            I-

                                     L' E
                     .
                     -i-i

            fJfff                                -
                                                                     TTIT ITJTH1TI.
                                                                            r             -—

                                TE. Tc .\-       T..                                TT -        .-.
                                             /                                                              /1
                                                                 L
                            t                                                       H




                                                                                                    /_
                ft

       8



            4
            - HJ}
                                             -- rH
                                                 I,,                                - - -/          /-, .
            fflii                      :J                .1 ..


                                                                      ...           /::/ .:p\\ ./ 71 ..
                                                                                                .
                                                                                                        I




                                                                                                            -j

       60




       50




                                   11Tt!I
                                       iI J' I17ILZ
                                   /)
                            1HT/t/zI_
                                    .: H
                                   .H7*: HE .
                                                 L



                            rj  HE     H- TH T7 TT jT
       3C                                                                       -
                                                     L               -- -                H-
                                                          1-1--
       2C




       10
                                                                            iI±IIZ1L
                                                                            .




                                                         HHi LI
            0                   /0    :          -30
                                                            [I N -                   /)
                                         —59--


total earnings received by the top X%. The Lorenz curves for 1955

and 1969 are presented in figure 1. -            Also   drawn in that figure is

a diagonal which is the Lorenz curve that would be observed if each

person   had the same   earnings.   In   all years studied earnings are not

distributed   equally   and are below the diagonal.

     All summary measures of relative inequality of two Lorenz curves will

yield the same ranking     provided the two curves do not intersect. 92
Conversely,   if the curves intersect, there always are some measures that

would disagree on whether curve 1 or 2 is more unequal. Sánce earnings

do not follow any well known distribution, we have used the nonparaxnetric

Kolmogorov—Smirnov test (KS) to determine if the difference in the

Lorenz curves is statistically significant. Results of the KS test in-

 dicate that the 1969 curve is statistically different from ( more unequal

than) the 1955 curve.

     We also have examined the Lorenz curves for various education and

mental ability gpg•3 In either 1955 or 1969, the Lorenz curves

for any two mutually exclusive groups, such as high school and some

college, were never significantly different at the 5 percent level though

many were at the 10 percent level. For any particular group, the 1969

curve always was beneath the corresponding 1955 curve and the maximum


     92See Atkinson [      3 1.
     93The education and ability groups are those defined in chapter
                                        —60--.-


  differences     which range from 6 to 10 percentage points were always significant

  at the 5 percent level. Thus there is ]:1 difference in inequality

  in earrdngs between various education and hUity       groups   in any year

  but   more inequality in each case in 1969 than in 1955.
  From Variance to Kurtosis
         Thus far we have indicated that earnings inequality has varied from
  yjar   to year. For many purposes, however, it is necessary to ask how

  particular features of the distribution have     changed over time and to
  what extent these features and their chance are the consequence of the

  distribution      of education, mental ability, etc. A quantifiable and
  at    times   decomposable description of a distribution can be obtained

  from   various 'tmoments'1 of the distribution.94 The first four moments

  iieasure the mean, variance, skev'ness, and kurtosis of the distribution.

         In 1969 our standard deviation,o, is 9•4•95 In some types of labor

  markets we would expect 0     to increase when average earnings did. For
   these cases a standardized measure is provided by the coefficients of

: variation, 0/mean, •which is about 2/3 in 1969.

          Several measures of syirmetry have been prcposed in the literature.

  To avoid reranking the observations as we hold constant education and


            will assume that the expected values of the first four moments
  can be estimated from the actual value. This need not be true. For
  example, if the distribution were }areto, the expected value of the variance
  would be infinite though a number could be obtained from the data.
         95ro insure comparability with the regression results, and to save
   on costs, the 1955 and 1969 statistics are based on the approximately
   4600 people who reported earnings in both years.
       — —-


                                            Table 6
                             Moments of Earns and LN Earnings in 1955         and   1&J69




'ear                                 Mean             Standard     Skewness         Kurtcsis
                                                      Deviationa

arnings                      .                                                 I

1955(5S$)                             $7.3            3.8              5.4          62.0
1969(58$)                             14.5            9.4              3.0          13.9
Percentage Change55—69               100%             147%             —44%         —73'

U Earnings                       .



 1955(58$)                            1.9             .38              .73          2.67
].969 (58$)                           2.5             .50              .67           .92

              .
                             !




          - )2/(N -   1)
  I(Y. -
           )3/L1E(Y1
                        - y_ 2J 3/2
          —   ;)4/cY4 )n — 3.0
  (
                                     —61—


other    sets of variables, we will use the third moment standardized by

the second'to eliminate scale effects.      A distribution is skewed to

the right when this measure is positive, as is our 1969 estLnate of

3.0. At the 5% level we can reject the null hypothesis that the

population is normally distributed which is symmetric, using a test

developed by Fisher.

      Kurtosis measures the frequency of observations in the tail or

near the mean of the distribution. We use the fourth moment di'ided

(standardized) by the second.      From this ratio we subtract 3 which is

the ex-pected value of the kurtosis in a normal distribution. Larger

values such as our 12, indicate that there are too many observations in

the tails or too few near the mean as compared with the normal curve.

       In 1955 mean earnings are $7,300 (in 1958 prices). The standard

deviation is $3.8 and the coefficients of variation is about 1/2. Our

skewness and kurtosis estimates are 5.4 and 62.0 respectively, neither

of which would be in accord with the null hypothesis that the distribution

is normal. Thus in both 1955 and 1969, the distribution of earnings is

skewed   to the right and has larger numbers of people in the tails.
      Given the differences .between our sample and the U.S. population,
the   results on the various inequality measures in any one year have
                                         —62--


restricted      interest until we control for education, ability, etc. But

the   changes   during the 14 years are of substantial interest —        especially
since such data are not generally available over such a time span and

so late in the life cycle.

      Between 1955      and 1969 mean earnings in constant dollars grew by

about 100%. Since the standard deviation increased by.a greater amount

than the   mean, the coefficients of variation                  increased by

27Z.96 The changes in the skewness and kurtosis measures are both negative.

Thus contrary to the usual interpretationf stochastic theories, the

distribution is     becoming'less   asymmetric and less deviant from a norn1
                                                                /
curve   as the people age (     though   the 1969 curve is far from a normal curve).
      One skewed distribution that has been used to describe the earnings
distribution is the lognormal. The skewness and kurtosis results for

the log of earnings in table 1 are not consistent with the null hypothesis
                                                                    97
that earnings in 1955 or 1969 are distributed log normally.

Sources of Variance, Skewness and Inequality

      Our sample is, of course, better educated, mentally more able, probably

less risk averse, and more limited in age than the population. Since all


     96Qiven      our earlier results on (nonintersecting) Lorenz curves and Atkinson's
theorems,    the   coefficients of variation and the standard error,hich are measures
 of   inequality must increase.
       TCareful analysis of nationwide random samples has generally concluded
that the earnings do not follow the log normal distribution for high levels
of income, but probably because of the restricted distribution of
education, mental ability and age in our sample, the deviations from log
normalcy ( on a chart not shown) are greater and occur over a wider range
of earnings in this sample.
                                      —63—


these   characteristics affect earnings and have    a   distribution different
than    in the population, there is no reason to expect to find that the

distribution of earnings is the same     as   that in the population. Despite

this we can still use the    sample to study problems of interest. For
exale,      suppose the true equaLion in the popu1ati is

            l)YXa+u
where X is a vector of ( measured) independent variables, a the associated

vector of coefficients and u. are errors arising from random events

and unmeasured variables. Because our distribution of the X's differs
                                                                             98
from the population, we have an unequally weighted stratifie3d sample.

As long as the U's are distributed the same as in the population, we can

study    the distribution of Y — Xa    u to determine what the population

distribution would he if everyone had the same education, ability etc.

        In examining the sources of various aspects of inequality, several

 things must be noted. First since the equation's coefficients are

 selected     so as to minimize the variance of the residuals with no

 attention given to the skewness or kurtosis, the results C on sources)
                                                                                 99
 are less reliable for these latter two measures than for the variance.



           is well known that such samples yield unbiased estimates of the
 a's. Thus we can use the equations we have 'developed to examine the
 effect of the various X's, on earnings, for the range of each X in the sample.
        Since most of our variables are ( zero, one) dunnues, our cothficients
 are estimates of the mean in various cells. Provided oui model specifications
 including interaction and homoskedasticity are correct   the residuals
 represent the distribution within various cells and can be used to study
 skewness and kurtosis.
                                            Table 7
                                           Sources of Iuequau ty in 1969 and 1955

                                   [       Stand a rd
                                           Error
                                                                Sk en e s s           Kurtois'
                                                                                                           .
                                   I
.969
.
                               i           9.42                 3.05
    —
                                                                              1
                                                                                  •
                                                                                      13.90
                               p
                                           7,75                 2.76                  14.75
•
    —

    — "3
                               '           9.11
                                           9.33
                                                                3.22
                                                                3.11          •
                                                                                      15.27
                                                                                      14.31
                           i               8.63
•
                           •
                                                    •           2.82   .
                                                                                      13.39
    —
                                           9.20             ,   3.12                  14.61
    —y                                     9,33                 3.05                               .
    —
                                                                                      13.91
               .
                                           9.06                 3.11                  14.78
    —
                                   1       9.37                 3.01                  13.71            .

955                                                         !
                                                                              '
                                           3.81                 5.33                  61.99
    —

    —
                       •
                                           3.41         .       5.56                  78.24
                                   '                                          :       65.09
    —
                                           3.78                 5.41                  62.88
    —
                   .                       3.65             •
                                                                5.40                  68.50
    —y                                 .   3.74                 5.46
    —
                                                                                      64.29
                                           3.80                 5.32                  62.3/i
    —
                                           3.69                 542                   65.12
    — Y8                                   3.80                 5.33                  61.99
                                                                                               .




he Y1 through Y8 series are based on equation    in tables
  =     all
         variables
2 = education coefficients, including M.D. and L.L.B., and the Gourman rating
  =
    mental ability variables
  = business assets, and the self employed businessmen and professional dunmies
  = prefer to be salaried and the 4 other nonpecuniary variables
  = age,
6         year of first job, hours iorkcd, hours on second job
    time spent, private schools, in law, biography, religion, size of current town,
    never move variables
  = teacher,
              no response in '72, weeks lost from illness, age entered school, religious
    school attendance and weight variables
                                        Table   8


                                                      Tenths     in the Earnings Distribution
                          Average Earnings in Various
                                                                                            (Thous. $)
                              And Their Percentage Change in 1955 and 1969
                                                                Soc Colige                   Bachelors                Graduate
                      Total                  High School
                                                                                                                   1955    1969    c/A
                              Z55                             1955    1969       %A         1955    1969
                1955 1969     to o9   1955      1969


                                                                      6.4        106%       $3.4                   3.1     7.5     142
                              106%    2.8       5.9    111%   3.1                                  $7.5     1211
         10¾   $3.5   $7.2                                                                   4.8     11.4   138    4.5    11.5     156
                                      4.0       8.3    108    4.4     9.4        114
< 20%           4.4    9.6   118
                                                              4.8                115         5.3     12.8   141    5.0     13.2   ].64
                       11.0 129       4. 6      9.3    102           i0.3
< 30%           4.9                                                              121         5.7     14.6   156    5.4     14.9    176
                       12.4 134        4.8     10.1    110    5.3    11.7
< 40            5.3                                                                          6.1     15.9   161    6.0     16.4   173
                                       5.2     11.2    115    5.8    13.1        126
< 50            5.8    14.1! 143                                                                                   6.4     18.3
                                               12.2    122    6.1    14.9        144         6.6     17.9   171
< 60            6.1    15.5, 154       5.5                                                                                        192
                                                               6.8   16.6        144         7.2     19.9   176    7.1    20.7
                       17.8 157        6.0     13.6    127
<   70          6.9                                                                                         177    7.7     30.8   300
                                                       140     7.4   19.4        162    .    8.3     23.0
<   SO          7.6    20. T 172       6.5     15.6
                                                       164     8.6   25.7    ;   199         9.8     28.7   193    8.8            2fl3
<   90                 26.6 200        7.6    2O.1                                                                        I.9.9
                                               35.3    250    14.0   45.8        227        11.2     43.6   334    12.8
    100%       14.2    46.0 224       10.1                                                                                        20
                                              —64—


 Second de ite this caveat,           the   effects of the Xs on skewness and kurtosjs
                                                  100
 might be larger thmn those on          variance.

       Table      3 contains estimat.s for 1969of the standard error, skewness,

and kurtosis with tlie latt:er two standardized by the standard error
                                101
raised to the appropriate power.     This stnndardization is appropriate

since we are primarily interested in the                question of whether the
distribution would be        normal    or would be such less skewed if ability,

etc., were the same for evetyoi,e. &i t              variables   which reduced the
residuals will also reduce u3 or u4; thus, the resul ting                series could

be as skejed though Y.—Y) —3would be smaller.
       We present the      estimates   for earnings (Y) and residual earnings,
(Y_X*a) where X*a refers to a subset or all of the variables used in the

equation           in table Al .   If we had estimated an equation with just X
                                                                                        I
generally         we would have obtained different estimates of these coefficients.

But since such coefficients would be biased estimates of. the true parameters,

it   was felt02that it was better to use the estimates from the
             ].                                                             comprehensive
equation.

     lUu
                            that the variable being considered is a zero
           For example suppose
one dummy variable, Z. The ones in the Z variable could all be located
just so that eliminating the effect of Z would eliminate completely
(nonnormal) kurtosis in the earnings distribution. Similarly the Z any
variable could be the sole source of skewness in a distribution. Finally
since most of our variables have been transformed into dumrrv-variab1es,
the effects of say schooling depend on the distribution of people by
education level and their coefficients.
              Kendall and StuartL ZY3.
    1-1owever,        part of the effects of say
                                           education may be appearing in
other coefficients whose variables are partially determined by education.
                                     —65—

    Using the most comprehensive equation available, the standard

error of the residual earnings is reduced by about 18% to $7.8 in

row 2 of table 3. The remaining rows in the table, identified at the

bottom, indicate the effects of various sets of variables. For

purposes of reference, Y2 will hc called education, Y3 mental ability,

   self employment, Y5 nonpecuniary trade offs, Y6 worlr related experiences,

Y7 socioeconomic standing, and       miscellany. The reduction in the

standard errors indicate the partial R 's —ignoring sign -    of   these

variables but because reductions in variance depend upon the covariance

of the independent variable, the effects of the individual rows .are not

additive.

     The self employment data reduces the standard error,a, by 8% with

business    assets beitg the most important single variable. The SES

variables reduce a by 5%. The quantity and quality of education

variables C   including   M.D. and L.L.B .) reduce o by less than 4% and all

other sets of variables have even smaller impacts on a. The percentage

reductions in a are, incidentally, the partial R 's for each set of
          103
variables.

     In the sample, the standardized skewness measure is 3.05. As

shown in the Y —    row, the full set of variables reduces the skewness
               104
by 10% to 2.76.    Thus even if education, ability, SES, business assets,

etc. were equal for all individuals, the earnings distribution would be

 about 90% as skewed as originally once we adjust for the reduction in


            the moments in table 3 are calculated about the mean that
 applies to each row.
     1041he reduction in Z(u.3) is about 50%.
                                      —66—

 variance from holding each of these items    constant.
      Interestingly when education, ability, the nonpecuniary trade offs,

 are individually held constant, th standardized skewness measure increases

 between 1 and 5%. On the other hand, the self employment variables

 reduce the relative skewness by 7% and the miscellaneous variables in

   reduce skewness 1%.

     Thus we can conclude that if everyone in the sample had the same

education or ability or nonpecuniary preferences, the earnings distribution

would have slightly more skewness. 105 We can also conclude that difference

in self employment (   size   of business assets and being self employed)

have contributed greatly to the existing skewness in the distribution in

this sample.

     Now let us examine kurtosis. In the sample the standardized kurtosis

measure had a value of 13.9 which is far from and significantly differen

from the zero expected in the normal distribution. 106,107 The standardized

kurtosjs measure based on the residuals from equation 2, is increased

by 6%. Looking at the other rows, we find that only holding constant

self employment and the miscellany in Y8 has lead to a reduction in relative

kurtosis. Even with self employment held constant the distribution

     105
       This increase is partly due to the distribution of people in each
category, e.g., nearly rectangular over the education groups and in the
ability and SES instances, and partly to the pattern of the coefficients.
       We have already subtracted 3 which is the value if the distribution
is normal.
    107
       The unstandardized measure of kurtosis, u. 4 , would decline
.ubstantia1ly, but even with the initial variance the distribution would
not be normal.
                                        Table g

                                       Sources of Inequality in 1969 and 1955



                                        Standard           Skewness            Kurtosis
                                        Error


    1969
                                        9.42                3.05                13.90
                                        7.75                2.76                14.75
                                                                       •

                                        9.11                3.22                15.27
                                        9.33                3.11                14.31
           Y3                                               2.82                13.39
                                        8.63                           i

           Y4                                                                   14.61
                                        9.20                3.12
           Y5                                               3.05                13.91
                                                                       :
                               '
    Y-.    '1                           9.06                3.11                14.78
                              .         9.37                3.01                13.71
           '18

    1955
    Y                                   3.81                5.35                61.99
    '1-                                 3.41                5.56                78.24
           '11                 !                            5.47                65.09

           '13
                                        3.78                5.41                62.88
                                        3.65                5.40                68.50
           '14
    Y-.                                 3.74                5.46                64.29
           "5                                               5.32           .    62.34
                                   •
                                        3.80
           '16
                                        3.69                5.42                65.12
           '17
    1—     '18
                                        3.80                5.33                61.99


    The Y1 through Y8 series are based on equation   in tables
       =        all
             variables
       = education coefficients, including M.D. and L.L.B., and the Gourinan rating
       = mental ability variables
    Y = business assets and the self employed businessmen and professional dummies
         prefer to be salaried and the 4 other nonpecuniary variables
         age, year of first job, hours worked, hours on second job
:        time spent, private schools, in law, biography, religion, size of current town,
         never move variables
       = teacher, no response in '72, weeks lost from illness, age entered school, religious
         school attendance and weight variables
                                       Table         10

                         Average Earnings in Various Tenths                in the Earnings Distribution

                              And Their Percentage Change in 1955 and                 1969           (Thous.   $)   •.
                     Total                 High School                 Some College                   Bachelors                     Graduate
                                                                1


                     1969    59      1955      1969       %          1955      1969      %           1955    1969        %A      1955        1969
                                                                                                J                                       1




 oztorn 10%   $3.5   $7.2    106%    2.8       5.9        111%:      3.1       6.4       106%       $3.4    $7.5         1211    3.1         7.5    142
.0 < 20%       4.4    9.6    118     4.0       8.3        108        4.4       9.4       114         4.8     11. 4       138     4.5        11.5    156
0 < 30%       4.9     11.0   129     4.6       9.3        102        4.8      10.3       115         5.3     12.8        141,    5.0        13. 2   164
 0 < 40        5.3    12.4 134       4.8    10.1          110        5.3      11. 7      121         5.7     14.6        156     5.4        14.9    176
 o < 50        5.8    14. 1 143      5.2    11.2          115        5.8      13.1       126         6.1     15.9        161     6.0        16.4    173
      60       6.1    15.5 154       5.5     12.2         122        6.1      14.9       144         6.6     17.9        1711    6.4        18. 3   186
0    < 70      6.9    17.8 157       6.0     13.6         127        6.8      16.6       144         7.2     19.9        176     7.1        20. 7   192
'0   < 80      7.6    20. 7 172      6.5    15.6          140        7.4      19.4       162         8. 3    23.0        177:    7.7        30.8    300
10   < 90      8.9    26.6 200       7.6     20.1         164        8.6      25.7       199         9.8     28.7        193     8.8        33. 7   283
0    < 100%   14.2    46.0 224      10.1     35.3         250       14.0      45.8       227        11. 2   48.6         334    12.8        49.9    290
                                                      Table      11
                             Effects of Various Ses of Variables on Inequality
                                    By Five Ability Levels

                                 1955
                                                                                 1.


                                                      Skewness        Kurtosis                Standard       Skewness Kurto
Ability         Fifth        Standard

Bottom 1/5
                        —    Error                                                            Error

                                                      2.92            14.79                   7.81           3.39        17.89
1                            2.91
                                                                                                             2.98
                                                                                                                     j

                                                                                                                         20.23
1 — Y                        2.67         I           1.90             9.54                   6.71
                                                                      14.96                   7.60           3.55        19.83
I —                          2.88                     2.89
     — ,.2                                            2.45            12.36                   7.24           3.29        20.36
                             2.83
                                                                                              7.61           3.45        18.49
Y —                          2.85                     2.94            15.27
                                                                                              7.76           3.40        17.96
I —                          2.91                     2.81            13.84
                                                                                              7.68           3.25        17.48
1 —                          2.83                     2.64            12.60
                                                                      14.67                   7.75           3.26        17.02
  —                          2.91                     2.86

2ndl/5                                                           t

                                                                                                             3.50        17.95
Y                            3.90                     5.39            49.39                   9.14
I—                           3.53                     5.41
                                                      5.41
                                                                      56.95
                                                                      50.26
                                                                                              7.52
                                                                                              8.89
                                                                                                             2.98
                                                                                                             3.55
                                                                                                                         17.57
                                                                                                                         18.28
     —                       3.86
I                            3.78                     5.37            52.09                   8.38           3.16        17.11
I —       I
          14
                             3.83                     5.47
                                                      5.44
                                                                      50.96
                                                                      50.47
                                                                                              8.89
                                                                                              9.07
                                                                                                             3.55
                                                                                                             3.47
                                                                                                                         18.66
                                                                                                                         17.83
I —                          3.88
I — 17                       3.76                     5.31
                                                      5.36
                                                                      49.88
                                                                      49.29
                                                                                              8.86
                                                                                              9.04
                                                                                                             3.56
                                                                                                             3.44
                                                                                                                         19.15
                                                                                                                         17.61
                             3.89
          '8
                                              ,                                                          .
3rdl/5
Y                            3.32                     3.02            13.73                   9.06           3.36        16.44
     —                                                2.20             9.98                   7.52           2.95        16.64
                             2.86
                                                      2.89            13.11                   8.81           3.50        17.87
I —
          '2                 3.22
                             3.07             i       2.67            11.89                   8.16           3.05        15.37
Y — 14                       3.25             1        3.07           14.28                   8.84           3.44        17.32
          15                 3.32                      2.94           13.32                   8.97           3.37        16.65
I — Yf                       3.27                 i    2.99           13.93                   8.79           3.44        17.48
     — 17                    3.30                      2.98            13.46                  9.05           3.31        16.16
                                                                                      .



4thl/5
1                             3.82                     3.80           23.84                   9.66            2.77       11.42
                                                                                                                         13.56
I —
          Ii                  3.40
                              3.75
                                                       3.66
                                                       3.89
                                                                      25.99
                                                                      25.00
                                                                                              7.76
                                                                                              9.39
                                                                                                              2.66
                                                                                                              2.95       12.73
Y — '2                        3.63                     3.65           23.43                   8.75            2.66       11.86
I — 14                        3.74                     3.87           24.71                   9.42            2.81       11.93
      — 15                    3.81                     3.76           23.74                   9.53            2.77       11.61
 I    —
          17
                              3.70                     3.87
                                                       3.78
                                                                      25.24
                                                                      23.83
                                                                                              9.19
                                                                                              9.59
                                                                                                              2.84
                                                                                                              2.71
                                                                                                                         12.18
                                                                                                                         11.12
                              3.83
          '8
    5th 1/5
                                                       7.27            95.12                   10.26          2.77        11.29
 Y                            4.50
    I -                       4.17                     7.77           114.43                    8.81          2.45        10.41
                                                       7.33            96.74                   10.00          2.89        12.16
    Y -                       4.47
    Y -                       4.36                     7.51           104.38                    9.55          2.49         9 69
    '-IY4                     4.45                     7.33            96.34                   10.12          2.83        11.8
    I -                                                7.31            96.70              ;    10.15          2.75        11. 1
                              4.48
    1-1
    V -
                              4.39                     7.41            99.69
                                                                       95.45
                                                                                                9.85
                                                                                               10.21
                                                                                                              2.82
                                                                                                              2.78
                                                                                                                          l1.9
                                                                                                                          11.4€
                              4.49                     7.26

              table 2 for definitions. Y—Y3° omitted sinceY3 only contains the ability variables.
                                  Table 12

                      1955 and 1969 Earnings Distribution by Ability Level



                                   Earnings
                     1955                                         1969
               Standard          Skewness     Kurtosis     Standard      Skewness   Kurtosjs
               Deviation                                   Deviation
tom 1/5        2.91              2.92         14.79        7.81          3.39       17.89
1 1/5          3.90              5.39         49.39        9.14          3.50       17.95
1 1/5          3.32              3.02         13.73        9.06          3.36       16.44
  1/5          3.82              3.80         23.84        9.66          2.77       11.42
  1/5          4.50              7.27         95.12       10.26          2.77       11.29

                                   LN Earnings
:tom 1/5       .36               •73          1.60         .47           .84        1.36
  1/5          .38               .86          3.58         .49           .87        1.20
11/5       1   .37               .68          2.30         .47           .89        1.56
 1/5           .39               .63          2.67         .50           .59         .61
 1/5           .38               .82          3.61         .49           .40        1.12




                                                                         S
                                                 Table 13
                              Effects of Various Sets of Variables on Inequality

                              by Four Levels of Education, in 1955 and 1969


                                      1955                                                    1969
                                                                           1

                              Standard           Skewness   Kurtosis               Standard      Skewness   Kurtosi1
                              Error                                                Error

igh School                                                                 :


                              2.81               2.87       13.68                  7.12          3.59       21.36
    —                         2.50               1.97        9.79                  5.74          2.68       17.50
    —                         2.82               2.84       13.50                  7.12          3.61       21.50
    —                         2.80               2.89       13.97                  7.07          3.61       21.62
    —                         2.64               2.34       10.74                  6.28          3.18       19.41
    —                         2.73               2.79       13.26                  6.84          3.56       21.64
    —                         2.80               2.79       13.10                  7.07          3.60       21.68
                                                                                                 3.47       20.39
            .6                2.75               2.82       14.04                  6.84
                                                                                                            21.37
    —                         2.82               2.80       13.48                  7.13          3.52

;ome College
r
                              4.30               5.37       51.00                  9.79          3.29       15.20
    -Y                        3.87               5.25       53.81                  8.32          2.87       15.45
    —                         4.29               5.30       51.17                  9.72          3.30       15.32
    —Y                        4.30               5.38       50.98                  9.75          3.29       15.30
    —                         4.14               5.33       52.'67                 9.02          3.09       15.58
    —                         4.25               5.45       52.48                  9.58          3.36       15.96
    —                         4.29               5.39       51.45                  9.72          3.28       15.12
            .6                4.13               5.30       51.18                  9.37          3.23       15.36
    — y7                      4.30               5.30       50.21              1
                                                                                   9.76          3.23       14.64
             8                                                         :




Bachelors Degree
                              4.25               6.30       77.92                  9.64          2.81        11.50
1' —                          3.93           i
                                                 6.94       99.70                  8.38          2.57        11.35
                              4.23               6.36       79.06                  9.58          2.85        11.80
    — '2
    —                         4.22               6.34       78.52                  9.60          2.85        11.76
    —                         4.13               6.41       85.69                  9.02          2.48         9.69
Y —                            4.19              6.40       79.79                  9.50          2.85        11.85
                               4.22              6.40       80.63                  9.50          2.84        12.76
                               4.15              6.53       83.65                  9.35          2.90        12.60
1— Y7                                                                                            2.78        11.28
        —                      4.26              6.32       78.25                  9.58
    '                                        I
                                                                                                     '



Graduate Work
Y                              3.33              2.53       10.29                  10.02             2.96    12.73
Y -                            2.89              1.56        8.08                   8.19             2.65    13.63
Y       -Y                     3.12               2.21       9.35                   9.55             3.16    14.54
        -                      3.29               2.60      10.84                   9.93             3.00    13.02
        —                      3.14               2.33       9.55                   9.08             2.79    12.74
Y       -                      3.27               2.62      11.03                   9.79             3.05    13.53
                               3.32               2.53      10.30                   9.85             2.97    12.85
                               3.32               2.50       10.77                  9.80             3.01    13. 49
                               3.27               2.47       10.01                  9.83             2.97    13.04


             1initi.ons see  table 3 of this chapter.
                                                                                    because a few people
                 low should rep t the row for Y. The small recorded change occurs
                                                           for less than a semester and have a Corinan ra
                 Le    as no. havfn" attended college went
                                     —67—

 of earnings would exhibit kurtosis. On the other hand, the elimination

 of education differences leads to a big increase in kurtosis. This

 suggests that education pushes more poele away from the mean and makes

for a smoother transition to the tails whose existence is not related

to education.

1955

       Our analysis of the source of Inequality in 1955 earnings distribution

is handicapped by the fact that several of our 1Tost important variables —

including   the self employment ones —   are measured only in 1969 and must
have changed between 1955 and 1969. Nevertheless, let us examine the

same statistics on inequality. As shown in table 3, the standard error

of earnings In 1955 is $3.8 C thousands of 1958 dollars). Since the

1955 equation has a smaller      the standard error of Y —     has only
been reduced by 10%. The standard error of earnings is reduced by about

1 1/2 to 3% by each of education, ability, risk preference and nonpecuniary

variables, work experience, SES, and the miscellany in Y8 but the self

employment variables reduce the standard deviation by 4%.

       The 1955 skewness measure is 5.3 which is much greater than in 1969.

Examining the various rows, we find that holding constant any subset

(except work experience and the miscellany) of the whole set of the
                                                           108
characteristics in equation 2 increases relative skewness.



     10rhe major difference between the 1969 and 1955 results for the
self employment variables may well be due to the measurement problem,
i.e., some in the 1955 right hand tail in 1955 are no longer self employed
in 1969 while some with large business holdings in 1969 were not yet
self employed.
                                         Table 1/i


                    1955 and 1969 Earnings Distributions (in 1958 dollars)
                                 by Education Lcvcl




                                             Earnings

                           1955

                                                     kurtosis     a     skewness   kurtosis
                                  skewness


                                                     13.68      7.12    3.59       21.36
High School             2.81      2.87
                                                     51.00      9.79    3.29       15.20
Some College            4.30      5.37
                                                     77.92       9.64   2.81       11.50
Bachelors Degree        4.25      6.30
                                                     10.29      10.02   2.96       12.73
At Least Some Grad.     3.33      2.53

                                             LNEarnings

                                                     1.84         .46    .92        1.73
                         .36       .52
High School                                                       .51    .91        1.11
Sone College             .40       .84
                                                     3.59         .47    .64        1.02
Bachelor's Degree        .38       .92
                                                     1.52         .48    .54        1.31
                         .37       .48
                                       —68--


      Much th same pattern appears on kurtosis. The residuals from the

 full or any. partial set of variables (       except the miscellany) have
 greater standardized kurtosis than in the original earnings data and

 this kurtosis is greater in 1955 than in 1969.

 Pattern by Education Level

      Since we have eliminated the average difference in earnings for people

with different amounts of education, ability, etc. , the
                                                         above analysis
essentially analyzes the between cell contribution of
                                                             education, ability,
etc. to inequality. For several purposes it is important to study inequality

within    various   education and ability cells. As shorn    in   table 4, in
1955 the standard error is lowest for those with just a
                                                               high   school

education, at the peak for those who started or completed college, and

intermediate for those with more formal education than a bachelor's degree. 109

The relative skewness and kurtosis measure increases sharply from high

school through a bachelors degree and then falls to their lowest level

for those with at least some graduate work. In each education group neither

earnings nor the log of earnings are distributed normally.

     In 1969 it is still true thatthe earnings distribution is neither

normal nor lognorrnal.
                           In other respects, the pattern is much different

than in 1955. While high school graduates still have the lowest standard

error, graduate students (including M.D.'s and L.L.B.'s) have the highest.

The skewness and kurtosis measures are greatest for high school graduates

    109
         There are from 950 to 1330 people In each cell.
                                        —6•9—


and then decrease through the bachelors level followed by a slight

increase at the graduate level. The major change in the high school
                                                                 the
category between 1955 and 1969 requires comment. We suggest that

above average growth in the standard error and the large absolute and

comparative increases in the skewness and kurtosis measures occur

because even the talented or lucky individual among high school graduates
                                             110
find that it takes longer to get to the top.     Thus in 1955 these

people would not be so far out in the right hand tail as they are in 1969.

Perhaps because of a different distribution of talent among the more

educated, because of credentialism based on education or because of

nepotism, this same phenomenon does not occur in other education classes,

     More light can be shed on these and other issues by examining the

distribution of the residuals in each education class.   Since we are

not able to find significant differencesin the coefficients by ability

 or education level we can use the same sets of coefficients as previously
                                 .111
 in making these calculations.

      Consider first the 1955 results in table 5. At each education level

 the standard error declines by about 10%, with the self employment
                                                                    in
 variables (Y — Y4) generally responsible for the largest reduction

 the standard error and the SES(Y — Y.7) and nonpecuniary trade offs

 (Y—Y5)
          variables nearly as Important.

      1The private  education variables, which we hink are a proxy for
 nepotism, have bigger range effects and partial R 'S in 1969 than in 1955.
     11•That the coefficients do not differ significantly, of course, tells
 us nothing about the pattern of inequality in the residuals as education varies.
                                     —70—

       In all but the bachelors group, holding the self employment variable

constant causes a reduction in the relative skewnes r'easurg. The

opposite is true in table 4 for the total aple. It eems likely that

thiB difference is duo to the use of a sepnrate stfmdardization factor

in each education level or in other words the total. ;unple combines

within education distributions i'hich have different pirarneters. In the

high school and graduate level, kurtosis dicreases hen self employment

is held constant while the oppo.itc is true at the other two education

levels. No other set of characti.ristics hrs a large impact on skewness

or kurtosis in 1955 at more than one education level.

       In 1969 the picture is more varied. The standard error of Y —

is   .nearly identical for all but the high school category which remains

the lowest and much of the difference in skewness and to a lesser extent

kurtosis disappears. At each education level holding constant the self

employment variable substantially reduces the standard error and the

relative skewness but only the high school and bachelors degree estimates

of relative kurtosis. Once again SES and nonpecuniary variables play an

important secondary role in deterr.ining the standard error but have little

effect on skewness and kurtosis.

Mental Ability

       Since very little information has ever been presented about the

distribution of earnings by mental ability, it is appropriate to repeat

the above analysis by the 5 ability levels. Table 6 contains the distribution
                                     —71—
                                                                    112
statistics for earnings and the log earnings for each ability fifth.

In 1955 the standard error is lowest for the bottom fifth and highest

for the top. The middle fifth, however, has a lower standard error and

coefficient of variation than the group on either side. Since the standard

error of the log of earnings does not vary with ability, the above

results may be due to a few extreme observations — as is also suggested

by the skewness and kurtosis meanure. Both skewness and kurtosis follow

the same pattern, with highest values in the top 1/5th; however, none of

the earnings distributions within an ability cell are normal or log normal.

     In 1969 the   standard   deviation follows the same pattern as in 1955

(though the largest fifth has the lowest coefficient of variation).

Skewness and. kurtosis are substantially lower in the top 2 fifths than

in the lowest 3; however, none of the distributions are normal or lognornal.

     Table 7 presents the inequality pattern by ability level once other

variables have been held constant. As we have consistently found in 1955,

the self employment variables cause the biggest reduction in the standard

error in most ability fifths with the SES and nonpecuniarY trade offs

contributions almost as large. In 1969 holding self employment constant

substantially reduces the standard error and skewness.

     At first glance the inequality pattern seems confusing. For example

when comparing the education results, we find high school to be (about)

     112
        It is important to remember that the ability measures is more
mathematical than a standard I.Q. measure and that to be in the sample
a person had to score in the top half of the Air Cadet Qualifying Test.
The 1/5ths, therefore, are more like tenths for the U.S. population.
                                           —72—

                                                                            113
the    lowest on skewness and kurtosis in 1955 but the highest in 1969.

A similar reversal occurs in the ability .results.

       A sorting uncertainty model can be used to explain these reversals

    and other results contained in tables 4 and 6. As explained earlier

the basis of this model is that it is difficult to measure in advance

a person's capacity to perform in various jobs. Firms also do not use

piece pay rate perhaps because of difficulty in measuring one person's

prdductivity and        of   interdependencies within production lines or heirarchial

structures. Firms, therefore, initially assign people to particular jobs

on the basis of certain"objective' criteria such as education, marital

status, military record, etc. and certain "subjective" criteria such
                              114
•




as rformance on an interview.      In addition appointment may be based

on discriminatic as evidenced by race, gender, or "parental pull".

       Since firms know that the above criteria or signals are fallable,

they continually monitor performance on the job to base decisions on

fire, retain, and promote. Average initial earnings may be fairly uniform

when studied by objective criteria, because of morale problems associated

with different pay for the same position and because at low level jobs

a person has little chance to use initiative or display productivity outside
                  115
of a narrow range.            People with more potential capacity perform better

are promoted faster and have a higher growth rate in earnings, However,

     113
       Since the adjustments for the other variables never change the rank
order on any inequality measure, we will base our statements on the inequality in Y.
     i14
      'The criteria used may vary dependIng on supply of the "best" groups
relative to total demand.
        -
            There   still
                   can be a wide variance within say education groups because
initial position obtained may depend on nepotism, being at the right place
at the right time, or because of the importance of subjective criteria.
                                      - 73.-

promotionS occur somewhat randomly because the particular vacancies
                                                               talent
a person is qualified for occur irregularly because a person's

may not be recognized at once if he t?b1oomsI late, and because family

connections or "nepotism" results in faster promotions for equally
                  116
qualified persons.

     Now how does this mode1 with some cther considerations, explain

the previous findings. First high schooi graduates have less objective
                                                 then the more educated,
credentials and probably less parent pul.1

and start at lower rungs in the career ladder. By 1955 the high school

 graduates have made some progress but thoy have not yet made it to

 those positions such as manacr ci      successful   business owner at which
                          117
 salaries are very high.        Thus in l5 high school graduates have

                                          and kurtosis than those with some
 a smaller standard error, skewness,

 college and a hachelors degreeLesLs€ sor: n the latter two groups
                                                             118
                                                                   By 1969, when
 have received promotions to very responciLie positionS.

 the men are about 47 years e1, firms have sorted out people by capacity

 thus the talented high school graduate has received his promotions and

 is at or near his potential c:Lpacit; at      age •.   But the distribution

                                                        than in the other groups
 of talent in the high school group is different

 with relatively few such tariented pcopl among the less educated. This


                         has exaudned the effects of such a system on the variance
        LlWise [ 5   I

  of earnings using a Iarkov model.
       U/pay does not increase linearly with position. See Lydall [
                                                                           30). For
                                       executives see Taubman—WalesI YC.], app., chpt.
  some specific evidence on corpotat:e
          The graduate c'ol resu'ts re ci in:: interest here since M.D., lawyers,
       118

  and   teachers ho have monopoly rc      rrn. ai nonpecuniary rewards are mixed in.
                                       -.74--


 difference arises frr several reasons. For exaple the more talented

 partly inherit their capacity from successfulparents who
                                                              encourage
 them to get more education.119 Second some sources of their capacity,

 (such as drive and creativity), may lead to academic leanings and

 scholarhips. Third for most people education may be a necessary ingredient

 in the formation of capacity.

     Now, how do we explain the ability results? A plausible argument

 can be made that the mental abIlity measure, we use is cor,related with

 types of cognitive and to a lesser extent noncognitive skills.
                                                                    Following
the lines of the above argument, we would expect skewness and kurtosis

for the less able to be relatively low in 1955 and high in 1969. Comparing

the bottom and top fifths, we find this to be the case. However, table

8 also indicates very large valuesof skewness and kurtosis in the 2nd

fifth in 1955 and an extremely large incease for the top fifth. This

is notthe only time we will find something unusual about these two ability

fifths. In [5j in chapter          we paint out the average amount of income

from capital is greatest in these two groups. This suggests that through

inheritance (   financial   control ,or nepotism), men in this group were

able to reach high positions quickly.

     While we can construct a plausible explanation of the changes in

inequality measure on the basisof a sorting uncertainty model, . other

theories are also consistent with the results.
                                                    For example Mincer'[ 3   I

     19See chapter      .
                           Also, in this sample educational attainment is
related to date of marriage, but a person with wealthier families may have
been able to affordboth marriage and education.
                                              —75—

has shown that in his theory

                        o2(YP)
                                   -     1     r2a2(CT)
                                               ____
                                                                         2rpo(CT)


                        a2(Yj)                     o2(Es)                  a(Es)


Where o2(YP) is          the   variance in peak earnings

           o2(Yj) is     the   variance in earnings in the overtaking year

           r   is the   rate of return on post school invest:ment

           a2(CT) is the variance. in        the   sum of post school investment

           02(Es) is the variance in initial post school earnings capacity

           p is the correlation between dollar investments in schooling and

               post school investment

       We will discuss the issue in more               detail   in chapter         but it is

 approximately true that 1955 corresponds to the overtaking year,( in

 any   event o2(Yt)        will   increase with t if p       is positive). Thus Mincer's

                         of    the faster growth in a between 1955 and 1969 for high.
 interpretation
       •
                                                                                                   120
 school graduates is that either p or o(CT)/cr(ES) is greater for these people.

           Skewness in Mincer's model arises primarily from the correlations

 between        the means and variances of earnings ( within education cells)
 However, under the same assumptions                as above we can express the nonstandardized

 skewness        as
                                                                     2
                                                                    a CT           r33 (CT)
                         a3(YT)
                          _____        — 1=3p3r ----
                                                                           —   +
                                                            +3p2r
                                                                    o2Es           c3E5
                          a(Yj)


                                                        school graduates       is evident in the
               The faster growth rate for ligh
  adjusted and unadjusted estimates of
                                       76—


where p1 and p2 are the correlations between E2s and CT and Es and

C2T respectively. Generally speaking         p1 and p2 will have the same
                       3                           3.      3           3
sign as p; hence, a        would certainly exceed o Yj if a (CT) and a
                                                                            ES
are the same sign. The theory would also suggest that the faster

the growth in variance within education levels, the faster the growth

in skewness provided the last term is about th1 satneat all education
                                        121
levels. This is borne Out in our sample.     The findings are not in'-

consistent with Mincer's model and indeed can not      be made so since o3CT
can vary by education level.




    izi.
       it   is   too tedious to analyze the growth ir)2the standardized measure
of skewness in Mincer's model since 3(\/2)3' will have to be squared
to eliminate the square root in the er\omfncor.
                                      —77-

!individua1 Stability in the Earnnc's Distribution
     Whilemany   of our findings are based on variables not previously

                                                                    could
used in studies of earnings, in priaip1e the same phenomena

be examined for different cohorts in Census type samples. The longitudinal

data in our sample also permit us to extend our understanding

of the dynamic evolution of the earnings distribution and to analyze

the relationship of annual to lifetime earnings by examining the stability

                                                   distribution over time.
of an individual's position in the earnings

      The empirical facts on stability and change over a long time span

 are very valuable in themselves since the distribution of lifetime

 earnings is more important for many purposes than that of any one years
                                              facts allow us to test and thus
 earnings. But equally important-these

 to have a chance to reject certain earnings' distribution theories,

 as described below.

 Individual Stability and Chanin the Earnings Distribution
                                                                 we have calculated
      To examine fndividual stability in the distribution,

 the "transition probability matrix" for the people who reported earnings

 in both 1955 and 1969. Table 1 indicates the percentage of people who

 ended up in any tenth of the 1969 earnings distribution from any given
                                     122
 • tenth in the 1955 distribution.         For example, of the people with the


     122rhere are not exactly 10% of the sample in each row or column for
 two reasons. First the dividing points were found for all respondents
 with nonzero earnings in the sample while some individuals were not
                                                                     included
                                                               in both
 in this table, primarily because they did not report earnings
 years. Secondly, in a few instances, a large number of people reported
 earnings equal to the dividing poiflt. While we could randomly allocate
 people to each adjoining class t) ill it, it was simpler and not misleading
 to place people in only one class.
                                                             Tab:.e    15
                   Distribution of Earnings in    1969   for 195 Earnings Percentile    —   Percent of People


                                                   Percentile in      1969 (% of Row Sum)

ti1c in    1955

                             nfl /
                             O. —0    19.   1   10.6       6.5         5.6    6.5      3.9
 10<20                       15.2    21.7                                                        2.7     3.4     2.6      25.7
                                                16.5      11.4        10.8    8.9      4.1
 20<30                       16.4    20.4       14. 4
                                                                                                 2.3     2.0     1.6      29.2
     -
 J,j I                                                    10.6        10.0    9.3      7.1       4.8
                             8.9     12. 6      16.2      18. 1
                                                                                                         4.5     1.9      34.6
 40<50                                                                15.6   11.1      6.7       6.4
                             5.4     in
                                     .LJ.       13.2      14.3
                                                                                                         2.5     1.7      38. 7
                                                                      16.5   15.2      9.9       7.8
 59<60                       4.9     10. 0                                                               3.1     1.4     42.8
 60<70
                                                 7.3      13.9        14.6   13.9     11.9      11.1
                             3.1      7.1        3.7       6.8
                                                                                                         7.5     4.2     46.9
 70<80                                                                14.8   16.7     15.3      17.3    11.8     3.3
                             3.0      2.5        3.5       6.1                                                           57.0
 00<90                                                                11.1   14.0     17.2      17.7    16.1     8.9
                             1.2      3.2        2.8       4.0                                                           62. 8
     10%                                                              3.8    11.2      9.8      19.0
op                           1.7      1.5                                                               26.0    19.0     71.3
                                                 0.8       1.3        3.9     6.9      4.5      10.0    25.5    43. 7    80. 1
 1969


             The Cutoff Points by Tenths for 1955 are:
                                                            4068, 4788, 5028, 5388,6000,6468,7188,8028,8798.
             The Cutoff Points by Tenths for 1969 are:
                                                            8899, 10,000, 12,000, 15,000, 16,510, 19,000 , 23,000, 30,000.
                                                             Table           16

                                                                                           in 1955
                            of        rate in earnings 1955 to 1969 by earnings percentile
               Distribution    growth
                                                             a
                                                                 Whole Sample


                                                                         =   growth rate                                                           __________
                                                    (Y69—Y55)/Y55
                                              _____________                                                                                        mean com'dl
                                                                                                                                                   annual
                                                                                                2.50<1 2.75<
                                                            1.00< 1.25< 1.50< 1.75< 2.00< 2.25<
         0   <.25       .25<   .501   .50 <.75 .75<                                             2.75 (3.00                                         gro'th
                                                            1.25 Ii.so 1.75 :2.00 2.25 2.50                                                        rate
                                               11.00
                                                I                                    ___
                                                                                     __                    -

                                                                                                                                 092     267.5%       6.8%
                                                                        .082      100   107   070        075   :043   0361 135
                                  r    .046         077     .116                                                                 021     175.9%       5.17.
3.00310.007 O.010                                                                 113   101   076        037    050   023 064
                                       .056          .126   .152        .157                                                             1806%        4.6%
0.Cfl2       .CI0        .033                                                                 0S2        030   026    041 081 '030
                                                     .133   .177        .087      130   065                                                           4.87.
             .005        .035          .070                                                                                      017     167.1%
0.0G0                                                                   .193      103   123   050        039    031   036 042
                         .039          .066          .128   .131                                                                 019     155.0%       4.67.
o.C00        .003                                                       .093      125   075   :063       053    025   020: 057
                                  :    .094          .090   .173                                                                         171.57.      4.57.
0.C02:       .006                                                                       0S9    068       037    031   010 037    026
                                       .099          .141 .173          .152      105                                                    161.0%       4.6%
             .030   ;    .026                                                                                   031   031 059    018
C.0                                                         .150        .r42      096   105    102       023                                          4.5%
                          .059         .057          .105                                                                        032     170.2%
o.UC3 .020                                                                        127   087   051        053    021   028 071
                                       .087          .119   .143        .103                                                             176.0%       4.7%
0.00t .030                .044                                                                062        032   052    024 106    030
                                                     .113   .114        .098      092   082                                              142.5%       3.6%
             .043         .062         .068                                                                     030   024 039    022
o.C0                                                        .037        .089      100   065   041        039
             .043         .110         .087          .089
0.036
                                                                   .1                                         —— —
                                  -H---   —                                — — — — — — — _________                 175.7%        .030.                 4.7%
                                                                                            .044 .034 .027 .076
                                       .076          .110 .145           .115 .113 .089 .06
 .011        .018         .045                                                                                  __LLiL
                                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                     I
                                            78—

  lowest 10% of the earnings in 1955,        i 1969   39% were still at the bottom,
  an additional 30% could be found between the 10 and 30% percentiles,

  and less than 9 percent have moved
                                            up into the top 30 percent of the distribution.
  As a simple (     ordinal)   measure of stability we can use the average percentile

  position, which has risen from 5 to 26% by 1969.

        For contrast consider the people in the top 10% in 1955. In 1969

  44% were still in the top 10%, an additional 35% were in the
                                                               next, 20%
  of the distribution, arid only 4% had fallen below the 30th percentile.

 The average percentile position had fallen from 95 to 80% in 1969.

        In the other lOths in 1955, people tend to be close to their

 starting position with, for example, from 39 to 64% of the people falling

 within the same or neighboring tenths of the distribution. Not
                                                                more than
 30% of the people in the row lie above the 70th percentile in 1969
                                                                    until
 we reach the 60—70% interval in 1955 while at least 30% of the row fall

 below the 30th percentile in 1969 until we reach the 50—60% interval
                                                                                 in
 1955. The average percelitile standing in 1969 for each tenth in 1955

 rises Continuously but on average people who were in the bottom 40% in 1955

have a higher percentile standing in 1969 while the reverse is true
                                                                    for
                              123,124
those in the top 60% In 1955.

       As shown in table 2, between 1955
                                              and 1969 about 1% of the people
suffered a decline in nominal
                              earnings, and 15% had a growth of less than
   125
75%.    For almost 50% of the sample, earnings grew between 75       and 175%

       1 ome of this difference
                                may reflect attenuation since those in the
bottom tenth can not fall but can rise in 1969 etc.
     124
        In all but one comparison, the
                                       KS test would reject the hypothesis
that each row is distributed the same as  its adjacent rows.
       Iu5 this section we     use   nominal earnings rather than the constant
dolLLr ones  used   In   the earlier chapters. This change i made
deteinjinatlonof the cut off points was done, early on,               because    the
Deflation would not change the oattern nr
                                                               in current dollars.
                                    —79—

while for 3% earnings grew in excess of 500%. Using individual ob-

servations, the average percentage change is 175% and the average annual

compound growth rate between 1955 and 1969 as 4.7% which over 14 years

is equivalent to an increase of about 90%.   (There is no reason to

prefer one measure to the other).

     Of the people who were in the second tenth of earnings in 1955:
                                                  l6%(the mode) had a
1% had a decrease in (nominal) earnings; nearly

gain between 125 and 150%; while 8.5% had a growth in excess of 300%.

The average growth rate in earnings in this tenth is 176%.

     Of the people in the BOth to 90th percentile in 1955: nearly 5%

had a decrease in their nominal earnings; the mode is in the 75 to 100%

interval; and 14.5% had a growth rate in excess of 300%. The mean

 growth rate in the next to bottom, and next to top rowe are identical,

 but there are more people in both tails of the distribution in the 80th

 to 90th percentile, and the two distributions are significantly different

 at the 5% level (K.S. test).

      In all but the two extreme rows, the mean growth in earnings only

 ranges from 151 to 176% and the compound rates .045 to .051. However,

 those whose earnings placed them in the top 70 to 90% in 1955 have

 distributions which are significantly different (   K.S.   test, 5% level)

 with more people in both tails than those in the bottom 10—50%. In

 the bottom tenth the mean change is 267% with a heavy concentration in

 the right hand tail. In the top tenth, the mean change is only 143%

 and there is a heavy concentration in the left hand tail.
                                       —80—

 Distribution of Growth Rates by Education Level

      Tables 3—6 contain the growth rate distributions for each of 4
                  126
 education levels.    Since in these tables cutoff points for the tenths

 are those for the entire sample, we may compare the corresponding rows.

 In the 10 to 20th percentile, about 68,57,45, and 36% of people with

 hih school, some college, a bachelors degree, and at least some

 graduate training had earnings increases no greater than 150%. The

average growth in earnings increases with education for people with

the same earnings in 1955. Despite the relatively small sample sizes

within each of these 1955 percentiles, the KS test rejects the hypothesis

that the cumulative distribution of, say, the second and ninth rows are

the same in each education level..

        For any one educational level, the results are similar to those given

for the whole sample in table 2.      That is except for the top and botto

rowi, the mean percentage change is independent of earnings percentile in
        27
1955.        The people at the bottom in 1955 have the highest growth rate

while those at the top in 1955 have the lowest growth rate C
                                                             except for
the high school category). Within each education level       those with high
earnings in 1955 tend to have distributions with a greater percentage of

people in both tails than people with low incomes.
                                                       Despitethe relatively

    126We used education as reported in 1969. The distribution of
education in 1955 is different because of the post 1955 education received
by about 8% of the sample.
    127
       There is however, a tendency in each of the tables for the average
compound growth rate to decrease with 1955 earnings partly because of
the wider variance in growth rates at the higher 1955 percentiles.
                                                                                                                                             I.




                                                 Table     17

                                                                            Percentile in 1955
                           Growth Rate in Earnings 1955 to 1969 by Earnings

                                                 High School Graduates



                                                   —   Y55)/Y55         growth rate
                                            (Y69



        o <.25! .25< .50 .50 <.75 .75<             1.00<! l.25<
                                       tl.00 1.25 1.50 l.75 :2.00
                                                                  ,                                                                5.67.
                                                                                  *j•ê..   062 C1;9    025
                                                   154     10S        117   130                                                    3.77.
                                                                                           006 01  :   Oi9
                                                           191        100   068   031                                              3.7%
                                       .216        234                                                 025
      .012                                                            140   033   J.d      017 oco                                 4.1%
                                       .190        223     074                                         043                         3.6%
      .030                                                                        032      011 032
                                       .194         172    151        Q507S                r'.)        005
3.000 .030                                                                        031      J-)    01                               3.4%
                                .152   .152         223    076        112! 049                         024
                    .116                                                                                                           3.8%
o.ooo .005                             •   190      26     095        143 003     024 I 024 024
                                                                                                       031
                    .024        .167                                  A1'               031 000                                    .1.   .
0.000   .003                                        234    lrA :                  047
                *                109   .172
O.o0    .016        .078                             1'
                                                           )                062   r'1
                                                                                  ,.J d 012 012                                    2.9%
                                .210   .222                C!9        09                A   074        021                         3.3%
0.012 .C10
                ' .074                              A
                                                                            ('    053   'I
                                                    UI_v       •
                                                           JLJ :.A—'
0.032 .063          .168        .131   .116                                       040   067 013        027
                                                           080              053
0.12 .040           .173        .067   .080. 067


                                                                                                       .020   .039 .016   13867.    .47.
                                                           .103       .098 .063   .037• .027 .023
                           •:   .122       159     .184
.012     .016
                          a
                          oC.J-
                          0

                          C)
                                 Cd 00
                                       04'
                                       I.4C3
                                                 '.cr
                                                 c .-4 O In C'4 C) C N- ,-.4 .-4



                                                                   .-4 C) Lnrc4Q-
                                 AD .1_1                           N-   In '-4 . QQy
                                                                   '.0 n N. '.0 N- N.                   N-
                          a oo                                     i 1 r1 .-4 .4 r4r-4                  '-4
                           0
                           0                    CC CC) C) C) In C) -J N. C'l 'El                        -4-.
                                                C.) C) .-I '-I C) C'-) C") C) C") '-1                   c-I
                               111
                                A               C) C.' 0 C) 9 0 C.) C-.) 0 0                            0
                                  .
                                      g                   '.       C) —4 O -.' —1 C) C\                 N-
                                                                                                        '.0
      I'-'
      In                              In        '-4 C) 0 C) C-) C) 0 C.)               0 C)             C)
      0
      '-4                      Lx               .-4 () N- 0 0) 0 -.1 --t .--)                            a,
                               N-     0.        'f'i C') c' -C -4 C') C') C') -..2 )
                                •                    CD 0 C) C) 0 0 0 0 0                                ('4
                                                                                                         0
                               CNC")
       a,
      '-I                       V
                               0v)r-.
                                  in            C").zj-CDC'1.4'-C'I
                                                 LI') '.0 C) N. C) C- I —? '-4 C-I
                                                                                   -                     0
       4'                                                                                                C-.)
       a)                             c'                  C) C) C) C) CD 00 C) C                         C).
       (.1
       I-i                      V
       a,                                       .—i            ... "i c'3 0 .-1 N. -1 t- —               C-)
      p4

       00
                                  • u.
                               C'.)   c'i       000 C) CD 000 C) C-
                                                '..- C') C' -.r (.') C- .-4 '.0 ('I C")
                                                                                                         C)
                                V
      -'.4                     C) Li)
                               0 •C-I
                                                .-. ..) C.) ..—i LI) C) N- -4 ('.1 C'
                                                N- N. C) '4 '') ') '.0 C") C") f)                        ri
                                                                                                         '0
       I-i
                               ('IC-.)
                                                0 C) •'-1 C) C) 0 0 0 0 C)                               C)
       Cd                                                                                           .
                    a)          V
      •0
                    1-I
                    Cd
                               tEl 0
                               N. C)                      C')4')
                                                              " '.0 -N.CD
                                                                             N- -   0
                                                                        0) sC) I:' c' C'—
                                                                                          -1              '-4
                                                                                                          0)
      0
      '.0
                    '-4
                               ,...             C) CD C) —4 C.) CD 0               C) C) C)               C).
      0'           4-I          V                          .                                              r-1
                               Ott')                                                                      C)
      0             C)
                    4
                               Il) I'—
                                 •                                 c .-;     -r L C) '.)                  '-I
      4'     C)     00         ,-4,-l                                          ..-......
             00
00    In     a)     U           V                                                               .
                                                                                                          Co
                               'El 0                             o 'i 0) '.0 N-
                                                                             ''
      'El    '-4                                          N- 0 (1) v,                                     C)
             '-4   I'-'               LI)
                               ,,
      0%                       C-I
                                                 V) '.) C\ CD -. '.C) C'-) C") C) 0
C)
             0
             C)
                   In                            C). .— I C)  0 '- CC
                                                                                                          r-4



                               g
r1

H rlII
       CI)
•.0    00    C,                 V
Cl           a                                                                                            a)
             0     In                            C)C'IC')Cf)QCc').—.4C'.'.O                               In
       '-I
             (/)                 •     .
                               ,...4 .—I         ,—4 .—.4 .-.4 ,. C I 4 C')        .—l .—4 C)
                                                                                                          ri
       CT,         0'
                   '.0                                                                     -
                                VC)                                                                       '.0
      -'.4
                               Li) C)
                               N- •              ('1-i-
                                                 çI,—,—-444-l  C") If) C) C) C') (El '—4 —2
                                                               v', C') c-C C) C') C') C') C)
                                                                                                          C.)

       C)
                                 ,...4                        4.4 -4.4
      4'                       In              ——-.-—--.--—- .—....----.—-- .— —.
       Cd                      N-                                                  .
                               V                      ) C') C") .—I C) N- 4 ('I '/)
      4-I                      0                 -.r N- C'— N- '0 -.. '.0 0 CC) c-I                       0'
       0                       it                0 CD 0 CD •--1 .—I C) .—4 C)                             C-'
                                                                                                              C)
       ).1
                               0In               .
                                                               .
                                 •
                                                 C) C) c C'-) C) CD
                                                 ..-4C)0-.0Crc0-..cs)
                                                                              ('
                                                                        -I .-1 —I                             C'
                                V
                                                 000      -C) C) C) '-4 C) 0 C)
                                                                                                              .4.
                                                                                                              C)


                               'I
                               U,                     ,

                                                           C') C CD C C) if) N- '0 C)
                                                                          C.) ' '0 '0 '.0                - C-I
                                                                                                           ('I
                                '3               C) C) C) C) C)
                                                     C)    C..) C.) C) C.) C) C) C) C) 0                      0
                               a
                                                           c?Yi ••o•       c, c r--o-
                                                     C) CD CD C) C) C) C) C) C) C')                           r-I
                                                 •C) C.) 0 C) 0 0 C)               C) C) C)
                               0V                    0 0 0 CD C) 0 0 0 0 0
                                                                                                              C)



                                      C,
                                      H
—---5----—-
                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C)                     a' 9                       N- p-4 C)            C')           0
                            .                               C)                 0) 0           C') CD            C")         C)              a'U", C)                              -C)                                                                       -
                                 N.:              "3' C",
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C'                           C'- CD      C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '0                            '.0   ')                     C') '—4     .-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ("I .—4 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    —
                                                                               0            "0c'-4    0                      c              C)                   CD                         C") C)                 '0                 C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '-J' 00                0)                             C)                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '-4         C)
                                                  N.         CD         41')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a'                                          N-    0                                           .-4          F)                            Cs)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0 C)
                                                                                                                        I-. 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                "-4
              C)                C',    r-.4
                                                                               0                      0          0'0                        0)                         C)         .         C'-.    C)             '1')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             C-' —                         C)         000                           C)
                                                                                   .
                                                  '.t                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C) (I') C)
               .4               -      O\
                                                             C)         C')                 '—4 .—4
                                                                                            C" .-4                a' C' 0                    N-                                   -         -..J-   C)             '—4                C"I                                         N- Cl)        0                                   .—           CX)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               a'C') C)                                                    Cl)        '0                CD     C)   0
                                                  C')        C)         C')CC)                        CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C)                                                0            Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ,—i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                C)     C')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
               %t                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C'—                                                      .'-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C) C)
                                                                                            0)0 C.)                              0                                                          '.0 '-4
                                                                                                                 C', C'-                     '.0                                   -                               .—4 '--"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             '.0 ,.-4                      C)
                                                              C)        a) N.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C)
                                       -4         0)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a'                                                       -4
                                                                                                                                                                                            N- 0
                            —f CO
               ..3'
                                                                                                                                 0                                                                                 C                                                              .—4 .-4L')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C) C)       C)
                                                              0         '.') '4             0 C)0                CD
                                                                                                                        •
                                                                                                                                             CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '-                                   —                                                -2 Q                   —4 —4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           —4         C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0 0
                                                   C')                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CD
               %fl              '-.0   C'J
                                                              0         N- ")                a' "—4 C)            C')            C)          -t                        0000                  N-0                     ¼')   C"           -,J'                                       C'.   ':')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0 C)                          C)          CD                C)
                                                                                                                        .0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c'JC')
               In                -J    In          N-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0            C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (J 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \) 0              Cl)                                        C")    .—4     C')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                 -     C)          .—4        0         'i     N-            C") —r   0           C')
                                                                                                                        .0
                                                                                                                                             C")                       C)                    a'C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -)' a'            C')                                         C") I-')      C.)                                 '—4           C'                           CD C'-                        C) CD                        "0                            C-)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    C)
                                                                                                                                                                                             '.0 Q                                                                                                                                                                                                            (D ()                                    C                  C)C)
                                                              0                                           0       N.                          N-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .—1
               In               Co     C)          C)                       C" CD            C')
                                                                                                                        ,                                                                                                               (D                                          C' (24        0                                                '0                           '-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .—I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0             -
                                                                                             0)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O                  C) C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           _-.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     C)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     In
               ifl               -.t   -                       D            C"   j'                       C)      '.0            C)          0)                         00
                                                                                                                                                                        '
                                                                                                                                                                                              (24
                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CD            0                                                    ,.QQ4Q00I0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                In        .-0000              If)       000000000
               N.                N.                CD
                                                               -            •r ,')            -
                                                                                             '1)          C)      In        __                Lf',
                                                                                                                                               oco-..rN..-5')'.')C')
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C' ,..          If',              Q,,4,440104
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N-C$N-(-.rN-ICN-I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cl)'-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                                                                       .                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               --
                                                                                        —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     00                                                                  LI')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '                                                                                                                     V                             0V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      III I
                                        -J                                  0 ')             CD    0              'nC'-              ("-1                                  c-i
                                                                                                                                                                       . -i V0")0
                                                                                                                                                                                               ("1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .              v U"C')                         v                                           .r"4           '3     0 'I")
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       In                           LI')                    0
                                                                                                                                 I III IIII
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C')
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -                                           N.            N.
                                              9                                                                                                                                                                  V                V
                                                                              •                                   °                                                                                                                                                                                                      OC'l                                                                                                                                   _____
                                        0                                                                                                                                                                            11')N.                                         .—4—i
              cu                              0             It',   A   00   0                 41",   N-                 U",
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CC"1
               ci     cOU                r                                            I_2Iv                    Iv                                                                1——-——--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1--
                                                                                                                                                                                                          c1)    cxiI             0I                                ii         LI') '1') >                LI') In   '4                    C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Cl)Cl)         to                  U))1                 U
                                                                                                                                              P4
                                                                                                                                                                              toci          ci                                   a'               o                         LI') Li")   0'             ,  toC                       Ci           •                  'I                      I-I    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a',-4                               1-4
                                E
                                0
                                C.) 4 .
                                            Q14
                                        C tOll
                                                                                                       I-I
                                                                           '5D '-I C' I— r— 0
                               '- C. C'-               p-4    4 C-'i C) r— c-i a) -) .—4 r—
                                                                                                       OS'
                                                                                                       '—4


                               ,e -o                   -- C-I C-i   (S-i   -4 CS-i .—4 ,--i ('I r—4
                               ___o
                                    0•                 'I) C) C' N- C) \) - m r— o                     0
                                                       ¼) — ' c-I C1 tt '-4 c-I '-1 (1)
      U..                                         I    -l C) C) 00 0 C) C C) C)                        C)
      'PI                            A
      C'                            Co
      •1-4
                                    00  •    •                           -
                                                       N- C N 0 0 '-0 CI --.r c'I Q
                                                       .-. C) C (N -4 Lfl -
                                                       c-I 00 .—IQQ C) .--*
                                                                                                       C...
                                                                                                       '-4
                                                                                                       '-4
                                     V
       41)
                 I                  I150               L/) —4 Cs C C) CD 0 '11 0.) 0
                                                       C') LI) 'D LI) II) ç) N- L/) CS-i C-I
                                                       O C 00000 0 00                                  0
       41)5
       cJ                            V
                                    0(11               —4 '—I (55 0 L/) .0 CI) C') '-.0 CD             Ill
       41)5                                            r— 0 — CI) LI) rj) —j
                                                       0 1 0000000 CD                                  0
       ci

      -'-4

       1-i
                                    V
                                    (Nu.               j0000cjoQQQc)
                                                             —4 0 r—. i
                                                       CS' LI) CS-I C) C)
                                                                                    C-i C C' 0
                                                                               ti) -- (I) C) C')       C'.
                                                                                                        Ill
                                                                                                       C)
                                    V
                                    0(11
                                    0(5-s              '-.7 .—4 C' C) (11 —4 CI) —-.2' -.t 0
                                                                  ct c\ C')
                                                       c—s cI) C') - c'-. —i C)
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                        C'
                         4)
                        4_I                            Q-4-IQQ-IQC)QQ                                   0
                                    V
      0\                 )'1
                                    UQ
                                    NO                 '-•l —4 N- 4') 0 —4 .—4 N- C') C)
                                                       N- -4 Ct N C)            i 4 .-l .-.4 C)         ill
                                                                                                        0
                                    rlC                C) .-4 0 .-4 .- I              4 •-I •—4 0       '-4
                        0           V
      u,O
                        14
                        tO          C.Dul              .4 (N —I N- C '—4 —2' c- c'I     Q               —1
                                                       C'— '. —4     C C1 '-' C' C) -s? C)              CI
      .-4 c            'i-I
                                                       0 —4 —C .—4 '—I .—.4 —i .—4 .—4 —I

      cl) cj14'        U)
                       >
                                     V
                                    'nc
                 H     5—                              CS-I .—4 tIi 0 0 Cl) _-4 4'I -J' 0               (p..
                                                       0) —7 (N -C) 0 4— P—4 C') 0 C'                   Cs'
0     c: w       4_I
                       U-I
                       v-I
                                                       0 •—I '—4 tN .—4 C--i .—4 .1 .4 C)
      "4         cj
Q)
'-4                    C'
                       '0
                                    0(5-I              r— .— —i r-. u- C') .-4 ) Cfl o
                                                       < %f( '—4 C) t r.j) —4 - C-i Ci)
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                        '-4
(j               1-4                                   o o •—              .-i 0 •—1 .—4 •—4 C)
E-4                    5—..

      4_I
                                 In 0
      (41
             r                   N
                                     -p--I
                                                       (5-3 '--4 C C) C) Ci) 0 - (Is C)
                                                       —4 L) '0 - t1) ('1 'f( C\ N-
                                                       000 C) 00 C) 00 '-.4
                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                        p-I
                                                                                                        0
                                 In
                                 N
                                    V
                                 0                     OQa)o)c-c-0                                      0s
                                                       0000000000
                                                       C) —4 (N C) in c'i ('I C) C)              111
                                                                                                        C—I

                                                                                                       •0
                                 C)
                                 .1-I

                                 V                     C) 0 - N- C) 0) 0) 4') c ô
                                 In
                                 CI                    000000000• -
                                                      - C) 0 '-4 (N — C-I (N C-I .—I 0                   0
                                                                                                         C—I




                                 'I-I
                                 (N
                                    V                  (N00Q0CiC')C0C)                                   '-4
                                                                                                         r-4
                                 0                      00QQ00000
                                                       —4 (N C) (DC) C) —4 C) ('I C')

                                                        00C)C)t1-I0--:000
                                                                                                         C)

                                                      - C) 0 C::) 0 0 C) '--a 0 0 'J)                    C)
                                                                                                               --
                                 0V                    000 000 0• 0, 9
                                                       dddooooooo
                                    —81-

few observations, within these tables, the differences in the distribution

by row are significant. Thus we can conclude that results in table 2

don't occur because high school graduates are more concentrated in the

lower percentiles in 1955.

     In the appendix, we present several equations in which the dependent

variable is (Y69 —   y55)/Y55.   (The reader who wishes to examine the

determinants of Y69 — Y55 can do so by subtracting the 1955 regression

from the 1969 one). The first equation contains all the variables used

in the final equations. for 1955 and 1969 in chapter 4. The second

equation adds Y55 to the first.

     We will concentrate first on the second equation which contains Y55

and which has an R2 of .20. The1nclusion of Y55 in our equation means

that we have held constant all theother systxnatic determinants of Y

and its percentage change including luck and K55 —155 where 1(55 is the

stock of investment in one the job training and 155 is the investment in
           128,129
that year.         But the coefficients on the other variables in this

equation represent the effect of each variable on the growth rate, net

of the effects passed on through Y55.

     The higher is a person's 1955 earnings the slower is his growth rate.

     128
       We have expressed the on the job training variable in this way to
be in accord with Mincer's model, as explained below.
     129
       It can be demonstrated that if we compare the estimates of
Y   Xd + Ze   and   Y = Xf + (Z + Xb)g that our estlm&tes of g and e
would be identical while the estimate of f would equal that of d — bg.
                                   —82—

The coefficient of —.09 is highly significant with a "t"   value   of 19.

As just explained, the coefficient on the earnings variable represents

the effect of all the unmeasured variables. Results presented later would

suggest that one of the unmeasured variables that is important is luck.

The on the job training variable, K55 — 155, may also be important though

tests of the theory presented below tend to conflict with Mincer's theory.

     Previous research based on crosssection data has shown .that age

earning profiles tend to be steeper for the more educated.     Using

the same people at different points of time,s also find that the

average growth rate increases continuously with education (   except
for some graduate) with most of the difference from high school graduates

being statistically significant. -- The coefficients on the education

variables are larger than most of the other coefficients though attending

private elementary school is the single largest coefficient.

     While the average growth rate increases monotonically with ability,

nonef these coefficients are significant at th5% level. There are,

however, several interesting variables, which have significant and large

effects. For example, those who are Jewish have a growth rate 21% points

above that of Catholics. Several other SES variables are also significant.

For example those who attended private elementary school have a growth

rate 80% higher than those who didn't. Also mother—in—law's and

father—in—law's education are both significant and positive.

     Of the time spent on youth variables, sports and part time job have

significant positive effects while chores has a significant negative
                                   —83—

effect. The nonpecuniary variables are significant with the exception

of helping others and job security, which is significant at the 6%

level. Those not interested in future financial prospects, nor in

challenging work, have a slower growth rate which also is true for those

interested in independence in their work. The people who prefer to

be salaried have a 10 percentage point slower growth rate.

     The age variable has a negative coefficient implying a concave

earnings function. The positive sign on year of first job also implies

concavity but this coefficient is only significant at the 5% level.

     Those who were self employed in 1969 have a faster growth in earnings.

Increased hours on first job in 1969 also lead to a faster growth rate
                                                130
but the opposite is true for hours on second job.   Those who moved inter—

regionally after 1955 have a faster growth rate as do those who live in

bigger cities in 1969. Good health in 1969 as reflected in weeks lost

from illness and weight —   are associated with higher growth rates.
     We have reestimated the equations dropping the variables that pertain

exclusively to 1969. The general results are unchanged.

     The equations clearly indicate that there are important systematic

elements in the distribution of growth rates from 1955 to 1969. Is

an underlying structure that explains which of the determinants of

earnings in 1955 and 1969 are also significant in the growth rate equations?


      This   may be because the 1969 earnings are only for main job while
 the 1955 earnings may include all jobs. However, this variable seems to
 represent those people with low wage rates who work hard. Thus it may be
 representing some of the forces in Y55.
  In Mincer's theory, differential growth rates reflect differential

 investments in O.J.T. Thus the nre educated, those whose in—laws

 have high education, those who attended
                                           private elementary school, those
 who do not want to be self employed, don't want to be independent,
                                                                    are
 not interested in future financial success and who are Jewish, all

 invest more than the omitted
                                categories. Mincer may be right, but one
 still wonders why these groups are different.

      An alternative explanation is that because
                                                    of uncertainty, people
 have to demonstrate their competence on the job which determines how

 quickly they ascend their career ladders. There are different career

 ladders with different characteristics.   Some careers are relatively
safe but as a consequence have bQth
                                      a relatively low ceiling on earnings
and a narrow distribution of
                                outcomes. Other careers have higher

earnings ceilings but more risk. Because people are relatively risk

averse the latter careers have higher
                                        average earnings. The difference
in earnings between ladders is greater for older person's because the

sorting process takes place quentia1ly over time and people only

gradually reach the upper parts of the heirarchy.

     This explanation, which can be applied easily to the risk preference

and other nonpecuniary variables, can also explain why the other

variables are significant. For example, the in—law and private school

variables can be interpreted as
                                  proxies for nepotism. In an uncertain
world a nepotistic system can function by a person be given a secure
                                   —85—

 job and then only if he has the ability is he promoted (
                                                          though his
 promotions may come faster for equal ability). Since there are
                                                                     pay
 scales within a firm, even the owner's son will only receive very high

 earnings if he holds an important job. We have argued earlier that

 the religious variable is associated with drive and hard work       but
                                                                 ,



such effort may only pay off cumulatively.   Finally, the educatio

findings reflect the types of career ladders chosen by the more educated.

Very few of our college graduates worked at any job but owner /manager,

salesman, or professional. Their choice may have been based on

opportunities or preferences but in any event these can be the careers
                                                                 131
within which sorting is important and ceiltng earnings are high.

Test of Predictions of Some Earnings Distribution Theories

     We begin the discussion with the stochastic theories32In these

models initial earnings depend on an individual's capacity but the

change in earnings depend on luck. Let the earnings of the ith

individual in year t be represented by Y1 and the random event by ej



     '3ven if this alternative explanation is correct, Mincer's
                                                                theory
may be correct in a formal sense. Lifetime earnings within career ladders
can be adjusted so that they are the same net of risk premiums and non—
pecuniary rewards. But even here, the increase in earnings need not be
due to on the job training but could solely reflect the firm's learning
by observation, bhough a combination of the two learning mechanisms seems
more likely.
     132
       bee Mincer [ - ) for    an interesting survey and analysis of these
theories. The original work in this area is due to Aitcheson and Brown,LLJ
Champernowe, and Rutherford, and Mandej.brot ['S-'. 3 1 ]. Various
                                                                   assumptions
about the distribution of the e's and about the validity of 1) or la)
can lead to a normal, log normal or Pareto or other distributions.
                                       —86-

which   is assumed to be distributed independently of

stochastic theories can   be written   as:
                 1) Y -          + ej -       +

                                                          N
                 la) 1nY —    lnY_1     + ej —    'io +   Ee

If the c's are serially independent, the distribution of Y will depend

solely on the distribution of e after a long nough passage of time.

Moreover with this assumption, the stochastic theories predict that

the variance of earnings ( or Of its log) will increase continuously
         133
with time.    These models either do not explain why education, ability,

etc. are correlated with earnings or they allow the correlation only
          134
with            In the latter case, these theories predict that the

correlations with education, etc. with Y decline over time since the

variance of Y increases.

        The stochastic theories require that either the difference or the

percentage change in earnings be independent of the level of earnings.

But table 2 indicates that the mean growth rate in earnings is differént

 at the highest and lowest levels of 1955 earnings and that those with

 high earnings in 1955 have distributions with fatter tails.    The difference

 in mean growth rates can be attributed to transitory effects that do

 not become impounded into a person's earnings base, but such an expiañäion

        This is the assumption normally made and the one we will test.
 However, it is important to note that Kaldor [ c3 ] assumes the e's to be
 serially dependent. He is interested in finding conditions on the correlation
 of the e's so that the variance of earnings would be constant at all ages,
 which is contrary to fact. It would be possible, however, to generate any
 pattern on the tim profile of the variance in Y by making the appropriate
 assuintons on the correlations of the e's.
        The stochastic processes theories also provide no explanation of
 why age earnings profiles slope upward or why the steepness varies with
 education.
                                     —87--


is not in accord with the Markov assumptions of the stochastic models.

As is evident from the pattern of the percentage changes and has been

confirmed by direct calculations, the average difference in earnings

increases with the level of Y55. Thus models expressed as equation 1

are also rejected by our data.

     Since in Markov models, the education and other variiables are

correlated with Yo only, the variance explained by such variables

should decrease as people age. But education, ability, family background,

and other characteristics have an R2 of about 4 points higher in 1969

than in 1955 even excluding the information pertaining to 1969.

Investment in On the Job Training Models

     Next let us consider the investment in on the job training theory

as presented by Mincer [   351. HIs   model can be thought of in the following

terms. Suppose skills learned on the job increase a person's marginal

productivity to many employers If an employee who receives general on

the job training is legally free to accept any job offer at any time,

after finishing his training he will be paid a wage equal to his new,

higher marginal product (   in   a competitive market). Next suppose

occupation A gives no general training and will pay a person the same

wage rate throughout his lifetime but occupation B involves general

training and has a rising age earnings profile for an individual. A

rational person would choose the occupation whose earnings stream has

the larger present discounted value. But Mincer argues that with free

entry into both occupations, the present 'ialue of the two earnings streams

will be equalized. Hence, since a person will receive a real wage equal
                                        —88—


to his marginal product after training, he must be paid less than his

marginal product while being trained.

     Mincer expresses his theory as:


                 2)      —
                             (l   + r
                                        t


                                        j—o
                                            XjjXi)
where     which depends on schooling, ability, etc. is the constant earnings

of a person who never invests on the job, A is the fraction of earnir

invested, and r is the rate of return on investment on the job. Mincr

assumes that investments are a monotonically decreasing function of
     135
age.     The change in earnings, Yt+l_Yt can be written as

which will be positive if A decreases with age.

        Mincer has designated as the overtaking point that year in which

rEX equals A or when
                              =   . Suppose     for the moment that everyone

was at the overtaking point at one year. Further assume that '1 is not

correlated with investment C      or
                                Al in equation 3 below) though Mincer's
                                         136
theory does not rule Out such correlation.    Assuming that At differ

by individual, people with the same Y and different investments will have

different changes in earnings subsequently. If the distribution of A

is independent of V, so also will be the percentage changes in earnings.

Thus when examined at the overtaking point, Mincer's theory yields the

same testable hypothesis on growth rates as the stochastic theory as

expressed in equation la).


            en we apply the tests we will reconsider the effects of this correlation.
       ,ee              .  Ben Porath has shown analytically that such a
pattern will often arise from utility maximization behavior.
    Mincer's model, however, yields different predictions when growth

rates are calculated from a year that is not the overtaking point. We

can see this best if we specify       the on the ob training investment function.

Mincer   in   his analysis often assumes that the individual', investment paths

are exponential as in equation 3).
                                _bt
                    3) X—A1e                    O<A<lb<O
The Implications of this investment equation ( as well as one with a

linear time trend) for testing this hypothesis which are derived in

will be summarized here. Mincer usually restricts b to be the same

for all individuals while letting A1 vary. In this case a length of

the overtaking period is the same for all A ( and r) though the actual

overtaking year will vary for people of the same age because of differences

in time spent in school and military service. Mincer's model, therefore,

preditts that those with the higher A will have higher growth rates in

earnings.

     If we knew Ai for each person, we could test the theory directly.

We can, of course, calculate the average earnings a person with given

set of measurable skills would receive, but the difference between an

individual's actual earnings and this average would be an imperfect estimate

of A1 since other unmeasured skills would also be in this residual. However,

as long as we are willing to assume that A1 is not correlated with

( or the unmeasured skills) we can classify people into groups between

which the average amount of A1 varies. That is in years earlier than

overtaking, those ( with the same education, ability, etc.) who are

investing more must be earning less and the earnings figure C perhaps
                                       —90—

adjusted) can be used as an instrumental variable or proxy for A.

     Similarly, those who invest more will have a higher growth rate in

earnings. Moreover those who have below average earnings in the pre-

overtaking years will have above avesage earnings after overtaking.

     According to Mincer, the overtaking point occurs in no more than

hr years of work experience or probably less than a decade.             In 1955

in NBER—TH sample the length of time in the civilian post World War II

labor market is 8 to 10 years of. most high school graduates, 7 to 9

years for most of those with some graduate work and 5 to 8 years for those
                          137
with one or more degrees.     As a first approximation we canasawne that

everyone was at the overtakinoint in 1955. But in this instance,

Mincer's and the stochastic theory generates the same hypothesis which

we have already rejected.

     Because the more educated have worked fewer years and because individuals

 fo±low different investment paths, it is unlikely that all individuals

are at the overtaking point in 1955. Mincer often specifies as his

investinett function equation 2) with bi equal to              for all persons. For

this investment function, the overtaking period is the same for people

with the same education ( who begin work in the same year). But when

we examine the distribution of growth rates within education groups, as

in tables .    we find the same pattern of results as above and this

pattern is unaltered if we standardize the observed growth rates or the

1955 level of earnings for differences in age and time on the job.


      13Zbout 1/2 of the high school graduates and 1/3 of the some college
 graduates began work before 1942.
                                                S




     Suppose that contrary to Mincer     the b's    diffsr but on aveiage people

in all •duàational levels were at the overtaking point in 1955. Since

earnings increase with education, on the     average   people with high education

but low earnings in 1955 must be investing more than people with less
                                 138
education and the same earnings.    But those people with less education

and high   earnings   in 1955 must be investing less than the more educated.

Thus at each level of 1955 earnings, the mean        growth rate   should increase

with education as is found in tables 3—6. But under the same assumption,

within an education class those with     smaller    earnings in 1955 must on

average have been investing more than those with more earnings. Hence,

the mean   growth rates   should be inversely related to 1955 earnings within

each education group.139 Yet in-tables 3—6 the mean growth rates are

constant except for the very top and     bottom tenths.
     It    is possible that high school graduates are beyond the overtaking

point —    especially   since 1/2 of this group began work before World War II

while those with one or more degrees have not yet reached the overtaking

point. When either A or b vary in equation 2) the profiles will continue


     138ThiS argument assumes that the other positive determinants of
earning are not negatively correlated with education. However, we have
recalculated tables 2—6 adjusting Y and tY/Y for differences in all significant
variables, e.g., we subtract out the average difference in earnings between
those in the bachelors and high school group or the top and bottom fifth, etc.
The adjusted tables yield comparable results(?).
     139
           rhis   tends to happen in the compound growth rates buc the differences
 are not significant.
                                      —92—



 to   fan out beyond the overtaking point ( as    long   as   investment   continues).
 While for those people not yet at the overtaking point1 those investing

 gore in 1955 should have the higher growth      rate.    In this case the

,correlation between mean growth    rates   and 1955 earnings level should be

positive for high school graduates and negative for college graduates.

But in tables 3—6, once the top and     bottom   fifths are eliminated, there

is not correlation at any education level in the average growth rates

and a slight negative correlation at any education level in the compound

growth rates.

       The classification by observed percentiles in 1955 may be affecting

the test of Mincer's theory since his formulation does not deny that an

individual's earnings in a year may be affected by random events. Suppose

such events are transitory so that, ignoring the on the job investments,
   —   Y   + e. Then as in Friedman[ /, ) we would expect         the top and
bottom     tenth of 1955 earnings to include a larger proportion of those

with large positive and negative e's. But with transitory events uncorrelated

over 14 years, we would also expect those at the top in 1955 because of

large positive e's to have low growth rates, etc. Replacing the observed

fraction of people in the top tenth in the left hand cell with the overall

sample percentage the average growth rate becomes about 1.8 while a

comparable adjustment for the right hand cell for the bottom tenth reduces
its average growth rate to about 2.2.' If these numbers are to be trusted,
table 2 would yield a U shaped pattern of average growth rates which is
not consistent with either the Mincer or luck theories.
                                        —93—

          In making these tests, we have consistently assumed that investment

 (   or   A1) was not correlated with       It is this assumption that, for

 example, allows us to say that people with a given education and low
                                                                         140
 1955 earnings must on average contain the people who are investing more.

 Mincer's theory does not rule out either positive or negative correlations,

which if large enough could destroy our ability to distinguish groups

with more or less investments in on the job training.

          There are several possible responses to this point. First our

equations indicate which variables have a significant effect on the gráwth

rate in earnings, which indicates differential investment.       Standardization
for these variables ( on the growth rate and on Y55) does not alter our

conclusions though, of course, otrr equations do not explain a majority

of the variance in earnings or its growth. Second if Mincer is not

willing to specify the correlations a priori, then it will be difficult

to distinguish his theory from stochastic ones since it is always possible

to find certain patterns of correlations among the error terms to generate

any age profile of variances.

      The essence of Mincer's argument is that labor markets functions well.

There are several reasons why our data might reject the investment hypohtesis,

though Mincer's theory (    with   no correlation between A1 and Y1) might

be a partial explanation of earnings and the labor market. By 1955 the

market might have adjusted for expected wage changes that were not realized.

      -140
       fhe argument is the same as Friedman's [       / ], as
                                                           to why people
with low observed income on average should have negative transitory income.
                                       —94—

But if forecasts are generally incorrect, it is difficult to consider

how investment modelS can ever be verified with either cross section

or time series sample i    or   more importantly how such samples can be

analyzed within the context of equilibrium investment models.

     Second Mincer's formulation only applies to general on the job trainthg.

No one has yet analyzed the implications of firm speific training on

earnings profiles though some arrangements must lead to rising profiles.

Sorting, Uncertainty and Heirarchy Modeir;

     Another explanation of the change in the earnings distribution with

age is provided by a sorting uncertainty model. That is suppose that

employers are uncertain about a person's overall skill level because

performance depends on many skill-s some of which are thfficult to test

for in advance. The firm can react to uncertainty in many ways. One

particular method, which may be very relevant in a heirarchial structure,

is learning by observing. In this model firms initially place an individual
                                                                       141
in a job which is an entry position for one or more career paths.            Then

firms make successive decisions to fire, retain or promote on the basis

of both the observed and required competency in the particular position

held and   the   number of jobs openings in the next rung. People will be

promoted faster the more competence they demonstrate and the quicker

positions that they are qualified for open up.

     Let us equate the positions with earnings and denote a per5ofl5

maximum earnings capacity as Y which is a function of education, in-

herited skills, etc. A person's prgoress towards '-       is   represented by an


     141The initial assignments may be based on "signals" such as education,
sex, age or various aptitude tests.
                                     —95—

 adjustment process

                 5)   in 'it"it_j.
                                      ajlnYj*/y11
 We would expect a to vary over individuals and over time because of the

 difficulties of different supervisors
                                         learnings about the individual
 and because appropriate
                           openings may occur randomly. In addition since
 Y* is not observable we
                           expect a distribution of growth rates for people

 at Y1.
      This model has certain characteristics that are different from

 those of Mincer and are capable of empirical verification or refutation.

For example since promotions depend on prior job performances, the most

able should, on average, be promoted faster and always have a larger

growth rate in earnings. But for a given a    ,   the   variance of Y will
increase continuously with age.

     Second this model does seem to provide a consistent explanation of

which variables determine the growth rate in earnings. The sorting

model postulates that initially employers have very little information

on a worker's productivity but that over time employee quality is rewarded

through faster promotions. The larger growth rate in earnings by education
level — demonstrated in tables
                                  and in   is in accord with this prediction.

However, the same regressions indicate that
                                              mental ability only has a
weak effect on earnings' growth
                                  rate. More positively the theory does
provide a rationale for the other variables
                                              significant in the growth
rate equations, as given above.

    The remaining pattern of results in table      and      is explanable
                                  - 96—


within the sorting theory. Those whose 1955 earnings
                                                       ars well below
(above) average must include more temporary under —   achievsrs ( low

achievers) and should have the faster growth found in ths   bottom(top)

tenth. Suppose that Y* is much greater for the "best"   workers and that
                                          "best". Since 1955 is still
Y55 is an imperfect predictor of who is

fairly early in their working life, the best could still have the lowest

1955 highest earnings growth rate. The constancy of the mean growth

rate between the 10th and 90th percentile may reflect the downward pull

of people who in 1955 were at or above their potential, offsetting the

higher growth rate of the more talented.

     It is unfortunate that only the 1955 and 1969 data are, as yet,

available since a more definitive test of these two models rests on

whether those with low earnings in the early years have high or low

 earnings beyond Mincer's overtaking point.   Since Mincer's theory is

 much more tightly specified than the sorting theory, it is easier to

 find ways to reject it and the rejection is not based on overwhelming

 evidence. Thus it tight be fairer to say that the sorting should not

 be given any more precedence than Mincer's model.
                                     —97—

VII. Conclusions and Questiq.

Empirical Results

       In our regressiOflB we have found a number of significant 'riablea,

       of   which have never been examined bef ore. Nearly all thcLe   variables
many

have the same sign in equations explaining     earnings   in widely saparate

years and also have what we consider to be consistent signs          equations

explaining educational attainment, test scores, and assets.

       In the earnings equations we find that educational quantity and

quality, mental ability, business assets, certain aspects of family back-

ground (     discussed below), preferences towards risk and towards nonmonetarY

aspects of a job, locational information, hours of work, health, and work

experience and age are significant determinants of earnings. Among this

 list of items are several, which to my knowledge have never been found
                                            because they have never been
 significant in earnings equations, partly
                                    are
                                                with economic and social
 studied. But the empirical results,\ifl accord

 science theory. For example, economists and others have long recognized

 that people can trade off earnings for nonpecuniary rewards, but information

 on what nonpecuniary rewards are traded off with earnings and the importance

 of such rewards are not available.

        Our family background variables are much different than in most other

 studies. For example parent's or especially fathers' education and occupation

 are often used as the major index of. SES. Though we started off using

 these variables, we found that they became insignificant especially when
                                   —98—

business assets were held constant.142 This suggests to it.     that   education

and occupation act primarily as   proxies   for financial and businoss

inheritance perhaps tinged with nepotism and not for home     training.    (Since

parental education is associated with the educational attainment and

test scores of respondents, we are only speaking of direct effects on

earnings.)

     While the traditional SES variables are not significant we have found

others that seem to be related to the types of family life, and child

rearing processes that people have in mind when they talk of training

and taste formation. For example, we find that Jews earn significantly

more than and Protestants significantly less than Catholics ( and the

few aetheists and agnostics). Other studies have found that Jews of this

and surrounding generations have more drive and motivation for financial

success — perhaps because of fear engendered by centuries of economic

insecurity and because most of them were children or grandchildren of

inmiigrants who were poor and wanted to succeed. The Protestant—Catholic

result may be attributable to the Protestants in this group coming

from wealthier families who did not need to emphasize economic success.

While this conclusion may seem contrary to the Profestant ethic, others in

small samples have found that some Catholic groups — such as German or

French — do better than the average Protestant. Given the education cutoff,,

in our sample and the cohort involved, it seems likely that we have drawn

Catholics from the above average earnings group.


     '42Parental occupation and education is contained with unknown weight in
our biography variable. As argued in Chapter     when onevariable, X, is
already included in another one variable Z with a weight of b, the estimate
coefficient on X is equal to c—bd where c is the true effect of X and d the
true effect of Z. Thus estimated coefficient is a net effect. But these
were significant before business assets were added.
                                  —99—

     We also find that those who attend privat, elementary     school   and

high school earn about $5,000 a year more in 1969(in 1938 prices).

While there are a number of explanations for this result the one that

appeals to me is that these people come from very wealthy families who

use pull to advance their eons.

     Another aspect of religious upbringing that affects earnings is

frequency of attendance at religious( not parochial) school with those

attending most often earnings the least and those never attending earning

the most. The ones who attended more than twice a week are probably

certain subgroups of Catholics and more orthodox Jews. This variable

may help to distinguish those less interested in a material life, The

non—attendees are more difficult..to explain though nonattendance in the

1920's or early 1930's may represent a very atypical family.

     We also find that those who spent their time differently on various

activities while growing up earn different amounts. The explanations for

these findings include indication of respondent's tastes and attitudes

as well as certain types of family rearing. For example, we argued that

respondents who..remembered spending time on chores, came from families

that are interested in conformity and   produce   people who enter into bureau-

cracies and safe jobs.

     The more educated earn more though the graduate coefficients are not

always higher than the bachelor's coefficients,143 The effects of education


     143The inclusion of various nonpecuniary and attitude variables generally
raises the coefficients on graduate education.
                                      —100—

increase with age   and th.   age earnings    profiles   are   steeper   for   education

than most other variables. However, in this sample which is stratified

differently than the population and     has    a truncated distribution of

education and ability, the (average) range in earning. arising from education
                                             the combination of ES or of trade—
are dwarfed by the range arising from

of La for nonpecuniary rewards and are only of the same magnitude as the

range associated with mental ability.144

     Mental ability has a continuous direct effect on earnings                 (   as   well as


indirect effects through educational attainment).              The age earnings profile

slope upward with only a tendency for the more able to have significantly

steeper profiles.

     Risk premiums, and nonpecur4ary         trade   offs are also a greater percentage

of earnings as people age. Given the crudeness of measures,(O,l dummies)

it is not surprising that variables such as job security and prefer to

be salaried ,   both   of which are related to risk avoidance, have separate

 effects. Combining these different variables and others such as chores and

 SES proxies into categories, the impression that comes through is that those

 who take safe, unchallenging and conventional jobs progressively fall further

 behind in earnings. That is, the high paying jobs are at the top of certain

 career ladders and cannot be reached by people on other ladders.
                                                                                   career but
      Time on the job is important especially early in..a person's

 experience in some types of work is more transferable than in others

 types. However, people generally do best when they do not switch


              appears that much of the variability in test scores is genetic
 in origin.
                                        —101-

 occupations.' It also appears that hours worked is an important determinant

 of earnings ( though the data is only avsiilable for 1969). However, there

 are   a   large group of men who moonlight because their earnings are low.

       Business assets as measured in 1969 are one of the most important

 variables in our equation explaining 10 percent of the         variance   in earn-

 ings by itself. The coefficient is .11 in 1969 which is not extremely

 high on a before tax    basis.
       We have also calculated the same   equations   within various occupations.

 Since many of the above variables are related to occupational choice,

 coàfficients tend to be smaller and less often significant. But we do

 find clear evidence that some skills, attributes, etc. are more important

 in Bome occupations than others. For example intelligence is more important

 for the self employed. Moreover the self employed who are the ones who have

more control over their work environment, have larger coefficients on

 the various nonpecuniary measures.

      We can explain moreof the variance in earnings in 1969 than in 1955 even
when we restrict our attention to varithlcs equ11y accurate in both
                                                                               years,
i.e., when we ignore business assets, etc.      Second, the truncated education
variable has a partial R2 of about .05                though some of the effàcts

of education may be impounded in the rionpecuniary      and other   vcriables. The
biggest partial R2 in each year is attached to the 1969 business asset

variable. This result probably does not generalize to the population since

we have a high proportion of self-employed, and       several   with large amour      of
business    assets. The SES variables (including all the time spent variables)




    The skewness of kurtosis measures or divided by c3 and a 4,
                                                                respectively
which we allow to vary by what is held constant in the numerator.   Also we
subtract 3, the expected value of the norial curve in the kurtosis measure.
                                       —102—




                                    including   preferred to be salaried)
and the nonpecuniarY variables (

               about   3% of the variance in the two years.
each explain
                                            effect on our relative
    Most of the variables have little or no
skewness and kurtosis tneasures. However, business assets, attending
                                                                 and the
private 'e1ernentary and high school, the nonpecuniarY variables

tiue spent all reduce skewness     and kurtosis sharply in 1969.
                                      —103—


Methodo1pg
                                                                        we
     Perhaps the simplest way to describe the rnethodolociiCal a.vances
                                    skills, and attitudes that ecoo:ists,
have made is that many phenomena'
                                                         should be related
sociologists, biographers and others have hypothesized
                                                                   that can
to earnings, can be represented or captured by simple questiOfl5

be included in mail surveys.   it seems likely that more systematic efforts

                                     other skills, attitudes and preferences
would allow us to incorporate many
                                    The payoff from our work in understanding
or to refine existing measures.
                                                                       of fs for
                                     large and promises adequate pay
the earnings distribution appears

other work in the area.


 Relationship of Theory to Empirical work
                                  pae there was a lengthy discUSSiOfl of vari-
       t the beginning of this
                            and ideas that have been advanced to explain vari-
 ous theories, hypotheses
                                                                 results do
 ous features of the distribution of earnings. Our empirical
                                    and importance of many of these.   For ex-
 shed some light on the validity
                                  skewness arose because of differences in risk
 ample Friedman suggested that

 preferences. The variables which are relatei to risk preferences include the

   prefer to be salaried item, the entered occupation because of job security item,

   and the time spent on chores item.146 In each year, we find that

        1460ur argument is that the people came from homes that breed conformity.
                                           —104—



     those that want to avoid risk earn significantly less and that the diff-

    erential grows with age and is a greater percentage of average earnings

     (of high school graduai.as) as people age. Finally, we find that risk

    preferences have an indirect effect with those who want to avoid risk

    obtaining less education. These conclusions are reinforced by the

    corresponding findin on the; role of business assets.

            Avoidance of risk can be considered one type of noripecuniary reward.

    We find that tastes towards other types of nonmonetary returns also show

    up as a reduction in earnings — presumably through the type of Occupation

    in which a person chooses to work. We find that those who want interesting

    work, or to help others, or who are not interested in future financial

    success earn less and that these differentials increase with age. Rut

    these variables do not contribute to skewness and kurtosis.

         We also find evidence that those who are willing to work hard or

    have drive or concern for financial success receive much more earnings.

    These conclusions are based on the effects of religion, part—time job
-
    while   growing up, and entered occupation because it(work) was challenging.

    These variables have larger effects over time.


                                                                                    a
                                            1:1      tugs,'



                                                  —105—



         The3o last Goveral sto      of   rosuLt als suggost that mocle2.s         which
 omphasisa that      training   and taste formation (on earnings rilatod aspects)
 Occur    in the   family,   re1iqicu. instituti05, and          within   peer groups have
 a larqo grain of truth in then. Howvor the lack of significance of

 pArental education and occupation suggest that education is too crude

 an indicator of the differences in
                                             upbringing.

        Many people have argued that a good portion of earnings differentials

 arise because of family pull. While we have no variable which is an

unambiguous measures of nepotism, we have several which lend themselves

 to that interpretation. This,for example, is the simplest explanation

of the in-laws education results and why the inclusion of business assets

wipes out the fathers education coefficients.
                                                              Nepotism and/or inheritance
of controlling intcrcst in a business seem to be likely explanations of

why the 22 people who went to private
                                      elementary and high school earn on average
up to 5D per cent more than people who went to                           147
                                               public or parochial school.
        Some theories such as the one that goes under the general title of

human capital are more general in nature. To the                 extent that the human
capital model means that people can improve their
                                                                 earnings capacity by
expending time and resources on schooling or informal training, we find

strong support in our analyses. The education
                                                              coefficients are signifi-
cant and large. Certain types of family environment and Childhood


 147
   There is also indirect intorgeneratjoa
                                            earnings transfers via edu-
cational attainment and inherited intelligence.
                                      —106—


                                          the   human capital model   often   is
activities are also significant. LIut
                                     invest rationally, i.e. invest to the
presented as one in which people

point where    the rate of return on the last dollar equals the coat of

                                       difficult to test becauee many of
capital. This proposition is very
                                                    variety, have not been
the returns to education are of a nonrnonetarY

examined in this tudy, and are net easy to convert into monetary

equivalents.
                                                    has demonstrated that if
      Mincer, in a brilliant series of pieces,
                                         that all returns to such training
all on—the—job training is general,

are   in   monetary terms, and if the market functions as a competitive

market would, then the human capital model would predict that age earn-
                                       for investors and that the more in—
ings profiles would rise with age

                                        His model also predicts
vestment the steeper the profile.

that the labor     market   adjusts occupationl wages so that the present

discounted value of lifetime earnings would be the same (to marginal

 choosers) in relevant occupations. In its most general form, this
                                                the amount invested in a year
 theory is a tautology with, for example,
                                       identities. But with restrictions the
 adjusting to make eq'uations into
                                                certain tests under the assump-
 theory can be tested. We have performed

 tion that differences in investment are not correlated with Y which is
                                                 received if he never invested
 the constant earnings a person would have
                                                  after adjusting for those
 in O3T. We also performed our calculation

 variables which we correlated with C3T       investment   propensity. We     find

 evidence in Chapter         that is at variance with the Mincer model given

 our no correlation assumption.       We also find some evidence that skills
                                         —107—

learned in one occupetien may not       be as t    aferctblci t anothcir occupation
as    "home grown" skills. This suggests that     ll trthing is not general.
       We   hay,   also examined stochastic modo].h. Since those   can   be repre-

sented as    difference    equations or Harkov chains, it ic also   true   that   those
models    can be   used   to explain any age profile of vari1ncos of earnings as

well as     generating    skewed models. But the most comnon   stochastic models
assume that errors are uncorrelatod. We find several pieces of evidence

at variance with this view. For example, the percentage change in earn-

ings from 1955 to 1969 is not independent of 1955 earnings level and

the      of the systematic elements increases over time though       the stochastic
model implies      a decrease.

       The   sorting-uncertainty model, which I believe in, receives some
support from these findings. In.part this         eupport is in the growth in

importance of the effects of education and ability since these determine

potential     earnings.    Additional support comes from the   growth    in the

differentials associated with drive, risk aversion, willingness to work

hard, etc., as stmutarized above. That is, these subjective measures are

best displayed on the job. The differential of 1955 experience on 1969

earnings would be consistent with this model. We have reexamined the

screening     model of TW which is   based on easy to measure education being

used as a.    barrier entry.     The tests, which were derived in TW,    still    in-

dicates that screening may be important.
                                          —108—

       oblems and Extojog
-
         Several   different typea of problems remain.   ?irst, our interprotation
    of many of the new variables we have used may be
                                                     wrong. It would be very
    useful for some one else,
                                perhaps a psych1ogjt or sociologist, to tact,
    validate and improve our measures of risk aversion, eloomosynary
                                                                       behavior,
    etc. Second, we have spent
                                 very little time examining interactions which
    may be very important and
                                              may be biasing some of our results.
    Third, we have not related our various
                                             cross-section periods to macro,
    time series developments.
                               Fourth, the results are only generated within an atypical
    sample of a cohort which in turn
                                     may be atypical because of war experiences and
    the Depression and because the
                                     economy and society are much altered now.
Thus many of our findings must
                               be subject to replication in other groups
before being accepted as not false. Finally we have not made much
                                                                   progress
on the nature/nurture or
                                             exp1antjonz of the distribu-
tion. Hopefully progress on this issue will be forthcoming
                                                           soon.




                                                           I
Appendix A& Regression.




                          I
                                                                                                                      71
                                                                          Ycc

                                                              -
                                                                  cocft value
                                                                    —---_                                      c,ef            t vt1u

Duc.ation:

                                                                                                                  16
                                              '                   —.21                  1.0*       •
                                                                                                               1.10            2.0
     So ColeCC
                                                               .13
                                                        __________                   .6*
                                                                                   ________


     )stcrs                                                       -. 15                 ,


     PhD+1                ________                     J'         .22                   .5'                     .52            2.6

     ___ _____                                    _i_L_ -.--- .*                                                                 ___


/bi1ity:                                                                                                                   '
                          -                                 ___    2 ____1.6*-
     rd Fifth__________ ___
     ______             ___                                        31                   j .9                   .71             L9
                  FIfth                                           .56                   3.3                                    3.7
     )4th                     ____
                                                                   82                   4.                                     5.1

Diogmhy:
                                                                                                                               1,7*
     2r                                                           .21                       • 5A


     )7rô ''" )                                                               .,
 •
        _2_4-,-_-----------—                                                             4.5
      4th Fict.h
      5th Fth                                           I




                                                        ,
                                                                               j
                                                                               I
                                                                                                           '



      Nohcr Fc                      ____


                                                                   2.00                     7.7                      i:         7.0
       JvIs'n
                                                                                            1.3*                                3,6
       Prct;tir:t                   _____

     Attenc              ?1io'.s                                   —.                       2.0
     School 0ftcr
     AttcnicI
     School iever
                  iiou                                             —.01                      1*        '
                                                                                                           H 33                  1.2*
                               ____

     Pthcr in Tj }S÷
     othr in Ii }3+                                    -----::                              1.;*                                 2.9
     T Snt on rts                                                       .06                                     .21
                                                                                                                                 2.8
                                                                                            1.3*
      .L._
     rç . .._-.


     iL Tflt O
                     -        O.i    •- —'



                                    - ,. .
                                    D1S
                                             —. —
                                                  -,
                                                                .
                                                       ---------------             ,•
                                                                                            1.0*
                                                                                                           H 27
                                                                                                                  15             1.7*
Never 1oved Before
F3    __________                         —.fl6               -.43.            1.7*
Attcndcd Private
High Sc''DO1 —                           1.49                2.60             3.3
                                                       3.9
Attended Private                         .23
E1ernntry School                                             2.98             1.6*
Factors Influenced
             Cc cuat ion
  P\.iture   Financial
 'octs           No=].                   —.54     4.2        —1.77            6.0
  Inependence         No=1
                                         .27      2.1        1.19             4.1
  Ch3llerirA.g Work
                                        —.76      5.0        —1.70            4. •9

•Re1:p0tcrs         1;=1                 .48      3.8
  Job   Scurlt.r No=1                    .48      4.0                         5.2
1refers to be Salaried              f             2.9        —L'P)            3.4
Other        ets (Cm
              Ta1 Estat)6C               .03      11.5
                                                             .12     .•       20.4

Self flployed
 usin:, 69                               .72      4.4 -.
                                                             1.09             2.9

Self }D1oycd
?rofessicr-t1, 69            -
                                                             3.30             5.5
                                                  2.4        —1.86            3.1
Teacher, Pro College                    —.61

     rs on in Job,           1969
                                                               .07            4.7

flours on cor.d Job, 19                 -.03     .3.3        —.12             5.2
Weeks Lost      froi     Illness
1969                                ; —.03       1.6*        —.18             3.8

)bii 1955 to        1969                 .08     2.7         .33              5.1
______________________                   .08     3.3         —.11             1.9*
Year of First Job                       —.11     5.1         —.15             3.1
Current      Residence in T
of   50, to 1,CCO,000 L                  .46     3.6         1.09             3.7
Current Resident in Ex
of)., 000,000                _:          ; 92    5.1         2.69         .   7.0
College Quality                         .0014 3.5
     in)                                                     .0044            4.3
                                                                                                                u)I-'
                                            .1)
                                                        •

                                                       lt                   jj
                                                                       rn.ngs it.or
                                                                            '2)

                                                                                .070 35*
                                                                                                                    .•3)




                                                                                                                    .082               1.7*
                                                                                                                                                             rf
                                                                                                                                                             4)



                                                                                                                                                             .116
                                                                                                                                                                           t vti
                                                                                                                                                                               2.4
oe Co11er!        -
                                           .040             .8*

                                            .143        2.8                     .2144.4                                                                                        4.8
che1orS




                                                                                                                                   -
ce        Grad                                                                  .)73 2.2                    1       L142               1.7* 11.180                             2.2

sters                                       362 14                8              322J5 '                            1..3.!_
                                                                                                                                       4.61 4338 48
                                            87         4 0                        543 146                   L LL4_l_L1  4  4
                                           ,191 •1.3                             .176 1.2*                          '493 3;4
                                                                                                                    '.464'             3.'l          -
                                                            3.9                  l1l4 5..6                          1.357              68        j           1.676 85
                                       ,                                                                '
                                                                                                                    I
).ity:                                                                      I
                                                                                 .016        •3*
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                        .013               .2*               p038 —' •7*                      -
                                            .009                .2*
       Fifth                                                                                        —




                                                                                  3JQ
?nd                                —

a Fifth                    —               Qcij* — .o 5±                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                                             fl2
                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                                                                                                                                          -
th Fifth                                   t.013                                                                               I

                                            .018 3*                              ,OJJ8*                                        H .6*                         09R
th Fifth
ography:
                                                                 .2*             .039 .8*
                                                                                                                           H'
                                                                                                                        .016               .3*
                                                                                                                                                 Ii           039          1
                                                                                                                                                                                   .8*

                                                                            ;j'.035 7*
                                            .008
2na       FIfth
;aFift)
1th Fifth
                               —
                                              S




                                            —.080 1.6*                                                                    063'             1.3* Qj_6______
                                                                                                                .




                                                        I                                                                          I                                   —




                                                        I                                                                                        I
                                                                                         I




Ugion:                   1.                        '




Je'ish          .037 •4* 215 ,.2.7
—--------------------------------
    protestant -                             .036_ 1.0* I_.0491.4*

tene 1iious                                 —.009           t    .1         —.056             •7*                        —.032 •4*                            —.071                •9*
ehool Often

ttendea. Beligious                                                                            i.2                        —.035 •9*                                                 1.0*
                                            -.O7                 1.0*           -.042                                                                        r'.°37
                                                                                                                                                                  -—
choo1ever
                                                                                                                                       I                                       F
ither       In te HS+ ,-
                                                            I
                                                            ._


                                                                  2.0 H .077                  2.1:                         .106 2.7                           113                   2.9
------------------------
other_In          Lay HS+                    075
                                                                                                                           .oQ6 5*                           1 .009
    SpntonSports                              .014                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                    2.0
                                                                                —.032         2.4                          —.024 1.7*                         —.027
                           Chores -.030                           2.1

I5e Scent on 1obbies —.010
flni br1t on Part-
$   'r.
                                              .017
                                                            :
                                                                  1.6*
                                                                   -
                                                                      .8*

                                                                            'I•
                                                                                : .024
                                                                                   '•
                                                                                               .6*
                                                                                              2.3
                                                                                                                        II _:016 1.3*
                                                                                                                           .016 1.5*
                                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                              —.014

                                                                                                                                                               .021
                                                                                                                                                                                    1.1*
                                                                                                                                                                                    1.9*
                                            —.0121          •3*                                                            —.009        .2*                        —.013
               rvatc                         .005          1.5*               —. 001
                      —        —.                                                                                          .114         .9*                       .629           2.4
               Private
lerntnry Scoo1                              . 720          2.9                 .790                 3.3                    .622         2.3                   ,   .236           11.9*
'actors Influenced
nte r.,in Occupation
                                                  -
 Future Financial
 Proscts                                   —.137           3.3                —. 188                                       —203         4.8
  ndeer.dcncc
 C1rn1lcning Work
                                             .065:         1.6*                .078                 2.0                    —.0391 .9                              ::
                                                           1.5*               —.084
                                                                                                                           -.052 1.2*
                                                                                                    2.1

 Heip Othcrs                                 .019          .5*                .052                  1.4*                               1.2*                       .083           2.1
         Security-                     —                                      .069               1.9*                       .091 12.3                             .139           3.6'

refers to be Salaried                      —.066          1.6*                .102               2.5
                                                                                           I                          I
                                                                                                                          —.167    !
                                                                                                                                                      -.215
ther   Asst (Owr                                                         I                                                                                I                             -
sincss,         Real Estate)69              .005          1.5* .013                             4.4

irSnen,
                                                                                                                                                          I



             DlOJCd                                   I              :                     I
                                                                                                                  j
                                                                                                                                                      1
                   69                       .405          4.7 43                                54
                           —                                                                              .                                                              H
lf Erployad                                           !



             onal,69           —                          1.5*               .146               2.8
                                            .0801                                                                                                     ,


lacher, Pre        Co1lee          69       —.08          .9*
                                                                             —.126 j.l.5* !                                                           I                      I
                                                                                                                                                                  —
DUTS   on1ajn Job,             1969          .0111        5.5 I               .010 15.2                                                           I
)Urson        Second Job,          1969     —.007         2.0                —.010              3.].

eks Lost frorn Illness,                               I                                         .             f
                                                          2.6                —.020              3.1                       —.018        2.7
                                                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                                              •.—.020                            3.1
)bil 1955 to 969                            .028          3.1        I        .036              4.1                        .022        2.4                    .026

         -                         -        .029L         3. 7               —.022              2.9                       —.027        3.3        —.021                          2.7
arof                                                      3.0
                                                                                    -
             First Job                     .021 1                             .012              1.8*                      .016         2.3'       .009                           1.3k
                                                                                                      -H
                                                                                                                                                                         1



trrent Fesjdence In To
5O, to1,OOo,co                             .060           1.4                 .105     :

                                                                                                2.6
irrent Tesident           in   Excess
                                           .211           3.6    I
                                                                              .297
                                                                                    -          •5.2
                                                                                                              H                               j




                           i-
 1,ob,ooo                          —-
   'ge       Quality (Gourir.an                       1
tiriQ)                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                         P1
Sht 199 1O0' ot lbs.)1.fl4
                                       cocf      t vi1ue      ctt1     t




                                                                           2             :Tr;' T:tt
ift                    19              — 288         1. 3*    —.430                      -.271! 1,2*      .376 1.



           --
                                                                                                    -
 —
         for Pon       sorisc   7::-   192 .040          4*    ,lC
uizity
ntered School Age 7+                      074 L8*                          ].3           -.077      .8-.iO8l.2
                                                                           l'. 1                           07 ) A
                                              -.424 5*        _.494        .6*           .344             .332   .4
ozstint
               .
                                                               .200                   (p084              LIii
-——
         E-r                                  ] . 109'         1.067             _____   1.142 _______    L1.7        ______
                   —



)reesOjeedOrn                                 4547             4546              -,      45   :_i   _i±LL
           *ot significant at the 5% level.
         a




Appendix B
 WORK EXPERIENCE, EARNINGS, AND INCOME
 1. We would Ilk. you to describe your work experience below, starting with your present Job. An illustrative sot of responses
    have been included in dark type.
   For the earnings Information, even very rough estimates will be helpful. If you are i.ifempioyed, mark column 1 is selfempicyid end Interpret
   the salary columns as total Income. If you have more than one job please report salary on main job only.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C4 II
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Average Weekly Hours
                                                                                    aa1lnfflng                         Ending
                                                                                                                       •0I•r'•                           Pension                                     Puring Lilt Ysar
                              Position               V—_n,                                 _______________                    ....                           Fsn                            -—_f,iiln                 Other
                                Held                Worked                                     (Annual full tlme                                        (X If yes)                             joe                     lobs

                              Foreman               issi.sv          Survey V('stWar Eduii and Emp!oyient
                                                                                                                                                                                                ** 1 0011.



                                                                                                                                                                                                   4L                             4

   PRESENT JOB                                                                                                                  .,.                           El
   PREVIOUS JOBS                                              n. ?a—eAdd                            .                                                                                                        omc Ups
                                                             - 3.11•) Whir Khhirj              (oil huJ ri. yo( lint iiR,iaii.n from hi Ar,nad                        If
                                                                                                                                                                                               T'                          5.10
                                                                                     ?l.
                                                                                                           ±I'!
                                                                                                                                       l)tI,, AiirirS,4              tit>.iii                                             11.15
                                                                                                            11i,,hn Juliroi          (n.,r.             7.            o...
                                                                                                                                                   boo. UP                 A,



                                                                                                          ——                                                                                                              18-19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2Q21
                                                                Ib) Hn. you find i,r on.lh..jwb ir.ininp lint. (00 win lip,rr.d troop hi                         fried For.,,?

                                                                (of If                                                                                                                                                    22.1
   F RST JOB                                                                  cooling      on'thtojoh rainIng ou Iik.n undor ho (>1 Sill, undir ffli
                                                                                                                                                 - pobilo low
                                                                           you'eiro •o,rrp bto.l,o'                                                                                     -______________________ _____________________
  Full.time, after                                                   FL 6 (Iwo diiiblod n.i.r.n,                               P3. 346 (oih.r OiiiIuC,)..__
  Ylnishing school)
                                                             4, Whit job. han. you had nine. your .cpor,iIon trw,,, rho Arnr.d I-n,i.,7 (PI,u.. IA., your pnuni
                                                                lob Snr, h, own befor. that miii, iii I
                                                                                                                                                                  L_nhdwri4r,
2. For the past year, please indicate the ,
                                                                                                m
                                                                           rbeOfwaweeksr,1,, ""àd your tifs fatherd ring most 0 their working

                                                               2
   spent doing each of the following:                                                                                          Alr,,.frP.,i.o                —
                                                               b. Per..,   M.i.t wd LU. 1947
                                                                                         —                   P.O. 949          Aino..OlI.   P.,'.7                                                                                Card IV
                                                                                                                                                                                             --A--                   B                     C
   Full-time work (or both full and part-time)                                                                                                                                                                                        Wife's
                                                                  _____                             —JO—DESC.RIP1•JO                                                                                            ether's           Father',
  Part-time work                                               . --___J-9_, _..                                                                                                              Yourwn              Job                       Job

  Paid vacation                                                (if Do.onlbo ..t youa17ooe pmnwnqM$lfl5AR,fEciprIetorowner,)...,,,,                                                                  6-i         08-1                        10.1

  Out 0f work or on layoff                                                              I2-1I..,... .if1armiaratar_._
                                                                                                       __.
     Check El it seasonal                                     fbI How mony.rnplwyol.4ulyoo,up.,on.'..J,4                                  Z11_..QJ.4j
  Unable to work due to illness
                                                              (o> Howwill do 700
                                                                                      t(       ot 000 p.rlorrning 0 (our p0000nI work' (C'hek on, boo)


  Other (please specify)                                       dIA Hon.r.oH do 700
                                                                                li16Wrypo ol work yotl(o._Jo(0?' (Cjoko,'b0n') ........... 0 -2                                                                 El -2                 El .3
                                                                   Dulik. 11 0 K. ii', F1 Lik, ir        otto, ban
                                                                                                   U Rosal (boctor, vyer,
                                                                                                                                      -..,,.. -
  Total                                                                      L_.J      • job

                                                         6       yob          Ion..                      d root f
                                                                                                             Occountant tescrit-etc.)
                                                                                               oood El
                                                                                                                                  nip> —Ma.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0 .3                  0.3
3. Please indicate your total househol incon fel'-the-4etIGw----_                                                                                                                                               0-4                   0 -4
  ing years. If your income was unusi lily
  years, please indicate the average for sut ounciirn,years,,,00,100010, y5o4 yoor 6roOrpiS.Ln from rjJA1.eJ
  (e.g. 1967.68-69).                                              Foon,,? (Do niti 00001 ihort tour, 09 dot7 Ion rotor,. rr.loin9.) Yoo._ No,,,_,.
                                                                  PIY".     v, darco

              YOUR
                                TOTAL
                              EARNINGS
                              OF OTHER
                                                 OTHER
                                                 INCOME
                                                  videns, ,
                                                                             TOTAL
                                                                                                            Te h ' ai. (draftsm n, surveyor,
                                                                                                                 h1aty°———-------——--—
                                                                                                                  . Peon ._,...Lwo                                                            El .5             El -S                 -5
  YEAR
              TOTAL
            EARNINGS
                             HOUSEHOLD
                              MEMBERS
                                                                             FAMILY                         nw'
                                           cap) al gain,- Jt°° iosomtrnEaiinoil 00000nlint'rrriw.Jr. riiW9(it.r,j0 Adiroiniotrutront- Sow ._                                                 JT6                El -6                 0-6
                                                                                                            Salesman
                                                        9. Ploiwo urn your Sociol S000rury nOtotbor lu emadhy inail.blo.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      7         El -7                 0-7
  1968 $                                    $                        $                                     ervice worIi                                                                                         El   -8               fl-B
                                                        (U.. the oilier aide of the blank for by commnnr, IProtective     (policeman etc.) . .
                                                                                                            I you think will ir or • boil in re of your
                                                                                                                                                                                 .            El                El                    El
  1958                   $                  $.          ponr'WonIdorIjcurewr>
                                                                                                                   etail or woesaieYrac°e                                                     El                El                    El
                                                                                                                Other                                                                                           El                    El
                                   15-40
                                                                                                           "Blue-collar' employee
                                  41-62                                                                      Foreman or supervisor                                                            07-1              El 9-i                011-1
                                                                                                                                                      "t—-                           —.--     El 2              El -2                 fi         -2
                                                                                                                Semi-skilled                                                                  fl 3              El -3                 0-3
OCCUPATIONAL INFORMATION                                                                                        Unskilled                                                                     0 -4              [1 -4                 El       -4
                                    Questionnaire eiit Oe
  A number of job descriptions are listed below. Ple, I)rt1d, u- ao.tcrI    SurVey. s.ampL                                                                                                                      El   -5               o -5
  cat6 X which of these best describes your own job (A, rld'
                                                                 I ,k-Ia
                                                                    ,,   °n            0 -6                                                                                                                     El -6                 El       -6
  whch best describes the type of job held by your father (B),                                             Not applicable                                                                     0 -7              El-7                  El       -7
                                     A 1'WENTY•FIVE YEAR FOLLOWUP SURVEY
                           Sponsorsd by the National Bureau of Economic Research, New York, New York

    We plaul to basin tabulations byjuly 1,
    end would appreciate your returning                                                             Identification
    the questionnaire as soon as possible.

    OIsrsrd ths small numbsrs the rtt the bouss thus' are for bUMoA purposes.


    GENERAL INFORMATION
    iWhatisyourageastblrthday)?                               years.     S.? 4. Do you own your own horns or cooperative apartment?
                                                                                 Yss—hsuss                0154
                                                                                  Yse—sparnsnt                         04
    2. Pleas. check X below to Indicate your marital status.
                                                                                  No                                   04
                                  05-1                           Dat.
                                                                         ,. 6. What Ii the stats of your general health?
       Married                    0 -2                   19
                                                                                 Ixosilent                    U-i
       Dtvoroed
       Widower
                                                                                  Seed                                 04
                                                                                                                       04
                                                                                  Fur
       Other
                                                                                  Poor                                 04
                                                                                6. What ii your approximate height?
—   3. Hew many child ren do you have?
            None            011.1
                                  04   4
                                       a
                                                                 04
                                                                 04
                                                                                              ft.             iteMs 25-11
            1
            2                     04
                                  04
                                       Sormors                   0 -7           7. What Is your approximate weight?
                                                                                              lbs. S5-24
            3

     EDUCATiONAl. BACKGROUND
     1. Please fill In the following form. We have Included an illustrative set of responses In dark type.

       SCHOOLS ATtENDED                            AtT4f&D
                                                                                GD                                                              DATE
                                                                                                                                               DEuCE
                                                                                                                                               RECEIVED


       HIGH SCHOOL
              Valley, Pennsytvanha                 193142                          X


                                                                 17.18             015-1

       VOCATIONAL TRAINING
        Mtomotlveftspalt$ChOOl                       1948                           X



        UNDERGRADUATE COLLEGE
        OR UNIVERSITY
        U. of CoIoradoBouIdsr                    1943, 45-48                        X                            LA.                             1948



                                                                                   021- 1                              82.1                                   22.24

                                                                                                                            -2
        GRADUATE SCHOOL
                                                                                    0
                                                                                    025- 1                                                                    26-27




     2. Please Indicate the highest grade of schooling completed                   your choice by circling the appropriate number on the
        by each of the following family members: (High school                      scale from 5 (very great Importance) to 1 (very little Im-
        graduate would be 12, college graduate 16, etc.):                          portance).
                                                                                                                              Importance       Importanc.
                                         Highest Grids
                                          Completed

                    wife                            yrs.                 8142
                                                                                   Basic skills (reading.
                                                                                        mathematics. etc.)                       5   432                  1           87

                                                                                                                                     432
                                                                         .
                                                                                   General knowledge (history,
                    Your father                     yrs.                 5384        literature, science, etc.)                  5                        1           68

                    Wit.'. father                   yr..                           Career preparation (vocational.
                                                                                     professional, etc.)                         5   432                  1           89
                                                                                   Activities (school clubs,
                                                                                      newspapers, sports, etc.)                  54        3      2       1           70

      3. Based on your own personal experIence, what do you think
         high schools and colleges should concentrate on? IndIcate
                                                                                   Social awareness (current
                                                                                        problems, community action, etc.)        5   4     32             1           73
 WORK EXPERIENCE, EARNINGS, AND INCOME
 1. We would like you to describe your work experience below, starting with your present job. An illustrative set of reeporius
    have been included in dark type.
    For the .arnings InformatIon, even very rough estimates will be helpful. If you are self..mpley.d mark column 1 as
    the salary columns as total Income, If you hav more than ens Job, pieau report salary on main Jo only.             s&f'employsd and interpret

                                                                                                                                                                            C4 H
                                                                                                                                          Avejaga W.ekly Hours
                                Peeltlon
                                                                           lejinning              Indleg                PensIon             curing Last Year
                                                      Years                 salary                Sai.ry                 Plan            Main
                                 Held               Werlisd                                                                                                  Other
                                                                                 (Annual full tim.)                    cx If yes)         Job                      Jobs

                                Permean             185148                  $7,100               $5,800                    2              42                            4
   PRESENTJOB                                    ..,.,.,,,,               ,,,,,,,,,
   PREVIOUS JOBS                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                   ORe, Use
                                                                                                                                                                 1-10
                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                          0               ..........            11-15
                                                                                                                                                        .       iLl,         -
                                                                                                               ,          0                                     18.10
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                20.21
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                22.1
   FIRST JOB                                                                                                              0
   (Full-time, after
   finishing school)


2. For the past year, please Indicate the number of weeks                                   and your wife's father (C) during most of their working
   spent doing each of the following:                                                       lives,
                                                                            Cd III                                                                                      Card IV
                                                              Number of
                                                               Weeks
                                                                                                                                             A              B                    C
   Full-time work (or both tuii and part-time). -                                                                                                                           Wife's
                                                                                                                                        Your Own      Father's          Father's
   Part-time work
                                                                                        JOB DESCRIPTION                                   Jeb           Job               Job

   Paid vacation                                                                            Business Proprietor (owner)                  08-1          08-1                 010.1
                                                                                              Check X if farm operator
  Out of work or on layoff                                                                        A                B                C
    Check 0 if seasonal                                                          14-1          o 12-1        0 13.1            0 14.1
  Unable to work due to illness
                                                                                            Managerial (executive, office manager,
  Other (please specify)                                                                     etc.)                                       o .2          0 .2                 0 .2
   Total                                                           52                      Professlonci (Doctor, lawyer,


3. Please indicate your total household income for the follow.
                                                                                             accountant, teacher, etc.)
                                                                                              Self .empioyed
                                                                                              Salaried
                                                                                                                                         0.3           04                   04
   ing years. If your income was unusually high or low in these                               Check X if teacher
                                                                                                A             B                     C
   years, please Indicate the average for surrounding years                                   o 15.1       0 18-1              0 17.1
   (e.g. 1967-68-69).
                                  TOTAL
                                                                                           Technical, (draftsman, surveyor,
              YOUR
                                EARNINGS
                                OF OTHER
                                                  OTHER
                                                 INCOME                 TOTAL                 medical, etc.)                             0-5           0-5                  0        -5
             TOTAL             HOUSEHOLD       (dividends,              FAMILY
   YEAR     EARNINGS            MEMBERS     capital gains, etc.)        INCOME             Office worker                                 0-6           0-6                  0        -6
                                                                                           Salesman                                      0-7           0-7                  0        -7
  1968 $                   $                 $                      $                      Service worker                                0-8           0-8                  0        -8
                                                                                             Protective (policeman, etc.)                o             0                    0
  1958 $                 $                   $                      $                        Retail or wholesale trade                   O             0                    0
                                    19-40
                                                                                              Other                                      o                                  0
                                                                                           "Blue-collar" employee
                                    41-62                                                     Foreman or supervisor
                                                                                              Skilled                                   0.2           0-2                   0-2
                                                                                              Semi-skilled                              0-3           0-3                   0-3
OCCUPATIONAL INFORMATION                                                                      Unskilled                                 0-4           0-4                   0-4
  A number of job descriptions are listed below. Please indi-
                                                                                          Other (please specify)                        0-5           0-5               0            -5
  cate X which of these best describes your own job (A), and                              Don't know                                    0-6           0-6                   0        .6
  which best describes the type of Job held by your father (B),                           Not applicable
    ATTI1UDE TOWARD JOE                                                                 2. Please check X below to Indicate your religious preferinc..
                                                                                                                                                       C.d V
     In this section we want to find out how people feel about                                                                                        D 50.3
     their work. Just circle the number that best describes your
     own evaluation. The numbers constItute a scale rangin
                                                                                          Protestant
                                                                                          Catholic                                                    D4
                                                                                          Jewish
     from five (highest, beat, etc.) to one (lowest, worst, etc.                          her
                                                                                          Plane                                                       D4
     Do you enjoy your work?
     Dose your work
                                                  5432
                          provide • challenge? 5 4 3 2
                                                                        1
                                                                        1
                                                                                  IS
                                                                                  Is    3. Please Indicate X which of the following best describes
     Is your work Interesting?                    5     432             1         10
                                                                                          your voting habits:
      Por the Items listed below, how doss your total work experience to                  Always vote in iccal, state and national elections .            $6.1
      data   compare with what you eXpected when you first                  started?      Always vote in national elections, sometimas In state and
      (3 about as expected)                                                                                                                                 .3
        inanciai compensation                     5432                  1         II
                                                                                          local ones
                                                                                          Usually vote In national elections                                 4

        Requirement for independent
          judgment                                5
                                                  5 4
                                                    4 3
                                                      3 22 1            1         U
                                                                                  U
                                                                                          Sometimes vote In national elections
                                                                                          Seidomvotelnanyelections
                                                                                                                                                            .4
                                                                                                                                                            .5
        ResponsIbilIty
        Prospects for advanoemsnt                 5432                  1         14

      Below i 5 list of poulbis requirements for achieving success in a                 4. Do you think of yourself as politically conservative or
      particular job or profession. indicate on the scale where your own                  liberal?
      pe of work should be ranked. That is, to what degree doss success                                                                               C 554
         Yourownperlormarlce                      55 44 33 2
      In your work depend on: (3 average importance for success)
                                                         2 1                      15
                                                                                          Very oonearvative
                                                                                          Moderately conservative
                                                                                          Sometimes conservative, sometimes liberal
                                                                                                                                                      04
                                                                                                                                                      C     -5
         Having the right connections . .. .                  1                   25                                                                        -4
                                                                                          Moderately liberal                                          C
        Being able to get along with people 5 4 3 2                     1         37

        Being lucky or unlucky                    5
                                                  5 4 3 2                         35
                                                                                          Very liberal

                                                  5432
                                                    4 3                 1
                                                                        1         15
        Having a collage diploma
        Workingherd                                     2               1         30


                                                                                        SOCIAL, ECONOMIC, AND POLITICAL. AlTITUDES
    ACTIVITIES
                                                                                           In this section we would like you to indicate your attitude
      in this section we would like you to indicate X the extent                          about various social and economic problems. Please check
      of your participation in social, civic, religious, and other                        X the appropriate box, and feel free to add additional ex
      similar activities.                                                                  pianation where necessary.
    1. WhIch of the following types of groups, if any, do you devote
      some amount of time to, either as a member, an active                             1. Do you feel that young people today have too much free-
      participant, or an officer.                                                          dom, too little, or about the right amount?
                                                                   No. of
                                    Typ, of Participation CX)      Hours                   Too much ... C 834 AbOut right... 0833 Too little... 083.1
                                            Actlvs                 During
                                  Member.   Psrtici-     Leader.    Last
                                   ship      pant         ship     Month
      Service organizations                                                             2. Do you feel that people today are too much concerned with
      (Rotary, Chamber of                                                                  financial security, too little, or what?
      Commerce, etc.)             031.1 0 .2 0 -3                              3243
                                                                                          Too much ... 0844 About right.., 054-2 Too little ... 064-1
      Youth organizations
      (scouting. Little
      League, etc.)               034.1      0 .2 0           4                3546
      Veterans' organizations 037.1          0 -2 0           .3               38.39    3. During the past ten years or so, do you think that the pace
      Professional and trad.                                                               of racial integration has been too fast, too siow, or about
      associations                0404       0 -2 0           $                41.42       right—considering the welfare of the country as a whole?
      Political organizations. 043.1         0    30          4                44-45       Too fast ... 0554 About right . -. 085-2 Too slow ... 055.1
      Educational organize.
      tiens (PTA, etc.)           0 45-1     o .3 0 -4                         47-48




'     Church or church
      related organizations
          Religious activity
          Educational activity.
          Social action
      Community and social
                                  049.1
                                  052.1
                                  055-1
                                             0-20-3
                                             0.204
                                             0 .2 0 4
                                                                               50-51
                                                                               53-54
                                                                               56-57
                                                                                        4. Assuming you thought that the financial possibilities were
                                                                                           about the same, would you prefer to work for yourself or
                                                                                           for somebody else?
                                                                                                         Prefer s.It.empioyrnent
                                                                                                         No preference
                                                                                                                                             056-3
                                                                                                                                             0 .2
      action groups               0 58.1     0 .3 0 4                          59-60
                                                                                                         Prefer salaried employment . . . - 0 -1
      Organized volunteer
      work (hospital, etc.)       061-1      o .2 0 4                          82.63
                                             o .2 0 -3                                  5. Suppose you thought that the financial advantages were,
          Fund raising
          Personal service
                                  064.1
                                   o 67.1    0.203                             65-66
                                                                               88-69       on the average, slightly favorable if you worked for your.
                                                                                           self rather than for someone else. Would you then prefer:
      informal helping out—
      friends, nelghtbors, or                                                                            Self-employment                     0573
      relatives                              o 70-2                             71.72
                                                                                                         No preference                       0 .2
      Household tasks                        o 73-2                             74-75                    Salaried employment                 0 -1
 ASSETS, DESTS, SAVINGS AND PURCHASES—OPTIONAL
    The following questions are of considerable interest to us, but we know that                some people regard financial information of this
    sort as very personal. if that is your feeling, just skip this section. Pleas, return theform, since the other Information will
    be of great help In the study. Once again, let us note that all replies will be treated with the strictest confidence.



 1. Please check X to Indicate the approximate amount of your household's assets or debts in each of the following categories:
                                                                                                                                                          Cd V
                                                           DON'T     Under    $1,000-   $2,000-
                                                           NAVE
                                                                                                     $8,000-   $10,000.     $20,000-    $40,000-       Ovur
                                                                     $1,000    2,000     5,000
   Checking accounts
   Savings accounts and government savings bonds. -
                                                          0 3-1
                                                          0 7-1
                                                                     o
                                                                     O -2
                                                                         -2   04        0
                                                                                                     10,000
                                                                                                    0-5 0-6 0-7
                                                                                                                             40,000      10000
                                                                                                                                        04 04         $10,000


   Common stock, mutual funds, other marketable
   securities (current market value)                      0 8-1
   Value of your home (what It would currently sell for) 0 10-1
                                                                     0-2 04 0-40-5 0-6 0-? 04
                                                                     0-2 04 0-40-5 0-6 0-7    04
                                                                                           0404
   Equity In annuities and life Insurance
   (cash surrender value)                                 0 11.1
   EquIty In pension plan (other than Social SecurIty) 0 62-1
                                                                    0-2
                                                                    0-2 04
                                                                        0-3 0-40-5
                                                                             0404   0-6 0-7 04 04
                                                                                    0-6 0-7040-9
   Other assets (own business, real estate)               0 13-1    0-2
                                                                    0-2 0-3 0-4 0-5 0-6 0-7 04 0-9
                                                                    0-2 0-3 0-4 0-5 0-6 0-7 04 0-9
                                                                        0-3 0-4 0-5 0-6 0-7 04
   Mortgage on your home                                  0 14-1
   Other personal debt (installment.. etc.)               0 15.1                               0-9

2. Please indicate the approximate change (either Increase or decrease) over the past 12 months in each of the following:
                                                                   Amount of DECREASE                No                 Amount of INCREASE
                                                          Over
                                                                                                   Change
                                                                    $1,000-   $500-     Under                  Under        $500-       $ 1,000-      Over
                                                          $2,000     2,000    1,000     $500                   $500                      2000
  Checking and savings accounts, government bonds         016-1     0 -2      0 $ 0-4 0 -5 0 -6 01,000   $2,000
                                                                                                  -7 0-8 0 -9
  Common stock, mutual funds, other marketable
  securIties (count only net new money put In or
  taken out)
  Equity In annuities and life insurance
                                                          017-1 0 -2          0 -3      0 -4       0 -5 0 -6 0 -7 0 4 0 -9
  (cash surrender value)                                  o 19-1 o -2
                                                                 0 -2
                                                                              04  0-4
                                                                              0-3 0-4
                                                                                                   0-5 0 -6                 0   -7      0 -8       o -9
  Equity in a pension plan (other than Social Security)   o 20-1                                   0 -5        0 -6         0 -7        0 -8       o -9
  Other assets (count only net purchases or sales)        021-1  0 -2         0-3 0-4              0 -s        0 -6         0 -7        0 -8       0 -9
  Mortgage balance outstanding                            o 22-1 0 -2         0-3 0-4              0 -5        0 .6         0 -7        0 -8       o
  Installment and other debts outstanding                 o 23-1 0 -2         04 0-4               0 -5        0 -6 0 -7 0 -8                      0
                                                                                                                                                          -9
                                                                                                                                                          -9




3. During the past 12 months, have you                                                                                                    U yes,
                                                                                                                                        Approximate
                                                                                                      Yes              No                  Colt
  Purchased a home                                                                                   024-1       0 .2
  Purchased a car                                                                                                                $                        25-29
                                                                                                     030-1       0 -2               $                     31-35
  Purchased major durabtes, appliances, or furniture                                                 036-1       0 -2            $                        37-41
  Made major alterations or repairs on your home                                                     042-1       0 -2            $                        43-47




  Thank you very much for your cooperation in filling out this questionnaire, If you would like to receive a summary of the
  results when the study is completed, indicate b' X.

                                                              0 Would like summary
                      SUPPLEMENTAL QUESTIONNAJREi TWENTY.FIVE YEMt FOLLOW.UP SURVEY

              We would like you to answer the following few questions, which represent items of tnformation thatwill
        be helpful to us in Interpreting some of the data from the original questionnaire. Please use the return envelops
        provided for your convenience. Thank you,
                                                                                             o 6 5 93
                                                                      Identification

        PLEASE MARK                  IN THE APPROPR lATE BOX: The numbers at the right are for tabulation purposes.

        0. 1: Are you working at th. same job as last year?                      0. 5: Was your high school work mainly concentrated on:

                     81 Yes-samojob                                                    0 11-1           Academic-type courses (colluge prepara-
                                                                                                        tion)
                     5.2 No . have changed job

        0. 2: Have you ever owned end operated a full-time business                    0 11-2 VocatIonal-type courses (work prepara-
               (do not Include medical or law practice, etc.)?                                   tion)

                     7.1 Yes- own arid operate business at present               0.8: In the high school that you attended,were most of the
(                          (please write in type of business) _________                other students:

                                                                                                 12-1   FInancially better off than you
                     7-2 Yes have owned and operated business In
                          past, but no longer doing so                                           12-2 Financially about the same as you
        If answer is Yes please go to 2A:
                                                                                       D 12-3 Financiallyworseoffthanyou
                     7-3 No - have never owned or operated busi-
                           ness                                                  0. 7: Please Indicate below how many brothers and sisters
                                                                                       you have (including those no longer living)
        Q. 2A: Did you receive any help from a Voter8ns Adminis-
                tration loan when you got started in This business?             Older brothers and                         Younger brothers and
                                                                                       sisters                                     sisters
                       8-1 Yes
                D8-2No                      -                                    O 13-1 None                                    14-1 None

        0. 3: How would you describe the town in which you grew                  0 13-2          1                         0 14.2         1
              up?

                     9-1   Rural area
                                                                                 O 13-3          2                         0 14-3 2
                     9-2 Small town (under 10,000)                              D13-4 3                                    014-4 3
              O 9-3 Moderate sized city (between 10,000 arid                     0 13-5 4 or more                               14-5 4 or more
                           50,000)
                                                                                0.8: (FOR THOSE WHO ATTENDED COLLEGE.]
              0 9-4 Large city (between 50.000 and 500.000)

              O 9-5 Metropolitan center (over 500,000)                                 Do you think you would have gone to college if there
                                                                                       had not been a "CI Bill" which took care of most ex-
        0.4: How would you describe your high school record?                           penses?

              O 10-1 Very high grades                                                  0 15-1 Yes -would havogone anyway
    •
              j 10-2 High grades                                                                 15.2 Probably would have gone anyway

              0      10-3 Average grades                                               EJ 15-3 No - couldn't have gone without Cl Bill
              E1 10-4 Poor grades                                                      0 15-4 Don't know
                                        A SUPPLEMENT TO
                              THE TWENTY•FIV2 YEAR FOLLOWUP SURVEY
                        Sponsored by tho National Duroau of Economic Roserch, New York, New York

We plan to bln tbuiations in 30 DAYSI
and would appreciate your returning                                                                      IDENTI FICATQN
the questionnnlre as soon as possibI.

DisreCard the small numbers to the right of ths bond they ire for tabulation purpocos.                               001.708
FAMILY BACKGROUND AND EARLY CHILDHOOD                                          7. Before you started school and while you were In elemen-
INFORMATION                                                                       tary school, dId your rnothor havo a regular Job of any kind?
                                                                                                                                   Your Age and School Status
 1. While you were growing up and going to school, wh3t type
    of house did you and your family live in?                                                                                     Ag, 0.5          Age     6.34
                                                                                              Mothsr'u Work Statue           (Pr-ichooi) (Elementary School)
          Slnle.famlly house that we owned ....,...,.., 0 6.1                            Worked full tTmo each year               0 3.j            0 34-1
          Single-family house that we rented                   0 .2                      Worked full time iome years              0.2              0,2
                                                                                                                                  0-3
          Apartment
          Other
                                                               o
                                                               0-4
                                                                                         Worked part time each year
                                                                                         Worked part time some years ,
                                                                                         Did net work
                                                                                                                                  04
                                                                                                                                  o -5
                                                                                                                                       04
                                                                                                                                        0 '5
                                                                                                                                                   0.3
                                                                                         Don't recall                             0 'S             0 .8
 2. Did you share a room with other children or have a room                    8. How marty years of formal schooling dId your mothar
    to yourself whUe you were growing up?                                         receive?
          Shared room                                         0 7'l                      0.4 years                                                 0 15.1
          Had own room                                        0 -2                       5-6 years                                                 0
          Both, at different times                                 .3                    7.8 years                                                 0 .3
                                                                                         9.10 years                                                0 -4
                                                                                         10-11 years                                               D •s
                                                                                         12 years (finished high school)                           0 -6
                                                                                         13.15 years (some enlioge training)                       0 '7
3. Up to graduation from high school, about how many times                               16 or more years (colloge graduate)                       04
   did you and your family move?                                                         Don't know                                                0 .g
          Never moved—stayed In same house                    0 8-1
         Moved once or twice                                  0 .2             9. Aside from your regular school, did you also attend re-
         Moved three or four times                            0 .3                ligious instruction or other church-related schools or
         Moved five times or more                             0 -4                cIascs?
                                                                                         Yes—several times a week                                  0 15-1
                                                                                         Yes—weekly                                                0 -2
                                                                                                                                                   0 -3
4. (For those who moved at least once.) Were all of these
   moves within the same neighborhood or town?
                                                                                         Yes—occasionally
                                                                                         No                                                        04
         Yes—within same neighborhood                         0 9-2          10. Please rank the following activities, indicating how you
         Yes—within same city or town                         0 .2               wero most likely to spend free time while you were grow.
         No—moved to different ciry or town                   0 .3               ing up? Indicate your choice by circling the appropriate
         No-—moved from farm to city or town                  0 -4                number on the scale from 5 (most often) to 1 (hardly over)
                                                                                                                         l,last                  H..rdly
                                                                                                                         Often                   Ever
                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                             Type of Activity
5. At what age did you start going to school?
         Under five years old (nursery school
                                                                                         Sports
                                                                                         Hobbies
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                    3 22
                                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                                                       1          17
                                                                                                                                                                  18
            or kindergarten)                                  0 10-1
         FIve years old (kindcrcerten or first grade) - . - - 0 10.2
                                                                                         Reading
                                                                                         Chores around home
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                  43
                                                                                                                                    32                 1
                                                                                                                                                       1          19
                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                             2         1
         Six years old
         Seven years old
                                                              0 10.3
                                                              0 10.4
                                                                                         Part-time job                   5        43         2         1          23
                                                                                         Other (please specify)
         Eight or older                                       0 10-5                                                     5        432                  1          22


                                                                             11. (Answer only if married.) How many years of formal
                                                                                schooling dij your wife's mother receive?
6. What kind of elementary (grammar) school and high                                     0-4 years                                                0 23-1
   school did you attend? (If more than one, check all                                   5-6 years                                                0 .2
   schools attended and circle the one from which you                                    7-8 years                                                0 -3
   graduated.)                                                                           9-10 years                                               0 -4
                                                Elementary     High                      10-11 years                                              El       .s
             Type of School                       School      School
                                                                                         12 years (finishcd high school)                          04
         Public school                           0 11-1      O 32-1                      13-15 years (Some co!leo training)                       04
         Parochial (religious) school            0 .2
                                                 03
                                                             o -2                        36 or more years (collage graduate)                      04
         Private (tuition-paying) school                     o -3                        Don't know                                               0 -9
    INFORMATION ON WIFE AND CHILDREN
                                                                                                   4 Since your marriage his your wife ever had a regular
       Please answer QuestIons 1                 through 5 only If married.                          full. or parttime jobl
                                                                                                           Yss •,,,, ,, , , ,, , 30.1 Pliiiiin,wi,Sest3i5
                                                                                                                                   4  PlI,øaklt0u,slle.$
     I. Approximately how long have you been married?
                         . . . . years                                                             5. Please check the appropriate boxes to show your wife's
                                                                              14 U
                                                                                                     •mployment history from the time of your marriage, Note
                                                                                                     that many peoplo have different answers deponding on
    2 What Is th. approximate age of your wife at the present                                        number of ysoro ofter marriogs; for example, many wives
       time?                                                                                         do not work during their ffrut five yeori of merriago but
                                                                                                     work part time leter on, etc.
                                    years                                     3921                                        W Is        Wlfs   WI?.
                                                                                                                          P4         Workad War hod
                                                                                                                           Net       part     'ull           j?f Workod,
                                                                                                     Ysars After Marriage Work       TImi    Tims            Typo 01 Job)
    3. What type of school did your wife attend when she was
       growing up?                                                                                    14                 C 4 C .1 0 .1                                          81 32,38
                     -          .
                 Tp of School
                                                         £lIm,nt,ry
                                                           School
                                                                              High
                                                                             School                  59                  04 04 04
(           Public school
            Psrochlal (religious) school
                                                          D 301
                                                          0 .2 0 .2
                                                                          0 294                       3044               04 04 04
            Privat. (tultlon.paylng) school               0  4 0 .3                                   l5ormors....04 0.4 04

                                            Please answer Questions 6 and 7 only If you have one or more children.

    6. Indicate the ages and the curront school status of your chlidrcn, inciudina children on longer living with you. In the
       last column, indicate how many years of schooiing you eventually expect each child to complete.
                                                                                                                                                             Schscl Status of
                                                                                                                                                        t = Nursery
                                                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                                                                Loch ChIld
                                                                                                                                                                       School
                                                                                                                                                               klndergsrt.n
                                                                                                                                                         * = lust Grads
                                                                                                                                                        25 = College Graduat.
                                                                                     Typo of School Now Attsndl,ig
                                                 5"                                                                                            Prssont
                                                                                                                                                                      Grad. Lepeetod
                                                                                                                                                                       to Compl.t.
      Ohltdrsn            Ale                   Morfl               PublIc             Parochial         Prlvsts     Not In school              Scads                 (or Computed)
       Oldest                                                       C 841                 0.2              04           04
                                                                    0 351                 0.2              04           04
                                                                    03e1                  04             04             04
                                                                    O 87.1               0-2             04             04
                                                                    O 354                04              04             04
                                                                    O 394             .04                04             04
                                                                    O   404              0.2                            04
      Youngest                                                  O 414                    04              04            04
    7. Have any of your children attended nursery school or
      other prokindorgarten school?
           All attended                                                  0 42.1
           Some attended                                                 04
           None attondod                                                 a
17. Fridmafl, N, "Choicc ,                            Chance       ar         Pr                   i:t     LuiCfl of
          i.P.., Aug. 1953. pp.                         277—90.

                                                                                    LJ°rkLuser ____ ort any time
Whofyour                                general heth at present?                            Yi
19
           txceIt.nt
           Oood
                            1.       & .P WE,t,         t1WD3 Cu11e02                       No
                                                                                                                       'c' tu
                                                                                  5. (If yes on 4.) Approximately how much total time (in
                                                                                                                                           D 484
                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                        terms of weeks) have you lost through Illness during your
                                                                                        working Ufetime?
20.       fluut        S.        'lncoiee Det2nniuattE to:..                                                wiii tL kttun
                                                                                                                           19.
      the state of your health?                                                    6 $ine .yo loft miistqry seef±er World War II, have
2         .gdian
                       '               r
                                                -        -
                                                                                     .yoi bverbeen unemployed?


                                                                    j
                                                                         2                j. ToI
                                  •    T                     7           4                  No                                             02
           Dont recall                                          04                      (if no, skip to General Information.)
22.       Kagon , J .        L    S Ti1k:                    Soca Ci.:-E D f€.r                   ceo       ChiTd Rcaring during
          It                                                                                                                       ttal time have
         s                                      p.                                      you lost because of unemployment since you left the
                                                                                        serv ce
    3. During the time you were attending high school, how
mary.eks     per )cat did you )ose1rrflschoI nthe
 average, due to your own illness or injury? (Exciuce in-
                                                                                                                           I



24JurirthieicS.?
                       a week
                                               :.                  0 .2                 ployed?
           3.2 weeks                                               0 .3                     Once                                           0
2:,                                        ..       i... ...                        .:jWJC , ,... .
                                                                                            breo rmoret4cnos.... .                         0

      -   Ki i
GENERAt4NFol?.1AflON
                                      1Ie1ativc income ShoreE. in Fa.:t o.
                                           -
                                                                                                                       e        EconomtcJYici.,
                                                                                   4. Over the last several years, have the average number of
                                                                                      hours you work each week:
    1. What was your rank when you left active military service                                                                            0 55-1
                                                                                             Increased substantially
       after the Second World War?
27, Krer I,                          The Structure cf—---.—--,.—
                                                        Iricco.                   Some Q4n              Ø.PdOtCI&Vt.,..            .'r     0 -3
                                                                                                                                               :. .2

                                                                                                      moderately                           0 -4
                                                                                            Decreased substantially                        0 .5
                           tc, S. L
                                                                                                                                  t i'
                                                                         -                                                            -.
28. Lec.c                   Sri                                  C ;.O

                                       S ta -WIi
                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                               number
2. At w1atagedôp qxpectietfré?                                                          of hours you have worked in recent years? (Please write in.)

    29.        i... ....
          1jScboc1,Unv.          .
                         of Wisconsin, MLdison..i9.5
    30.



    32.
           Lydeil, h.


           Stay about the same
                                     The. St



                                                0 .3
                                                      ::
    3. Between now and the1Tñ&yoLi plan to retire, do you ex-
    31ctt%, "Paretian Die tribut: ions57—85.
                                                                    t
                                                                             j5    Whtis th
                                         and fluraLarpa (t id. O pies".. Quarter56-1
                                                        (2,000)
                                                                                        you now live?


                                                                                           ::: :
                                                               Moderately sized city (50000.250,000)
                             S±-l-- T.beo.ry. .adOo±oi Structulareo city (250,000-3 million)
           Decrease substantiafl .T7T7T.        Q                   metropolitan area (over 1 million)
                                                                                                             MMe th9n or city where

                                                                                                                                  : : ET  :
                                                                                                                                       0 -4
                                                                                                                                           05
                                                                                                                                           04
    OCCUPATIONAL HISTORY                                                         3. As best you can remember, what factors influenced your
     1. What is your occupation at the present time?                                decision to enter the occupational field you are in at the
                                                                                    present time? Check yes or no to each of the following
                                                                                    and indicate factors that were of special importance.
                                                                                       Factors that influencad decision to
     2. We are interested in the kind of jobs people tale when                         enter present occupation:
        they first begin working, especially for those who leave                                                                            Of Special
        school before finishing in order to begin work. Please in-                                                            Yes    No    Importance
       dicate, by checking Yes or No, whether any of the following                       Type of training in school      o 6-1      o -2    o 7-'
       circumstances were present when you began working                                 Type of training in military - o s-i       o -2    o 9-i
       full time.                                                                        Personal contacts (friends
                                                         Yes       No                      or relatives)                     0
                                                                                                                            10-1    o -2    o 11-1
            When you began work:                                                         Salary or pay offered           o 12-1     o -2    o 13-1
              Were you married?                        0 57-1    0-2                     Prospects of eventual financial
              Did you have children'                   0 58-1    0 -2                      success                       o 14-1     0-2     o 15.1
              DId you receive an exceptional                                             Chance to do interesting work o ic-i       o -2    O 17-1
                job offer'                         0 59.1        o -2                    Chance for Independent work        18-1    0.2     o 19-1
              Were you self -employed'             0 60-1        0-2                     Chance for a lot of pcrson-to-
              Was there financial presure to work? 0 61-1        0-2                       person contact                o 20-1     0 -2    o 21.1
              Did you sçcnd much t,mc looking                                            Chance to help others               o
                                                                                                                            22.1    o -2    O 23-1
                for a job?                           0 62-1      0-2                     Represented a challenge . . - o 24-1       0 -2    0 25-1
              Did you regret having to leave school? 0 63-1      O -2                    Job security                    0 26-1     o -2    o 27-1
              Did you have any specific vocational                                       Provided a lot of free time.    o 23-1     o -2    o 29.1
                traIning for the job'                0 64-1      0-2                     Always liked that kind of work o 30-1      o -2    o 31-1




                                               Please check below if you wish to receive a summary of
(                                              the results from this questionnaire.
                                                   I would like t receive the summary of results - . . . 0




                                         Use this space for additional explanation where needed.
                                       LIOGRAPHY

 1.   Altchison, I. & Brown. T                               Catnbidge   University
      Press,   1957.
 2. Arrow, K. and R. Lind. "Uncertainty and Evaluation of Public Investment
      Decisions", American Economic Review, June 1970.

 3. Atkinson, A.B. "On the Measurement of Inequality", J. Econ. Theory, 2, //3,
     September 1970.

 4. Becker, C. Human Capital, Columbia University Press, 1964.

 5. Becker, C. "Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income: An
     Analytical Approach" Woytinsky Lecture No. 1, University of Michigan,
      Ann   Arbor,   1967.

 6. luau, P. & O.D. Duncan, The American 0ccup*iional Structure, New York:
     John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1967.

 7. Bloom, B.S. Stability and Change in Human Characteristics      ,   John Wiley &
     Sons, Inc. 1964 N.Y.

 8.   Burt, C.  "Quantitative Genetics in Psychology" The British Journal of
      Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, Vol. 24, Part 1, Nay 1971.

 9. Cavalli—Sforza, L.L. & W.F. Bodmer, The Genetics of Human     Population,   San
     Fraxiqisco: W. H. Freeman & Co, 1971.

10.   Champernowe, D.C. "A Model of Income Distribution" Econ. J., 1953.

11. Christensen, L. "Tax Policy and Investment Expenditures in a Model of
     General EquIlibrium" 1969 A.E.R. meetings

12. Clark, B. ,Heist, P, McConnell,T. etal. Students and Colleges: Interaction
     and change. Center for Research and Development in Higher Education, Univ.
     of Calif. at Berkeley, 1972.

13. Crockett, J. "Technical Note" in Consumption and Savings, Vol. II, U. of P.
     Press, ed. by Friend & Jones, 1960.

14. Eckland, B. "Academic Ability, Higher Education and Occupational Mobility"
     American Sociological Review, Oct. 1965.

15. Featherman, D. "The Socioeconomic Achievement of White Religio—Ethnic
     Subgroups: Social and Psychological Explanations" American Sociological
     Review, 1971, Vol. 36 (Apr): 207—222.

16. Friedman, N. A Theory    of   the Consumption Function, Princeton U. Press, 1957.
                                                                                tIOIIs,
                cac      i1             LLf.       Univ. Lt

 2. Grilichea, Z, ad W Mason,
1.8                                "Ed.ication Income and Ability", JIPrE., May—
      teI A socioeconomic         Anaiysi   o Fan ii -d1dng Behavior' unpublished
       ocora1 issertation,Univ.    of Penn. ,   J973.
19.   Ravetnann, E. & P.- West, They Went to College: The College Graduate in America
      Today, N.Y.: }Iarcourt, Brace, 1952.


20. Hunt, S.J. "Income Determinants for College Graduates and the Return to
     Educational Investment" Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Yale U. 1963.

21. Jinks, J.L. & D.W. Fulker," Comparison of the Biometrical, Genetical,
     Maya and Classical Approaches to the Analysis of Human Behavior" Psychological
     Bulletin1 May 1970, Vol. 73, No. 5.

22. Kagan, J. & S. Tulkin. "Social Class Differences in Child Rearing during
     the First Year" in The Origins of Human Social Relations , ed. by ll.R.
     Schaffer, Academic Press, 1971.

23. Kaldor, N. "A Model of the Trade Cycle" Economic Journal, Vol. L,l940,p.78—92.

24. Kendall, M.C. and A. Stuart, The Advanced Theory of Statistics, Griffin, London,
      1961.

25. Kohen, A., Parnes,H. & J. Shea, "Income Instability Among Young and Middle—
     Aged Men" Center for Human Resources Research, Ohio State, 1972.

26. Kravis, I. "Relative Income Shares in Fact and Theory", American Economic Review,
     Vol. 49, Dec. 1959.


27. Kravis, I. The Structure of Income: Some Quantitative Essays, Phila., 1962.



28. Lebergott, S. "The Shape of the Income Distribution" Amer. Econ. Review,
     June 1959, pp. 328-47.

 29. Little, J. A State—Wide InQuiry into Decisions of Youth About Education beyond
      High School, Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison, 1958.

 30. Lydall, H. The Structure of Earnings, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968.

 31. Nandeibrot, B. "Paretian Distributions and Income Maximization" Quarter]y
      Journal of Economics, Feb. 1962, pp. 57—85.

 32. Merton, R. Social Theory and Social Structure
33. Miller, H. Income Distribution in the United States,     iYO. Bure3u of the
     Census Monograph, Washing-ton, D.C. 1966.

34. Miller, H. "Annual arid Lifetime Income in Relation to   Edcation:    1939
     to 1959." Amer. Econ. Review, Dec. 1960.

35. Mincer, J. "The Distribution of Labor Incomes: A Surv2y with Special
     references to the Human Capital Approach"J.E.L., Marh 1970,Vol.III,No.l.

36. Mincer, J. "Schooling, Experience and Earnings"N.B.h.rc Mirneo, Feb. 1973.

37. Project Talent. The American High School Student, Cooerative Research
     Project No. 635, Univ. of Pittsburgh, 1964.

38. Reder, 11. "A Partial Survey of the Theory of Income size Distribution"
     in Six Papers on the Size Distribution of Wealth arid lnconie, ed. L. Soltow,
     N.B.E.R. 1969.

39. Mittler, P. The Study of Twins, 1971 Penguin Books.

40. Roy, A.D. "The Distribution of Earnings and of Individual Output" Economic
     Journal, Sept. 1950, pp. 489—505.

41. Sewell,W.H. & V.P. Shah. "Sociojconmic Status, Intelligence, and the
     Attainment of Higher Education" Sociology of Education , 40, Winter:1—23.'

42. Simon, B. & Ellison, A. "Does College Make a Person Healthy and Wise?" in
     Does College Matter? , ed. by L. Solmon & P. Taubman, Academic Press, N.Y. 1973.

43. Solmon, L."The Definition and Impact of College Quality"N.B.E.R. Working
     Paper #7, 1973.

44-.   Solmon, L. & P. Wachtel, "The Effects on Income of Type of College Attended"
       Forthcoming in Sociology of Education.

45. Spence, M. "Market Signalling" mimeo, Harvard U. 1972.

46. Taubman, P. & T. Wales, Higher Education: An Investment and a Screening Device,
     N.Y.: N.B.E.R. forthcoming.

47. Taubman, P. Schooling, Ability, Nonpecuniary Rewards, Socioeconomic Background
     and the Lifetime Distribution of Earnings, N.Y.: N.B.E.R. forthcoming.

48. Thorndike, R. & E. Hagen. Ten Thousand Careers, N.Y.: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
       1959.

49. Tinbergen, J. "On the Theory of Income Distribution" in Selected Papers,
     Amsterdan: North Holland Publ.Co., 1959.

50. Wales, T. "The Effects of School and District Size on Education Costs in
     British Columbia" 1972 Discussion Paper #83, University of British Columbia.
51. Wise, D. Academic Achievement and Job erEorninc2: Earnings and Promotions,
     Doctoral Dissertation, Berkeley, Calif. Univ. of


52. Wolfe, B. "A Socioeconomic Analysis of Farjilv Building Behavior" Unpublished
     Doctoral Dissertation,Univ. of Penn. , 1973.
