                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE DETERRENT EFFECT OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT:

                     A QUESTION OF LIFE AND DEATH



                            Isaac Ehrlich




                    Working Paper No.       18




CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF hUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                 261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                            November, 1973


                  Preliminary; Not for Quotation

     NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

     This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.

     The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant from
the National Science Foundation to the NBER for research in the area of
law and economics. The opinions expressed herein are those of the author
arid do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
             THE DETERRENT EFTECT OF CAPITAL PUNISHMENT:
                     A QUESTION OF LIF'E AND DEATh

                                  by

                           Isaac Ehrlich
                        University of Chicago
                                 and
                National Bureau of Economic Research*


       •"A punishment to be just should have only that degree of
       severity which is sufficient to deter others."

                                        (Beccaria   (17611.), p. 117)



        The debate over the legitimacy or propriety of the death penalty may

be almost as old as the death penalty itself and, in view of the increasing

trend towards its complete abolition, perhaps as outdated. Not surprisingly,

and as is generally recognized by contemporary writers on this topic, the

philosophical and moral arguments for or against the death penalty have re-

mained remarkably unchanged since the beginning of the debate (see Sellin

(1959), p. 17 and Bedau (1967), pp. 12O2111.). One outstanding issue has

become, however, the subject of increased investigation, especially in re-

cent years, due to its objective nature and the dominant role it has played

in shaping the analytical and practical case against the death penalty. That

issue is the deterrent effect of capital punishment, a reexamination of which,

in both theory and practice, is the object of this paper.

        The multifaceted opposition to capital punishment relies partly upon

ethical and aesthetic considerations. It arises also from recognition of

the risks of errors of justice inherent in a legal system, errors occasionally
                                     2


aggravated by political, cultural and personal corruption under certain so-

cial regimes. Such errors are, of course, irreversible upon application of

this form of punishment. But the question of deterrence is separable from

subjective preferences among alternative penal modes and can be studied in-

dependently of any such preferences. Of course, the verification or esti-

mation of the magnitude of the deterrent effect of the death penalty--the

determination of the expected tradeoff between the execution of' a murderer

and the lives of potential victims   it may help save--can, in turn, influence
the evaluation of' its overall desirability as a social instrument under vary-

ing circumstances, even if such evaluation is largely subjective. This may

be the reason why the issue is being consistently raised and reexamined by

most public bodies investigat.ing the relative merits of the death penalty.

        In recent studies (see Becker (1968), Stigler (1970) and Ehrlich

(1970, 1972, 1973)), economic theory has been used to present some analyti-

cal considerations and empirical evidence that support the notion that of-

fenders respond to incentives and, in particular, that punishment and law

enforcement deter the commission of specific crimes. Curiously, two of the

most effective opponents of capital punishment, Beccaria in the 18th century

and Sellin in recext years, have never, to my knowledge, questioned analyti-

cally the validity of the deterrent effect of punishment in general; Beccaria

even recognizes explicitly the existence of' such a general effect. What has

been questioned by these scholars is the existence of a differential deter-

rent effect of the death penalty over and above its most common practical

alternative--life imprisonment. But if' the imposition of' life imprisonment

upon convicted murderers can deter potential felons from committing murders,

why cannot the death penalty be expected to have an even greater deterrent

effect? Beccaria uses a logical argument to explain his apparently inconsistent
                                    3


viewpoint:

    It is not the intenseness of the pain that has the greatest effect.

    on the mind, but its continuance.   .   . .       The death of a criminal is

    a terrible but momentary spectacle and therefore a less efficacious

    method of deterring others. Perpetual slavery . .             . has   in it all

    that is necessary to deter the most hardened and determined, as much

    as the punishment of death. I say it has more. There are many who

    cai-i look upon death with intrepidity and firmness; some through

    fanaticism, and others through vanity     .   .    . others   from a desperate

    resolution to get rid of their misery, or to cease to live; but

    fanaticism and vanity foresake the criminal in slavery, in chains

    and fetters, in an iron cage; and despair seems rather the begin-

    ning than the end of their misery. (Beccaria (1767),
                                                                    pp. 117-117)
Sellin, in the same general spirit, mentions cases showing that "the desire

to be executed has caused persons to commit a capital crime" (Sellin (1979),

p. 65) and implicitly considers imprisonment for life a more adequate sub-

stitute (ibid., pp. 69-79). More important, however, Sellin has presented

extensive statistical data that he and others have interpreted to imply,

by and large, the lack of a differential deterrent effect of
                                                                          capital punish-
ment (see Sellin (1979, 1961, 1967)).

        Whether the death penalty constitutes for the average potential

criminal a more severe form of punishment than life imprisonment cannot

be settled on purely logical grounds, though crime control legislation,

ancient and modern, clearly answers this question affirmatively. Indeed,

the fact that convicted offenders aimost universally seek and welcome the

commutation of a death sentence to life imprisonment is consistent with an

Intuitive ranknr of   the death penüty as    the harshest of all punishments.
                                     1.



The validity of the differential deterrent effect of capital punishment

still remains an open empirical issue, however, both in view of alleged

evidence denying its existence and because of the need to verify a dis-

tinct deterrent effect that is independent of any preventive effects asso-

ciated with this form of punishment. (See Ehrlich (1973); by the latter

is here meant the total prevention of any fi.iture crimes by those executed

for capital offenses.) The importance of a unique preventive effect of the

death penalty may not be very large in practice because actual imprison-

ment for life can provide in principle an identical service and because

the risk of recidivism among those convicted for murder may be relatively

low. But the differential deterrent effect of capital punishment on the

incidence of capital offenses. may also be partly offset by the added in-

centive it may create for those who actually commit such offenses to eli-

minate policemen and witnesses who can bring about their apprehension and

subsequent conviction and execution. Moreover, if an offender's subjective

probability of being executed approaches unity following his involvement

in murder, his incentive to commit additional murders may be enhanced be-

cause the marginal cost of additional crimes would then approach zero.

        In spite of these somewhat conflicting intuitive expectations con-

cerning the differential deterrent effect of capital punishment this inves-

tigation, although by no means definitive, does indicate its independent

existence. Two   related   arguments are offered in this context of which

only the second shall be elaborated upon in this paper. First, it may be

argued that the statistical methods used by Sellin and others to infer the

nonexistence of the deterrent effect of capital punishment do not provide

an acceptable test of such an effect and consequently do not warrant such

inferences.1 Second, it is argued that the application of the economi.c
                                           7



approach to criminality permits a more systematic test of the existence of

a differential deterrent effect of capital punishment. Moreover, the theo-

retical analysis provides some a priori predictions concerning the absolute
                           the effect of
magnitude and importance of/capital punishment relative to apprehension

and conviction. Since the empirical analysis, in spite of many deficiencies

in data, allows a quantitative estimation of these effects in practice and

is found to be remarkably consistent with theoretical expectations, the

paper further elaborates upon analytical and practical implications that

are related to the empirical findings.


I. An Economic Approach to Murder
    and Defense Against Murder

A. Factors Influencing Acts of Murder and
    Other Crimes Against Persons

          The basic propositions underlying the approach here to murder and

other crimes against the person are that these crimes are committed largely

as a result of hate, jealousy, and other interpersonal conflicts involving

pecuniary and nonpecuniary motives or as a by-product of crimes against

property, and that the propensity to perpetrate such crimes is influenced

by the prospect of gains and losses associated with their commission. The

abhorrent, cruel and occasionally pathological nature of murder notwith-

standing the empirical evidence concerning its circinnstances is at least

not inconsistent with these basic propositions. Victimization data reveal

that most murders, as well as other crimes against the person, occur with-

in the family       or   among relatives, friends, acquaintances and members of the

same race, and are not committed as a rule by strangers on the street (see

PCL, pp. l, 15, 81, and 62 and Table 1).             Indeed, hate and other inter-

dependencies in utility across persons are likely to develop among groups

that   exercise a   relatively close and frequent social contact, rather than   amonroup
                                             6


that exercise little or no contact. There is no a priori reason to expect

those who hate, or, for that matter, those who love other persons to be

less respor6ive to changes in costs and gains associated with activities

they may wish to pursue in accordance with their preferences than persons

who are indifferent toward the well-being of others.

         More formally, assume that persons o's utility from a consumption

prospect in a given period is a function of his own consumption c0 and

consumption activities involving other persons (with or without 0'S di-

rect participation),        Cj i = 1,        •...   n


                                   u0(c0) = U0(c0,                            (1)
                                                        c)

and the sign of
                     J/c           indicates the direction in which o's utility

is affected by consumption activities pursued by others. For simplicity,

let us conceive of c0 and             Cj as activities that are produced by vary-

ing combinations of a composite market good x representing, in effect,

individual real wealth, and time available for nonmarket activities, t,

as follows:



                                     c0 =   c0(x0,   t0)                      (2)




                          Cj =     cj(x X0j      t, t0; E0)                   (3)



where         > 0 and t0 > 0 indicate the amounts of goods (wealth) and

time allocated by o to affect consumption activities involving other

persons, and E            stands   for environmental factors accounting for social

and   geographic proximity and other opportunities for social interactions
between o      and   j.    The   unique feature of this multi-person oDnsumption
                                             7


model is that it          allows    one person (here identified with o) to modify

the consumption level enjoyed by others simultaneously with determining

his own consumption level through positive or negative transfers of his

own time and goods. Such modifications are constrained by the production

functions specified in equations (2) and (3),           by person o's and all other
persons' endowments of x and t in a given period which, in turn, are

assumed to be determined separately through optimal production decisions,

and by potential "awas" or "penalties" that are conditional upon person

o's benevolent or malevolent actions with varying degrees of uncertainty.

The focus of the present analysis shall remain actions which harm others.3

          The preceding framework can be applied to analysis of' the incen-

tive to commit murder and other crimes against the person by extending the

model to incorporate explicitly the uncertainty associated with the pros-

pective punishments for crime. Specifically, murder can be considered a

deliberate action intended by an offender, o, to inflict severe harm on

a victim, v, by setting                   equal to, say, zero at some direct costs of

planning and executing the crime and mainly at the risk of' incurring detri-

mental losses in states of the world involving apprehension, conviction, and

puriishment. By the usual theory of' behavior under uncertainty, a necessary

and sufficient condition for murder to occur is that o's expected utility

from crime exceed his expected utility from an alternative (second best)

action:



                       U*(Cm(c       0)                > U*(Cf Ic   =   ct)   ,     ()

where     S   =   a,   ...,   S,   denote a set of mutually exclusive and jointly ex-

haustive states of the world inc].uding all the possible outcomes of' murder;
                                        8


c     denote the offender's consumption levels, net of potential punishments

and other losses, that are contingent upon these states; it          denote   his

subjective evaluation of the probabilities of these states; and               and

C'   denote, respectively, his consumption prospect in the event he commits

murder or takes an alternative action.

         To illustrate the behavioral implications of the model via a simple,

yet sufficiently general example, assume the existence of just four states

of the world associated with the prospect of xrrurder as summarized in Table

2. In Table 2, Pa denotes the probability of the event of apprehension

and 1 - Pa     denotes its complement- -the probability of getting away with

crime; Fda denotes the conditional probability of conviction of murder

given apprehension and 1 -      Fda denotes     it complement--the probability

of conviction of a lesser offense (including acquittal); finally, Peic

and 1 - Peic      denote, respectively, the conditional probabilities of exe-

cution and of other punishments given conviction of murder. An implicit

assumption is that none of these states is an empty state--all are relevant

for the offender's decision. The (subjective) probabilities of these states

are equal, by definition, to the relevant products of conditional probabi-

lities of sequential events that lead to a more final set of states. The

last column in Table 2 lists the consumption levels that are contingent

upon the occurrence of this set of states. Economic intuition suggests

that these consumption levels can be ranked according to the severity of

punishment imposed on the offender; that is, Ca > C > C > Cd.

         In   the preceding   discussion the incidence of murder has been viewed

to be motivated by hate. As hinted earlier in the discussion, however, mur-

der could also be a by-product, or more generally, a complement of other

crimes   against persons and property.      Since the set of states of the \\'orld
                                        TABLE   2

                                                      Probabilities         Consumption
          Event                     State s
                                                                       •
                                                                            Prospect

                  con'tiction    execution            PaPc JaPe Jc           :(c=O   ;c)
                                 imprisonment   for   PaPcIa(1   - Fe Ic) Cd
                                                                           C:(c0c;c=o)
                                 murder
apprehension      conviction    )other punishment     Pa(1- pcJa)          Cb:(CO=b;cV=O)
                  of a lesser
                  offense or
                  acquittal

no apprehension                  no punishment        1 - Pa               C :(c =a;c
                                                                            a   o    V   0)
                                    9


underlying   the outcomes of these other crimes also includes punishment for

murder, the decision to commit these would also be influenced by factors de-

termining the probability distribution of outcomes considered in Table 2.

In turn, the incidence of murder would be influenced by factors directly

responsible for related crimes. In general, behavioral implications con-

cerning the effect of various opportunities on the incidence of murder ought

to be analyzed within a framework that includes related crimes as well. For

methodological simplicity and because data exigencies rule out a comprehen-

sive empirical implementation of such a framework,5 the following discussion

emphasizes the effect of factors directly related to murder and the direct

effect on murder of general economic factors like income and unemployment.

In practice, however, the effect of these latter factors on murder may large-

ly be due to their systematic effects on particular crimes against property.


1. The Effects of Probability and
    Severity of Punishment

        An immediate implication of the model that is independent of the spe-

cific motives and circumstances leading to an act of murder is that an in-

 crease in the probability of severity of various punishments for murder de-

creases, relative to the expected utility from an alternative activity, the

 expected utility from murder or from activities that may result in murder.

 These implications have been discussed in detail elsewhere (see Ehrlich

 (1970, 1973)) but the somewhat more detailed formulation of the model adopt-

 ed in this paper makes it possible to derive more specific predictions con-

 cerning the relative magnitudes of the deterrent effects of apprehension,

 conviction,and execution that expose the theory to a sharper empirical

 test. Specifically, given the ranking of the consumption levels in states
                                      10


of the 'world involving execution, imprisonment, other punishxnent and no

punishment for murder as assumed in the preceding illustration, and given

the level of the probabilities of apprehension and the conditional proba-

bilities of conviction and execution, it can be shown that the partial elas-

ticities of the expected utility from crime 'with respect to these probabi-

lities can be ranked in a descending order as follows:



                                                  '
                              CPa > CPcta > Pec


'where    =   -fn U*/7n   P     for P = Pa, Pc Ia, Pete.6 The interesting im-

plication of equation (5) is that the more general the event leading to the

undesirable consequences of crime, the greater the deterrent effect asso-

ciated with its probability: a one percent increase in the (subjective)

probability of apprehension, Pa, given the values of the conditional prob-

abilities Pc!a and Peic, reduces the expected utility from mu.rder more

than a one percent increase in the conditional (subjective) probability of

conviction of murders Pc!a (as long as PcIa < 1), essentially because an

increase in Pa increases the overall, i.e.,unconditional, probabilities

of two undesirable states of the 'world: conviction of murder and convic-

tion of a lesser offense, 'whereas an increase in PcIa raises the uncon-

ditional probability of the latter state only. A f'ortiori, a one percent

increase in Fda is expected to have a greater deterrent effect than a

one percent increase in Pete as long as Pete is less than unity. If

there exists a positive monotonic relation bet'ween an average person's

subjective evaluations of Pa, Pc Ia, and PeJc and the objective values

of these variables and between an average person's expected utility from

crime and the actual crime rate in the population, equation (5) would then
                                   11


amount to a testable theorem regarding the partial elasticities of the mur-

der rate in a given period with respect to objective measures of Pa, Pc Ia,

and Fe c. On the basis of this analysis, it can be predicted that while

the execution of' guilty murderers deters the acts of murder, ceteris paribus,

the apprehension and conviction of guilty murderers is likely to have an

even larger deterrent effect.

        Another inTportant theorem associated with the effects of probabi-

lities of' apprehension, conviction, and execution for murder is that the

absolute magnitudes of their deterrent effects on the murder rate are in-

creasing functions of the levels of Pa, Pc Ia, and Pec and, hence, of

the level of' the unconditional probability of execution, Fe   PaPcIaPeIc.

More formally,7




                     -> 0, P = Pa,      Pc Ia,   Peic   .              (6)


A somewhat surprising implication is that the extent of the deterrent ef-

fect of' execution as well as of apprehension and of conviction is not in-

dependent of the overall frequency with which capital punishment is en-

forced in practice: the higher the latter, the greater the deterrence from

apprehension, conviction, and execution.8

        Analogously to the effects of' the probabilities of various punish-

ments for murder, an increase in the severity of' these punishments, their

probabilities held constant, decreases the expected utility from murder and

so discourages its commission.9 Furthermore, a change in the severity of

a specific mode of punishment for murder is expected to affect the elasticity

of the murder rate with respect to both the probability and the severity of

that punishment and with respect to other punishments as well. To i1lustr.te
                                           12


the latter propositions, consider a decrease in the severity of imprison-

ment for murder. This decrease implies an increase in an offender's con-

suxnption level in the event he is punished by imprisonment (c             in   Table

2). It also enlarges the difference between the prospective consumption

levels that are contingent upon imprisonment and execution, respectively

(Cc -              source of the differential deterrent effect of execution
        Cd)_the
(see equation (5.3)    in footnote   6).        A decrease in the severity of imprison-

ment and   other   related punishments for murder with no change in the severity

of punishment by execution can thus be expected to increase the differential

deterrent effect of execution as represented by the elasticity of the mur-

der rate ith respect to the conditional probability of execution, Pec


2. Effects of Employment Opportunities, Income
    and Demographic Variables

           Further theoretical development in this section suggests that the

incentive to commit murder or other crimes that may result in murder would

be enhanced by an increase in relative opportunities to extract material

gains via illegal activities or by an increase in what might be termed

social interaction between individuals. Predictions regarding the effects

of a social interaction variable appear limited because of difficulty in

identifying empirical measures of such a variable (see, hoiever, the dis-

cussion in footnote 27). In contrast, variations in legitimate and              illegit—
 imate earning opportunities may be approximated by movements in the rates

 of unemployment and of labor force participation and in the distribution of

 permanent income within the population.

           Given the distribution of permanent income, an increase in the un-

 employment rate, U, or a reduction in the labor force p'ticipation rate,

 L, are unambiguously     expected   to lessen legitimate employment and earning
                                      13


opportunities. These e:ffects, in turn, would precipitate a relative in-

crease in the gains fran crimes involving material gains. Further, they

imply a reduction in the opportunity costs of the time expended in crimes

of hate and passion and even a decrease in the opportunities costs of

relatively short imprisonment terms. Thus, changes over time in the rate

of murder and other related crimes may be expected to be anticyclical either

because of the direct effects of employment opportunities on the incentive

to commit murder or because of the indirect effects of these opportunities

on the incentive to commit crimes against property of which murder is of-

ten a by-product.

        An increase in the level of permanent income, Y, may have a di-

rect effect on offenders' incentives to commit various crimes through the

association between income and preference for crime or between income and

the willingness to assume the risk of punishment for crime. The analysis

of income effects becomes more difficult to decipher when changes in the

level of permanent income are associated with changes in the distribution

of personal income. Conceivably, increases in the permanent income level

of potential offenders may not have the same effect on their propensities

to harm other persons as would changes in potential victims' income. The

theoretical ambiguity with respect to the precise effect of pure changes

in income does not justify, of course, the exclusion of income or income

inequality from the list of the major determinants of murder and other

crimes against the person. Moreover, it has been demonstrated elsewhere

(see Ehrlich (1973)) that positive shifts in the level of the entire income

distribution or in the degree of income inequality, the extent of law en-

forcement activity   held   constant, should be expected on the average to in-

crease the incentive to commit crimes against property. Since nTtlrder nay
be coninitted partly as a by-product of these other crimes, one may expect

in practice a positive correlation between the frequency of murder and, say,

the level of permanent income in the population even if murde' as an ex-

pression of hate were a neutral or an inferior good.

        Variations in the age structure of the population may also exert an

independent effect on the frequency of murder arid of related crimes. Ab-

stracting from any systematic differences in the propensity to corrirnit crimes

against persons and property across different age groups, it may be argued

that the opportunity cost of imprisonment may be relatively low for young

and sometimes for old persons who are part of the labor force because their

expected market wages, hence, their opportunity costs of time, are relatively

low. Also, law enforcement agencies tend to treat apprehended and convicted

offenders of young age groups less harshly than older age groups. To the

extent that variations in the probability and severity of punishments irn-

posed on young offenders are not fully accounted for in an empirical in-

vestigation, it is important to "control" for the variations in the percen-

tage of this age group in the population in order to estimate more effi-

ciently the effects of other variables. The partial correlation between

the murder rate and the percent of young age groups might in such cases

be positive. Similar arguments may apply when considering a systematic

empirical investigation of the partial correlation between the murder rate

and the racial composition of the population or other demographic variables.


B. Defense Against Murder

        The hazard of murder creates an incentive for potential victims to

protect their lives both privately and collectively. This section deals

with specific aspects of social defense via law enforcement that seem par-

ticularly   relevant in   the   context   of   this   study. Since the main concern
                                       15


here is the establishment and estimation of the causal relations between

the incidence of murder and the enforcement of capital punishment or other

punishments for murder, the major determinants of these latter activities

must also be identified in light of the economic approach to criminality

in order that these determinants and the interactions among them may be

adequately accounted for in the empirical investigation.


1. Factors Determining Law Enforcement
    Activity Concerning Murder

        Following the approach adopted in Becker (1968), I shall attempt

to derive implications concerning optimal law enforcement activity against

murder on the assumption that law enforcement agencies behave as if they

seek to maximize a social welfare function by minimization of the per-

capita loss from murder.1° Losses accrue from three main elements: harm

to victims net of gains to offenders, the direct costs of law enforcement

by police and courts and the net social costs associated with penalties.

The behavior of enforcement agencies is assumed   to   be in accordance with

the general implications of the deterrent theory of law enforcement.

        For methodological simplicity murder is considered here a uniquely

defined capital crime that is punishable in practice, however, by either

execution or imprisonment. It is further assumed that public expenditures

on law enforcement against murder do not affect the private incentive to

provide self-protection against murder (for this concept, see Ehrlich and

Becker (1972)) or public expenditures on combatting other crimes, so that

optimal law enforcement activity concerning murder can be determined in-

dependently of these other activities. The per capita loss function is

 then assumed   to   be of the special form
                                        16




                                                                             (7)


        The first term in equation (7), D(Q), represents the net social

damage resulting from the death of murder victims and other related losses.

It is assumed to be a continuous, increasing, and twice differentiable fw-ic-

tion of the rate of murder in the population, /N (here referred to as Q)

such that D = '—> 0 and D
          0   'C         00
                            =           —> 0.
        The function c(Q, Pc) represents the cost of appehending, indict-

ing, prosecuting, and convicting offenders. The aggregate output of this

activity can be summarized by the fraction of all murders that are clered'

or solved by the conviction of their alleged perpetrators. This fraction,

e, may be viewed as an objective indicator of the probability that a per-

petrator of murderwillbeconvictedofhis crime, Pc=PaPc!a,11 with one

qualificaticti: since the probability of legal error, a--that of convicting

an innocent defendant--is presumably greater than nil, Pc will exceed 9

as long as the probability of legal error is lower than the conditional

probability of convicting the guilty. For methodological simplicity, it

is henceforth assumed, however, that Pc and 9 are proportionally re-

lated and that C =
                    p   --> 0 and
                        Pc              C =       C

                                                 Pc
                                                      > o, given o <pc <

The rate of murder Q is introduced as a separate variable in C because

of the argument and evidence that the costs of producing a given value of
                  higher
8 are higher the/ Q was, for more suspects must then be apprehended,
charged and convicted in order to achieve that value of 8. Thus, it is

assumed that (
                0
                    =   ->
                        c. 0, and   C
                                     00
                                             =        0.

         The remainin expressions in equation (7) represent the per capita

 social costs of punishing guilty and innocent convicts through execution

 or imprisonment, respectively, where l and                are coefficients relating
                                              17


Pc to the fractions of guilty and innocent convicts, respectively, and

Peic is assumed to be identically equal to the fraction of all convicts

who are subsequently executed. The terms d and m denote the private

costs to convicts and their relatives from execution and conviction, and

the multipliers b and                indicate the presence of additional costs or

gains to the rest of society from administering and otherwise bearing the

penalties of execution or imprisonment to guilty and innocent convicts,

respectively. Presumably             > b--the social costs of imprisoning or exe-

cuting innocent persons are greater than the costs of imposing these punish-

ments on guilty ones if only because of the greater probability of recidi-

vism on the part of the latter.13 However, the signs of each of these mul-.

tipliers could in principle be positive or negative depending upon the rel-

ative magnitudes of transaction costs involved in meting out penalties in-

cluding mandatory appeals and conutations of death sentences, on the one

hand, and benefits of retribution to victims, accomplishing "justice" by

adequately punishing the guilty, and other considerations. The signs of

the "social prices" of execution and imprisonment, 7] =                   + 21    and

   =         +          are also a function of the implicit probabilities of
       1b2       X22,
apprehending and charging innocent persons as well as the probabilities

of legal error tolerated in murder trials. As will be shown later in this

section, the magnitudes of               and 2 play an important role in deter-

mining optimal law enforcement against murder.

         Equation (7)     can   also be specified as



                          L = D(Q) +     c(Q, Pc) + 71Pc f Q                      (8)

where   f = Pejc d +     — (1    -
                                     Pejc)m    is a measure of the expected social
                         1
costs of punishment for murder. Equation (8)             is   a generalized version of
                                               18

the   loss function considered in Becker (1968).              It      identifies the relevant

set of control variables underlying law enforcement activity as the uncon-

ditional probability of conviction, Pc, or the tolerable probability of

legal error (see the discussion in footnote 12), the conditional probability

of execution, Peic, the harshness of the method of execution, hence the

level of d, and the length of imprisonment, hence the maiitude of m.

The following analysis illustrates some behavioral implications of the

model by formally considering the choice of optimal values o± Pc and

Pec assuming that values of d and m have been fixed at predetermined

levels.

          The values of Pc and           Peic       that locally minimize equation (8)

must satisfy the following pair of necessary conditions,1


                               +              ÷ 71Pc f(1 -                =   0
                  [D0 + C0
                                   C                         E)J%                        (9)




                    [D0
                          +
                              C0
                                   +
                                       71PC
                                              f(l -
                                                      Ef)}Qff'e
                                                                  =   0                  (10)



where


                          Pc 1                     fQ 1
                                                 Ef-—

and the subscripts p, f, and e associated with the variables C and

Q denote the partial derivatives of t1 latter with respect to Pc, f,

and Fe Ic, respectively. The product 1'e indicates the difference be-

tween the social costs of execution and imprisonment.
                                      19


       Equations (9) and (10) reproduce the general proposition of economic

theory that in equilibrium the net marginal gains from convictions and exe-

cutions must be nil. For example, given the optimal probability of convic-

tion, the probability of execution must be set so as to equal the marginal

revenue from execution, - (D     +             with its marginal cost,
                                     Co)QPfe
y1Pc f(l -              The former term represents essentially the value of
             Ef)Qpfe•
the lives of potential victims saved, and the reduced costs of apprehension

and conviction due to the differential deterrent effect of an additional

execution on the frequency of murders in the population; the latter term

represents essentially the differential value to society of the life of a

person executed at a given probability of legal error, including all the

various costs of effecting his execution, net of imprisonment costs there-

by "saved." Because, in equilibrium, the two must be equated, the optimal

probability of execution given conviction of murder need not be unity--

capital punishment may not always be imposed even when it is legal--and

ou1d depend on the magnitude of the various parameters entering equation

(io). A similar interpretation applies to equation (9).

        Inspection of the equilibrium conditions given by equations (9) and

(10) reveals a number of interesting results. First, it may be noted that

if an increase in Peic is assumed to unambiguously raise theexpected so-

cial costs of' punishment for murder, that is, if' i'e =
                                                             y1d
                                                                   -     >   0,   then

it can be shown as an implication of' the present model, that, in equilibrium,

the deterrent effect associated vith capital punishment must be less than

unity, or Petc <         < 1.15 Put differently, executions must only de-

crease the rate of' murders in the population but not the rate of persons

executed, for otherwise the marginal cost of execution ou1d be negative

and a corner solution would be achieved at Peic = 1.       In contrast, equation
                                         20


(10) does not have a similar implication regarding the value of s.

More specifically, equation (10) shows that the marginal costs of convic-

tion, [C      +          f(l - E )]Q ,    include   the marginal costs of apprehend-
        Pp        y1Pc          p p
ing and prosecuting offenders in addition to the marginal costs of punishing

those convicted of murder. Therefore, the marginal revenue from convictions

must also be relatively higher. Indeed, by combining equations (9) and (io)

it can readily be shown that in equilibrium Pc > ef > 5Pec               that is,

the deterrent effect associated with the unconditional probability of con-

viction must be larger than the differential deterrent effect associated

with the conditional probability of execution. This proposition is essen-

tially the same as that derived regarding the response of offenders to

changes in Pc and Peic (se equation (5)). The compatibility of the

implications of' optimal offense and defense under the assumptii that both

offenders and law enforcement agencies regard execution to be more costly

 than imprisonment or other punishments for murder insures the stability of

 equilibrium with respect to both activities. It also provides the basis

 for a sharp empirical test of' the theory.

         The analysis thus far has been restricted to the assumption that

 minimization of the per capita costs of crime and law enforcement is the

 sole objective of law enforcement acvtivity. An additional possible tar-

 get of social polcy, and one which received much emphasis in the Supreme

 Court decision in 1972 on the constitutionality of capital punishment in

 the United States, is the minimizing of ex post discrimination among offen-

 ders. Clearly, equally guilty offenders do not receive equal punishments:

 some are executed, others are imprisoned, and still others escape 1etal

 sanctions altogether. A concern for equal treatment of all offenders 'an

 be expressed formally by introducing into equation (8), as an adc1itcl
                                              21


 source of social loss, the variance of the actual punishments borne by dif-

 ferent offenders (d, m, or, say, zero). This variance is given by



  v=PcPeIc(l _PePeIc)d2+pc(lpeJc)[l_pc(1_peIc)]m2 _2pc2pe1c(1_peIc)dm


In this more general model equation (8) ought be rewritten as L' =
                                                                                    L   +
with    'i"(v) > 0, and equations (9) and (10) should be modified to incor-

porate the effects of Pc and of Peic on L', 'r(v) (i-)                        and
y (v)                         17
        PeIc) ' respectively.
          As can be easily shown, a separate increase in Pc or in Pefc will

always increase v and hence raise the marginal social costs of convic-

tions and executions if the values of Pc or PeJc are lower than one-

half. At higher values of both variables, an increase in Pc or PeJc
                                  1
is generally expected to lower v.    The magnitudes of v/Pc and
v/PeIc are found to be decreasing functions of Pc and Fe Ic, respec-

tively; that is, v is a strictly concave function in each of these vari-

ables. In addition, the magnitude of v/PeIc is found to be always a

decreasing function of m and, more generally, anincreasing function of

(d - m)   if Peic < .         However, the same is not true in general for the
effect of (d - m)        on v/Pc if Pc < .                 These observations imply that

concern for equality of punishment creates an incentive to lower the opti-

mal values of Pc and PeIc if these variables are lower than one-half

and, particularly, when they approach zero. Furthermore, the incentive to

lower the optimal value of Peic is generally increased when the difference

(d - m)   increases. It is thus possible that the steady decrease              over time

in the severity of imprisonment relative to execution, and the relatively

infrequent imposition of capital punishment in the United States in recent

decades, had precipitated the trend toward the practical abolition of this
                                        22


punishment that culminated in the Supreme Court's decision in 1972 to de-

clare it "cruel and unusual' in violation of the eighth and fourteenth amend-

ments.


2. The Interdependencies between the Murder
    Rate and the Probabilities of
    Conviction and Execution

           Although the preceding analysis concerned the determinants of the

optimal values of Pc and Pete, the same frames.ork can be used to derive

implications regarding optimal punishments for murder and other factors de-

termining the social cost of murder. The present analysis i1l continue,

however, to focus upon implications concerning the former variables, since

only these have      been amenable to empirical investigation.
           Further   consideration of equations (9) and (10) indicates that an

exogenous decrease in the severity of punishment for murder via a de-

crease in the conditional probability of execution increases the optimal

value of the probability of conviction, Pc, because it tends to decrease

the marginal costs of conviction and increase its marginal revenue (proofs

of this and other assertions made in this section are given in a mathemat-

ical appendix available from the author upon request). But the relation

bet'ween     Pc and Peic can be stated more meaningfully if it is assumed

that both are subject to control. Given the values of d and m, an

increase in social aversion toward capital punishment or simply toward

punishment in general, measured by an increase in           or by an equal pro-

portional increase in both           and 2' can be shown to produce a decline

in the optimal value of Pete and a simultaneous increase in the optimal

value of Pc. This analysis is consistent with an argument often made

regarding the greater reluctance of courts or juries to convict defendants

charged with murder hen the risk or their subsequent execution is re1t:ey
                                    23


high. Conviction and execution can thus be aDnsidered substitutes in re-

gard to changes in the shadow price of execution, including the'costs of

mandatory appeals or, a fortiori, in regard to changes in legal procedures

like the compulsory appointment of public defenders that make apprehensions

and convictions more costly to achieve. The empirical investigation re-

veals that at least over the period between 1933 and 1969, in which the es-

timated annual fraction of convicts executed for murder in the United States,

denoted by PXQ1, fell from roughly 8 percent to nil, the national clearance

ratios of reported murders, denoted by P0a, and the fraction of persons

charged with murder who were convicted of murder, denoted by P°ca, on the

whole, moved in an opposite direction (see Figure 1). Indeed, the zero-

order                                                   0
        correlation coefficient between PXQ1 and P a is found to be

-0.028,   while that between PXQ and P°cla is found to be -0.19. (In

principle, the product of P0a and P°ca approximates the value of Pc.)

The general implication of this analysis is that the simple correlation be-

tween estimates of the rate of murder    and   the conditional probability of exe-

cution cannot be accepted as an indicator of the true differential deter-

rent effect of capital punishment, even if movements in Peic are consi-

dered to be the result of changes in exogenous factors like public atti-

tudes toward execution, because the simple correlation is then likely to

confound the offsetting effects of opposite changes in Pc and possibly al-

so in the severity of alternative punishments for murder.

          Just as convictions and executions are expected to be substitutes

with respect to changes in the shadow cost of each activity, they can      be
expected to be complementary with respect to changes in the severity of

damages   from crime, essentially because such changes increase the marginal

revenues from both activities. Since an increase in the rate of murder due
a,




                 Figure   3.




                                ptr
                                      o?U$OI1iOT1      i

                                           Pcc rcckIei'wk purder
                                               ehorec&
                                                           of (rurcter)   f' c1c




                                           'A Q :1.,
                               Eecvt%oits (t+i)/CocV *%OflJ' (t)
                                                                               C-

     LIC   (41                                              cc   c7
                                    2I


to factors outside the control of law enforcement agencies is expected to

increase the marginal social damage, D, and the marginal costs of ap-

prehension and conviction, C0, it may also induce an increase in law en-

forcement activity and hence in the optimal values of both Pc and Fe Ic.

This analysis demonstrates the simultaneous relations between offense and

defense and suggests that the deterrent effects of conviction and execu-

tion on the incidence of murder must be identified empirically through ap-

propriate statistical techniques. These may be particularly important to

pursue if the magnitude of the probabilities of conviction and execution

are low, because in such cases the deterrent effect of capital punishment

and even the deterrent effect of conviction are expected to be relatively

low by equation (6).


II. New Evidence on the Deterrent
     Effect of Capital Punishment

A. The Econometric Model

        The preceding analysis suggests that the differential deterrent ef-

fect of capital punishment can be tested empirically via a statistical iden-

tification and estimation of a "supply of murders" function within a sirnul-

taneous equation regression model that incorporates the major determinants

of the frequency of murder, including the conditional probability of execu-

tion, and accounts for the simultaneous relations among the endogenous var-

iables of the model. Specifically, the analysis suggests that statistical

applications should consider the rate of murder, murder combatting activi-

ties, the probabilities of apprehension, conviction, and execution, and

even the severity of punishment as endoenous variables,joiritly determined

by a system of simultaneous equations.
                                      25


            A simple econometric model of crime and law enforcement has been

devised and partially tested in my analysis of variations in the rate of

murders and other major felonies across states in the United States in 1960.

However, due to data shortcomings, the cross-sectional investigation did not

include a test of the deterrent effect associated with the conditional prob-

ability of execution. In this investigation, an attempt is made to apply

essentially the same econometric framework in the analysis of data on the

time trends of murders and executions in the United States in the period

1933-1969.      Since data limitations appear to rule out   the estimation of

structural equations relating to law enforcement activities or private de-

fense against murder, the following discussion deals only with the specifi-

cation of the supply of murders function actually estimated in this study.

A more general discussion of some of the underlying structural relations

can   be found   in Ehrlich (1973).


1. The Supply of Murders Function.

            Following the analysis of Section I.A, and the specification of the

model used in my analysis of crime variations across states (ibid.), it is

assumed that the supply of murders function as well as the functions ex-

plaining other endogenous varibles are of a Cobb-Douglas variety in the arith-

metic means of all the relevant variables. The supply of murders        function
estimated     here is specified as follows:



                               Pcacr2 PeIc U L2
                     = K    cz
                           Pa
                                         a l
                                                        A (exp)'T           (ii)




where K is a constant term, (exp) denotes the base of natural logarithms,

aj
      and        denote constant coefficients (elasticities), and v is a sto-
chastic variable ith zero mean and a finite varianee. The regression
                                    26


equation used to estimate the parameters of equation (ii) and the reduced

form regression equation used to estimate the systematic parts of the en-

dogenous variables entering equation (ii) (see the statistical appendix)

can thus be derived upon a natural logarithmic transformation of the rele-

vant variables. Equation (11) becomes



                          y1 = Y1A1 +          +                             (12)
                                         X1B       V1


where y1, Y1, and X1 denote, respectively, the natural logarithms of

the dependent variables, other endogenous variables, and all the exogenous

variables entering equation (ii); A1 and B1 are coefficient vectors.19

The following section discusses the empirical counterparts of these ard

other variables used in the regression analysis. The method of estimation

is outlined in the statistical appendix.


2. Variables Used and Their Limitations

         The dependent variable of interest             is the true rate of capital

murders in the population in a given year. The statistic actually used,
    0
        is the number of murders and nonnegligent manslaughters reported by
(s)
the police per 1,000 civilian population as computed from data reported

by the FBI (j)20 and the Bureau of the Census. This statistic can serve

as an efficient estimator of the true              if the two were related by



                                 -k
                                 -      Q O(ecp,\.i
                            N           N


where k indicates the ratio of the true number of capital murders corn-

mitted   in a given year relative to all murders reported to the police and
t denotes random errors of reporting or identifying murders. It should be
noted, hoiever,that the fraction of capital    murders among all   murders
                                           27




may   have been subject to a    systematic      trend over time. Indeed, the
theory developed in      Section   I.A,   suggests that the decrease     in the tendency
to apply the death penalty in the United States over            time   may have led to
an increase in the fraction of capital murders among all murders. More
important, the number of reported murders may have decreased systematically
over time because of the decrease in the fraction of all attempted murders
resulting in the death of the victims due to the continuous improvement in
medical technology. To account for such possible trends, the term k in
equation (13) can be defined as k — o(exp)AT, where 6 and A are constant
terms and T denotes chronological time. Upon substitution of (——)° for                   (—---)
in equation (11), the inverse values of 6 and i would be subsumed under the
constant term, X, and the stochastic variable, v, respectively, and (exp)AT
would emerge as an additional explanatory variable. Thus, the natural value
of T is introduced in equation (12) as an independent exogenous variable.21
         The matrix of endogenous variables associated with                in equation
(12) includes the       conditional probabilities that guilty        offenders   be appre-

hended, convict•d, and      executed for murder. These probabilities have been
approximated     by computing objective measures of the relevant fractions of

offenders who     are   apprehended, convicted, and      executed.     However, problems of

measurement and interpretation warrant          a mere   detailed discussion of these

measures.

          Pa   is measured by annual national "clearance rates" as reported by
the FBI (UCR), which are estimates of the percentage of all murders cleared
by the arrest of a suspect. Clearance rates, denoted by P0a, would serve
as efficient estimates of Pa in the context of the            regression equation (1.2)

if   the true   probabilities of apprehension      for capital and      noncapital murders
                                 27a


wsre identical or proportionally related and if both the proportion of
innocent persons arrested for aurder and the ratio of the total nueber of
aurders to the nber of aurder perpetrators reaained constant over tiae.
                                  28


However, random deviations in these latter ratios would inject donwrd

biases on the estimated elasticity associated with P0a.

        Pca is identically equal to Pchla Pclch--the product of the

conditional probabilities that a person who committed murder be charged

once arrested and that he be convicted once charged. Again, it is assumed

that this probability is the sarmfor both capital and noncapital murders.

Statistical exigencies preclude the estimation of a complete series of

Pchla, but Pclch is estimated here by the fraction of all persons

charged with murder who were convicted of the same offense in a given year
                                                             0       0
as reported by the FBI (UCR). This fraction is denoted by P cIa. P ca

may serve as an efficient estimator of the overall true probability, Pc Ia,

provided that the missing conditional probability of being charged with mur-

der, Pchla, were either constant over time or proportionally related to

the probability of arrest Pa. There is, however, a more fundamental prob-

lem associated with the use of P°cla as an indicator of the true Pc Ia.

The implicit assumption underlying the interpretation of the fraction of

those charged who were convicted of murder as an estimator of the probabi-

lity that a guilty offender be convicted of crime is that court decisions

are probabilistic in the same sense as are the outcomes of throwing a die.

But if court decisions were perfectly efficient so that the guilty were al-

ways convicted and the innocent always acquitted, then variations in P°cla

would merely represent variations in the proportion of innocent persons

among those charged. In that case, the estimated elasticity of       ° with

respect to P°cla might be nil. It would be more realistic to assume,

however, that t.he probabilities of both type I errors (convicting the in-

nocent) and type II errors (acquitting the guilty) are positive. If, in

addition, these latter probabilities were proportionally related (see the
                                       29


discussion in footnote 12) and the fraction of innocent persons charged with

murder were constant over time, P°ca and the true Pca would be pro-
                     22                       . .              .     o
portionally                        .
              related and the estimated elasticity associated with P c Ia

would reflect the deterrent effect of conviction, as predicted by the theory.

         The actual measures of Pefc consist of alternative estimates based

on the expected fraction of persons convicted of murder in a given year who
                                             0
were subsequently executed, P°elc =
                                        ()        This fraction must be estimaied

because there are no complete statistics on the disposition of murder con-

victs in a given year by type of punishment. Instead, P°elc must be es-

timated indirectly by matching annual time series data on convictions and

executions. Mandatory appeals and other various requirements of due pro-

cess generate a time lag between conviction and execution. Since over most

of the period considered in this investigation (up to 1962) executions ap-

pear to lag convictions by 12 to 16 months on the average, an objective mea-

sure of P°ec in year t may therefore be the ratio of the number of per-

sons executed in year t + 1 to the number convicted in year t or

PXQ1   =Et+i/Ct.23
         One problem in connection with the use of PXQJ as a measure of

the true Pete is that the fraction of convicts executed for murder may

merely represent the fraction of those convicted of capital murders among

all murder convicts. Deviations in PXQ1 might then be entirely unrelated

to   the likelihood that a convict liable to be punished by the      death penalty

will be actually executed, and the expected elasticity of the overall mur-
der rate, including both capital and noncapital murders, with respect to
PXQ1, might
              be nil. However, the significant downward trend in PXQ1
bete 1933 and 1967 suggests, especially          during the   1960's, that it may

serve   as a useful indicator of Pete, since it seems reasonable to assume
                                       30


that the fraction of capital offenders among all those convricted of murder

has been essentially constant and may have even increased over time due to

the decline in the tendency to impose capital punishment.              -




         A related problem is due to a particular aggregation bias. The
                                                                           o
relative variation in the reported national murder rate,                       relates

to the United States as a whole whereas the relative variation in PXQ1

(or alternative estimates of P°elc discussed below) relates to only a

subset of states which retained and     actually     enforced capital punishment

throughout   the period considered in this investigation. The fraction of

(de facto) abolitionist states remained virtually constant up to 1960 (8

out of' 119 states including D. C. until the late 1950's; the fraction then

rose to 10 out of 51 with Alaska and Hawaii joining the Union). However,

the estimated elasticities of the national murder rate with respect to es-

timates of P°elc necessarily understate the true elasticities of the mur-

der rate in retentionist states alone.

         Another difficulty associated with the use of' PXQ1 as an estima-

tor of Pete is that Et+i, the number of persons executed in year t + 1,

and hence the ratio Et+i/Ct is, of course, unlcnown          in year       t and must

be forecast by potential murderers. Even if expectations with respect to

PXQ1 in any given year were unbiased on the average, the actual magnitude

of PXQ1 is likely to deviate randomly from its expected magnitude in time

t. The effect of such random noise would be to bias the coefficient asso-

ciated with PXQ1 toward zero. I have therefore constructed four alterna-

tive forecasts of the desired variable, based on past data on convictions

and executions: PXQ1      =                     =                    the
                              Et/C1;    PXQ,2       Et/C;   TXQ1 =         systematic

value   of   PXQ,1 computed via a linear distributed lag regression of PXQ1

on three of its lagged values; and PDL1 = the systematic part of'
                                                                                PXQ1
                                  31


computed via a second degree polynomial distributed lag function relating

PXQ1 and four of its lagged vaiues.21 The advantage of using these al-

ternative estimates (with the exception of PXQ1) is that they may be

treated as predetermined rather than as endogenous variables on the assump-

tion that the random components of current murder rates are uncorrelated

with lagged executions and convictions. Alternatively, PXQ1 is treated
                                       0         0
as an endogenous variable along with P a and P cIa and its systematic

portion is computed via the reduced form regression equation.

        The matrix of exogenous variables associated with X1 in equation

(12) includes annual census estimates of the labor force participation rate

of the civilian population 16 years and over (calculated by excluding the

armed forces from the total noninstitutional population), L, the unemploy-

ment rate of the civilian labor force, U, Professor Friedman's estimate

of per capita permanent income (extended through l969),25   Y, the percen-

tage àf residential population in the age group 111._25, A, and chronological

time, T. These variables have been discussed briefly in Section II,A, and

the relevance of T has been stressed above in the discussion of the depen-
                   0   Other exogenous variables assumed to be associated
dent variable

with the complete simultaneous equation model of' murder and law enforcement,

X2, are one year lagged estimates of real expenditure on police per capita,

 XPOL1, and annual estimates of real expenditure by local, state, and

 federal governments per capita, XGOV. Real expenditures are computed by

 deflating Survey of Current Business estimates of current expenditures by

 the implicit price deflator for all governments. In addition, X2 in-

 cludes the size of the total residential population in the United States,

 N, and the percent of nonwhites in residential population, NW. The reason

 for including NW in the list of variables subsumed under X2 is discussed
                                     32


below in Section II.B. A list of all the variables used in the regression

analysis is given in Table 3.


B. The Empirical Findings

        An interesting finding which poses a challenge to the validity of

the analysis in Section I is that over the period 1933-1969, the simple

correlation between the reported murder rate and estimates of the objective

risk of execution given conviction of murder is positive in sign. For ex-
                                                                       0
ample, the simple (zero-order) correlation coefficients between ()         and

PXQ,,           and        are found to be 0.1140, 0.096 and 0.083, respec-
       PXQ1 ,        PXQ,2
           -1
tively. However, the results change substantively and are found to be in

accordance with the theoretical predictions and statistically significant

when the full econometric framework developed in the preceding section is

implemented against the relevant body of data from the same period. The

numerous limitations inherent in the empirical counterparts of the desired

theoretical constructs notwithstanding, the regression results reported in

Tables J47 uniformly exhibit a significant negative elasticity of the mur-

der rate with respect to alternative measures of the probability of execu-

tion. More importantly, the regression results also corroborate the speci-

fic theoretical predictions regarding the effects of the probabilities of

apprehension and conviction, unemployment, and labor force participation.

        Table I shows that the estimated elasticity of the murder rate with

respect to the conditional probability of execution is lowest in absolute

magnitude when the objective measure of Peic, PXQ1, is treated in the

regression analysis as if it were a perfectly forecast and strictly exo-

genous variable. The elasticity associated with PXQ1 is -0.039 with

upper and lo\:er 95   percent confidence limits (calculated from the normal
distribution) of o.008 and -o.o86. The elasticities associated with the
                                      33


alternative   measures of Peic, PXQ1  ,
                                        TXQ1, PXQ1, and PDL1, vary be-
                                   -1
tween -0.09 and -0.068 with upper and lower 10 percent confidence limits

ranging between -.01 and -0.10. These results have been anticipated by

the analysis of Section II.A.2. The regression coefficient associated with

PXQ1 is likely to be biased toward zero due to the effect of random errors
                                           Et
of prediction associated with PXQ.1             when this variable is treated
                                            t
as a perfectly forecast statistic in year t. PXQ1     ,
                                                        TXQ1, and PDL1
                                                   -l
may be relatively free of such errors if expectations concerning the true

value of Pete in year t are formedon the basis of past information.

In addition, since the analysis of optimal social defense againstmurder

suggests that an exogenous change in            may change the socially optimal

value of Pete in the same      direction,   the coefficient associated with PXQ1

may be biased toward a positive value because of a potentially positive cor-

relation between          and the unsystematic part of PXQ1. This simultaneous

equation bias is expected to be eliminated when the systematic part of PXQ1

is estimated via the reduced form regression equation               It is note-

worthy that the estimated elasticities of              with respect to alterna-

tive measures of Pete are found generally to be low in absolute magnitude--

not an unexpected result with the average conditional risk of execution given

conviction over the period investigated being estimated at about 2.1 percent

and the average unconditional risk of execution estimated at only about 0.8

percent.26 This, perhaps, is the principle reason why previous studies into

the effect of capital punishment on murder using simple correlation techniques

and rough measures of the conditional risk of execution have failed to iden-

tify a systematic association between murder and the risk of execution.

Table 5   indicates   the particular importance of introducing into the

regression equations measures of Pa, Peta, L, U, and the tnie trend, p.
                                       3l.



          The regression results regarding the effects of P0a, P°cla and

P°elc     constitute perhaps the strongest findings of the empirical invct-

gation. Not only do t-e signs of the elasticities associated.with these

variables conform to the general theoretical expectations, but their rank-

ing, too, is consistent with the predictions in Section I. Table                 shows

that the elasticities associated with P0a range between -1.0 and -1.7,

whereas the elasticities associated with P°cla in the various regression

equations range between -O.1 and -0.5. And, as indicated in the preceding

paragraph, the elasticities associated with      P°elc   are lowest in absolute

magnitude. It is, of course, possible that the observed ranking of these

elasticities is a consequence of the varying degrees of noise associated

with P0a, P°cla, and P°eIc. However, there is no compelling reason

to   expect the degree of noise inherent in the empirical counterpart of
Pca to be lower      than that indigenous tc   the empirical counterpart     of

Fe   c.
           The estimated values of   the elasticities associated with U, L,

and Y in Table         are not inconsistent with the theoretical expectations
discussed in Section l.A. Of particular interest is that the effects of
equal percentage changes in P°elc and U are found to be nearly alike
                                                                             °
in absolute     magnitude. In part, the positive effect of U on                   may

be attributed to the effect of the reduction in legitimate earning oppor-

tunities on the incentive to commit crimes involving material gains, because

murder is often a by-product of these crimes. Indeed, preliminary time

 series regression results show that the elasticities of robbery and burglary

rates with respect    to the   unemploymcnt rate are even larger   in   magnitude than

the correspondin: eiast.icties of the murder rate. These results corjorm
more closel' to theoretical expectations than      o the results in the
                                     35


cross—state regression analysis (see Ehrlich (1913) and Table8 ). The reason,

presumably, is that, due to their higher correlation with cyclical variations

in the demand for labor, changes in U over time measure the variations in

both involuntary unemployment and the duration of such unemployment more ef-

fectively than do variations in U across states at a given point in time.

The estimated negative effect of variations in the labor force participation

rate on the murder rate can be explained along similar lines. Theoretically,

variations in L, are likely to reflect opposing income and substitution ef-

fects of changes in market earning opportunities. However, with measures of

both permanent income, Y, and the rate of unemployment introduced in the

regression equation as independent explanatory variables, changes in L may reflect

a pure substitution effect of changes in legitimate earning opportunities on the

incentive to commit both crimes against persons and property.27     Finally,
the positive association between
                                                 °   need not imply a positive
                                    Y and ()
income elasticity of demand for hate and malice since changes in the level

of the personal distribution of income may be strongly correlated with pay-

offs on crimes against property. If legitimate employment opportunities

are effectively accounted for by U and by L, changes in Y may be high-

ly correlated with similar changes in the incidence of crimes against prop-

erty.   Such a partial correlation is indeed observed across states (Ehrlich

(1973) and Table 8) and in a time series regression analysis of crimes against

property now in progress. Of note, perhaps, is that changes in      Y exhibit
a trend which is similar to the trend in urbanization for which no complete

time series data are available. The effect of Y       may thus represent in

pu't the effect of increased urbanization on the overall crime rate in the

United States.

        The positive   effect of variations in the percentage of' the popula-
tion in the ago group l5—21, A, on the murder rate :Ls consistent with the
cro —tatc ev:i (1cl1( (cIIcernlng the correlation between thse vtriables
                                         36


(see Table 8). A possible explanation for this finding was already offered

in Section II.A.2. Hoever, in some of the regressions, the standard errors

of the estimated elasticities associated with A exceed the absolute value

of the elasticities. The effect of the percentage of nonwhites in the popu-

lation, NW, is found to be statistically insignificant when the time trend.

T, is introduced as an independent explanatory variable in the regression

equation and is therefore excluded from the regressions estimating the sup-

ply of murders function (see Table 5 ).         This   result stands in sharp contrast

to the ostensibly positive effect of NW on the murder rate across states

(see Table 8). I have argued elsewhere in this context that the apparently

higher participation rate of nonwhites in all criminal activities may largely

be the result of the relatively poor legitimate employment opportunities

available to them (see Ehrlich (1973)). Since, over time,variations in these

opportunities may be effectively accounted for by the variations in U and

L, the estimated independent effect of NW may indeed be nil. The negative

partial effect of T on (
                                  °
                                       reported in Tables 1_7 may indicate a
rising proportion of capital murders among all murders, k, as predicted

by the analysis of Section II.A.2. For if k was related to T by

k =   (exp)T,   then T would enter the regression equation (12) ith a ne-

gative coefficient, -A. However, the effect of T is likely to confound the
effect of the continwusly iMproving .edical technology on the nunber of
atteMpted .urders   resulting in the death      of   victims and   actually identified

as murders, as well as the effect of other relevant Missing variables which
may exhibit a systematic trend;       hence   no conclusive inferences may be drawn
from the negative association between T and (—s--)         .
        The regression     results are   found to be robust with respect to the
functional fore of the regression equatiOn.            Running the   regressions reported
in Table 4 (using   the   same estimatLei procedure) by        introducing the
natural values of all the relevant variables instead of their natural
                                      37


logarithms does not change the qualitative results reported therein. In

addition, running the regressions by introducing the levels of' the rele-

vant variables rather than their modified first differences (that is, as-

suming no serial correlation in the error terms) artificially reduces the

standard errors of the regression coefficients as would be expected on purely

statistical grounds (see Table 7 ,     equation (3)). The results are further
insensitive as to the specific estimates of expenditures on police used in

the reduced form regression equation. The data for this variable are not

available for all the odd years between 1933 and 1951 and the missing sta-

tistics were interpolated either via a .. reduced form regression analysis

(XPOL1) or via a simple smoothing procedure.        The results are virtually

identical (compare equations (1) and (2) in Table 7 with equations (3) and

(14.) in Table 14- ).   The introduction of a dummy variable distinguishing the

Second World War years (191l2-l95) from other years in the sample has no dis-

cernible effect on the regression results, while the effect of the dummy vari-

able itself appears to be statistically insigifnicant.

          Of more importance, the qualitative results reported in Table 1. are

 insensitive to changes in the specific interval of time investigated in the

 regression analysis, asindictedby the results reported in Table 7. How-

 ever, the absolute magnitudes of some of the estimated elasticities,especially

 those associated with P0a, P°cla, U, and L do change when estimated from

 different subperiods. One reason for this sensitivity of the regression re-

 sults follows from the theorem sunmarized by equation (6), namely, that the

 absolute magnitudes of the elasticities associated with Pa, Fda, and 1ec

 are increasing functions of the levels of these variables.      There is some in-

 dication that the regression results are compatible with this theorem. For

 example, the average 'values of     P0a and P°cta in 1911.1-1969 were distinctly
                                        38


higher   than in 1937-1969 and estimates of the elasticities associated ith

these variables are indeed higher in equations (6) and (7) of Table 7 than

in equations (3) and (14) of Table 1• In contrast, the elasticities associat-

ed with estimates of Peic, expected to be an increasing function of the un-

conditional probability of execution, Pe = 1a       .
                                                        Pcta   •   Fe c, do not exhibit

an unambiguous decline across the two subperiods, perhaps because the dif-

ferences between the magnitudes of the corresponding estimates of the uncon-

ditional probability of execution, Pe, are not as substantial as the dif-

ferences between the mean values of P°a and P°cla. Alternatively, it is

possible that the imprisonment terms actually served by capital offenders de-

creased during this period. The analysis of' Section I.A.l, indicates that

the magnitude of the elasticity of           with respect to Peic is negatively

related to the severity of punishment by imprisonment.

          Another reason for the sensitivity of the absolute magnitudes of the

regression coefficients to different sample subperiods is due to changes in

the accuracy of' empirical estimates of Pa, PcIa, and Peic. It is generally

asserted that more recent UCR data are relatively more reliable than earlier

compilations. Indeed, the national sample size from which the values of

P°a and P°cla were computed by the IJCR has increased steadily over time.
                                    0        0             0
In   addition, the variations in P a, P cIa, and P             elc   were more pronounced

during the l960's than in other decades. These considerations may explain

why the elasticities associated with the latter variables are relatively

lower when estimated from the 1935-1966 subsample than from the 1937-1969

subsample.28 In contrast, the variations in U and L were largest during

the 1930's. .fndeed, the standard errors of the regression coefficients as-

 sociated with these variables are 'ower when estimated from the 1935-1969

 sample   rather than the l91l-l969 subs ample.
                                                39


           Last,   but   not least, the time series estimates of the supply of mur-

ders function appear to be generally consistent 'with independent estimates

derived through a cross-state regression analysis using data from 1960. The

set of explanatory variables used in the separate investigations is not iden-

tical due to the lack of comrehensive data for the length of imprisonment for

murder and for inequality in the personal distribution of income in the time

series analysis and because of the absence of separate information on P0a,

 o                 0                                                                         estimates
P cIa, and P elc across states. To make the separate regression

more comparable, the product of               P0a and P°cla, P0ac, a proxy for the true
                                                                           instead
Pc      Pa . Pc Ia, 'was introduced in the time series regression analysis

 of P0a and P°cla since the variable P in the cross-state analysis has

been constructed as a proxy for the unconditional probability of imprison-

ment (see Ehrlich (1973)). The results reported in Tables 7 and 8 are quite

 compatible. The elasticity associated with P in Table 8 lies between esti-

 mates of the separate elasticities associated with                      P0a and P°cla in Table

 li.' and is    similar   to, albeit somewhat higher than, the elasticities associated

 with    P0ac in Table 7.            The   general compatibility of the qualitative results
 associated 'with other variables introduced in                    Tables   1   and   8 has been discussed

 in   the preceding paragraphs.


 III. Some Implications

 A. The Apparent Effect of Capital
     ment: Deterrence or Prevention?

              It has already been hinted in the introduction to this paer that an

  apparent     negative effect of the         conditional         probability of execution on the

  murder rate may merely reflect the relative preventive impact of the death
                                                            recidivism on the
  penalty hich eliminates categorically the possibility of

  part   of    those executed. The argument is             more     general, however, and may apply
                                     40


in part to all forms of punishment involving the incarceration or detention

of perpetrators of crime. To the extent that offenders have a positive prob-

ability of recidivism once free to commit crimes outside of prisons ad if in-

carceration per se does not enhance considerably that probability, imprison-

ment as well as execution would reduce the actual murder rate by reducing

the number of offenders at large.

         An estimation of the differential preventive effect of execution rela-

tive to imprisonment for capital murders can be attempted through an applica-

tion of a general analysis of the preventive effect of imprisonment developed

in Ehrlich (1973). The theoretical model assumes that offenders constitute a

unique group of persons unresponsive to incentives and who compose a constant

fraction of the population that is determined by forces exogenoi. to the social

system. An   average   offender is assumed to commit     offenses per year

may be less than one) i not imprisoned or executed, but none otherwise.

Thus, by this model, the effects on the murder rate of increases in the

fractions of potential offenders who are imprisoned or executed,
        oo                   0
Pom P aP cla(1 - P0elc) and P e
                                          00 0
                                          P aP clap elc, respectively, exhibit

the pure preventive effects of imprisonment or execution.2 In this apç1.ica—

tion of themodel,execution is identified analytically with an imprisonment

term, Te, which is equal in length to the life expectancy of an average

offender imprisoned for murder. Under these assumptions, the absolute magni-

tude   of the elasticity of the murder rate with respect to the fraction of
                                                              0                     shon
those convicted   of murder who were punished by execution, P   elc,       can be

to equal
                            Te              Tm
                        0
                       Fe   E (lFg)_T
                                                              < 1      ,       (iii-)

                              r=l
                                 : (1)_T E 'r=l
                                           (i+g)1•
                                                   11.1




where g denotes the natural rate of growth of the general population as

well as the stock of potential murderers over time and Th denotes the effec-

tive average time spent in prison by those convicted of capital murders. The

method used in deriving equation (i1) can be inferred from the analysis given

in Ehrlich (1973, p. 536).

          Tentative        calculations of                 relating to   the period 1935-1969
                                                   °peIc
are   based upon estimates of the average values of Te, Tm and g, and

upon   estimates of P0e and          P0m compited on the extreme assumption that an average

offender      at   large coimnits murders at the frequency of one per year. This

yields estimates of °peIc ranging from slightly less than a third to a

little more thanhaif of the empirical estimates of elasticities of the mur-

der rate with respect to alternative measures of P°elc, a3,                       reported       in

Section III.B.29 Thus, even under the extreme assumption that                          =   1,    the

empirical findings a'e inconsistent with the notion that executions have a

preventive effect only. Moreover, according to the preventive theory of

law enforcement, the partial elasticity of the murder rate with respect to

the fraction of offenders apprehended for murder, P0a, is expected to

be identical to the partial elasticity of the murder rate with respect to

the fraction of those apprehended or charged with murder who were convicted

of murder, P°cfa; that is,

                                          Tm                      Te
                                    P°m         (1 + g)1• + P0e E (1 + g)T
                                          ¶—1                     r=l
         0•                   =                                                    <   1.       (15)
              o        o                    Tm                      Te
           Pa Fda l+P°m                             (1+gYT+POe E (1+g)T
                                            'r=l




(Equation (15)        is   a straightforward generalization of equation (2.7) in

Ehriich       (1973).) The        reason, essentially, is that      equal percentage changes
in either P°a or P°c a have the same effect on the fractions of offenders
'who are incapacitated through incarceration or execution, P0m and

respectively, and thus should have virtually equivalent preventive effe'ts

on the murder rate. This prediction is ostensibly at odds with the sini-

ficant positive difference between empirical estimates of the elasticity of

the murder rate 'with respect to P0a and P°cla. In contrast, the latter

findings are consistent 'with implications of the deterrent theory of la

enforcement (see equation ()).             In   light of these observations one cannot

reject the hypothesis that punishment, in general, and execution, in parti-

cular, exert a unique deterrent effect on potential murderers.


B.    Tentative Estimates of     the Tradeoff
      Between Executions     and Murders

           The   regression results concerning        the partial elasticities of the

reported      murder rate 'with respect to various measures of the expected risk
of execution given conviction in different subperiods, c,                   can   be restated
in terms      of expected tradeoffs between the execution of an          offender and the
lives   of potential victims that might thereby be saved. For illustration,

consider the regression coefficients associated with PXQ1 and PXQ1                        in
                                                                                 -l
equations (6) and      (3)   of Table 14        These coefficients, -o.o6 and -0.065,

respectively, may be considered consistent estimates of the average elasti-

city of the national murder rate,               a 0    with respect to the objective con-

ditional risk of execution, P°elc =()°,                 over the period 1935-1969.       Eval-
uated at the mean values of murders and executions over that period,

     = 8965    and E = 75,

be 7 and 8, respectively. Put
                               the   marginal tradeoffs,
                                        differently,
                                                                =
                                                                    a   ,   are found
                                                        an additional execution per year
                                                                                        to



over the period in question may have resulted, on average, in 7 or 8 fcwcr

murders. Curiously, approximately the same tradeoffs are faind to ext at

the middle year of the sample, 1952, in which the numbci'sof murdcrs an:1 exe-
cutions were 8,26a and        71,    respectvcly. In contrast, the tradeoffs corrcspoii'Jin:
                                      I13



to   the average values of murders and executions over the period 1960-1967

(Q = 10,958      and E   22, respectively) and to the elasticities -o.o6 and

-o.o65 are found to be 1 for 30 and 1 for 32, respectively. The weakness

inherent in these predicted magnitudes, especially those relating to the

more recent years of the sample, is that they may be subject to relatively

large prediction errors. More reliable point estimates of the expected trade-

off's should be computed at the mean values of all the explanatory variables

entering the regression equation (hence,, also the mean value of the dependent

variable) because the confidence interval of the predicted value of the de-

pendent variable is there minimized. The mean values of the dependent vari-

able and the ex-planatory variable used to calculate the value of &3 in

equation (3) of Table 1 are found to be nearly identical with the actual

values of these two variables in 1966 and 1959, respectively. The corres-

ponding values of murders and executions in these two years were

Q(1966) = 10,920     and E(1959) =   1;     the marginal tradeoff's between execu-

tions and murders based on the latter magnitudes and the elasticity

     =   -o.o6   is found to be 1 to 17.

           It should be emphasized that the expected tradeoffs computed in the

preceding illustration mainly serve a methodological purpose since their valid-

ity is conditional upon that of the entire set of assumptions underlying

the econometric investigation. In addition, it should be pointed out that

the 90 percent confidence intervals of the elasticities used in the preceding

illustrations vary approximately between 0 and -0.10 implying that the cor-

responding confidence intervals of the expected tradeoffs in the last illus-

tration range between limits of 0 and 2. It is particularly important to

recall that the validity of both the regression results and the expected

tradeoffs in question rests on the assumption that the effecUve ]ent1i of
                                         11


imprisorunent for murder, which is expected to have a direct effect on both

the rate of murder and its elasticity with respect to the conditional prob-

ability of execution, a3,        were not subject to any systematic trends. As

the above illustrations indicate, however, although the estimated elasticities


(3)     reported in Tables 1 -7    are   low in absolute magnitude, the tradeoffs

between executions and murders implied by these elasticities are not negli-

gible, especially when evaluated at relatively low levels of executions and

relatively high levels o:f' murder.3°

          Finally, it should be emphasized that the tradeoffs discussed in the

preceding illustrations were based upon the partial elasticity of

with respect to measures of P°elc and thus, implicitly, on the assumption

that the values of all other variables affecting the murder rate are held

constant as the probability      of execution varies. In practice, however, the
values of   the endogenous variables, Pa and Pc Ia, may not be perfectly

controllable. The theoretical analysis in Section II.B suggests that exo-

genous shifts in the optimal values of Peic may generate          offsetting   changes

in the optimal values of Pa and Pca. Indeed, consistent estimates of the

elasticities of the reported murder rates with respect to alternative measures

of P°ec that were derived through a reduced form regression analysis using

as explanatory variables only the exogeneous and predetermined variables in-

cluded in the supply of offenses function and other structural equations (x1

and    X2 in Table 3   ) are   found to be generally lower than the elasticities
                        31     The actual tradeoffs between executions and murders
reported in Table

thus   depend partly upon the ability of law enforcement     agencies to control

the    values of all the parameters characterizing law enforcement activity
while, at the same time, setting ne guidelines for the application of capital
pmi shment.
                                      115




Iv.    Conclusion

           r1liS paper has attempted to present a systematic analysis of the re-

lation between capital punishment and the crime of murder.      The analysis rests

on the presumption that offenders respond to incentives. Not all those who

commit murder may respond to incentives. But     for   the theory to be useful in

explaining aggregate behavior, it is sufficient that at least some so behave.

           Previous investigations, notably those by Thorsten Sellin, have de-

veloped evidence used to unequivocally deny the existence of any deterrent

or preventive effects of capital punishment.     This evidence stems by and

 large from what amounts to informal tests of the sign of the simple corre-

 lation between the legal status of the death penalty and the murder rate

 across states and over time in a few states. Studies performing these tests

 have not considered systematically the actual enforcement of the death pen-

 alty, which may be a far more important factor affecting offenders' behavior

 than the legal status of the penalty. Moreover, these studies have generally

 ignored other parameters characterizing law enforcement activity against

 murder, such as the probabilities o± apprehension and conviction, which

 appear to be systematically related to the probability of punishment by

 execution. The sign of the simple correlation between the murder rate and

 the legal status, or even the effective use of capital punishment,    cannct   prc-

 vide    conclusive evidence for or against the existence of the deterrent effect

  of capital punishment since it may capture effects of other determinants of

  the murder rate as well.

            The basic strategy I have attempted to follow in formulating an ade-

  quate analytic procedure has been to develop a simple economic model of mur-

  der and defense against murder, to derive on the basis of this model a set

  of specific behavioral imp1ication that could he tested against ava.drthle
  data and, accordingly, to test those implications statistically. The
                                    146




theoretical analysis provided sharp predictions concerning the signs and the

relative magnitudes of the elasticities of the murder rate which respect to

the probability of apprehension and the conditional probabilities of corivic-

tion and execution for murder. It suggested also the existence of a systema-

tic relation between employment and earning opportunities and the frequency

of murder and other related crimes. Although in principle the negative effect

of capital punishment on the incentive to commit murder may be partly offset,

for example, by an added incentive to eliminate witnesses, the results of

the empirical investigation are not inconsistent with the hypothesis that,

on balance, capital punishment reduces the murder rate. But even more sig-

nificant is the fact that other specific theoretical predictions, too, are

found to be consistent ith the empirical results. The elasticity of the

murder rate dth respect to the probability of apprehension is found greater

in absolute maiitude than its elasticity with respect to a measure of the

conditional probability of conviction. The latter elasticity, in turn, is

found to exceed the elasticity of the murder rate with respect to alterna-

tive measures of the conditional probability of punishment by execution.

The murder rate is also found negatively related to the labor force parti-

cipation rate and positively to the rate of unemployment. None of these re-

suits is compatible ith a hypothesis that offenders do not respond to incen-

tives. In particular, the results concerning the effects of the estir2tes

of the probabilities of appehension, conviction and execution are        not consis-
tent ith the hypothesis that execution or imprisonment decrease the rate of

murder only by incapacitating or preventing apprehended offenders froiri corn-

mitting   further crimes.
          These observations do not imply that the empirical investiaton has
proved the existence of the deterrent or preventive effect of capital p'ansh-
ment beyond convcnt onal statistical quali-fir:ttionr;   r1ie   iesult   moy be
biased by the absence of data on the severity of alternative punishments for

murder and by other missing variables in the regression analysis. The use

of national data in the regression analysis creates potential aggregation

biase partly because the national statistics incorporate data from both

retentionist and abolitionist states. Although the estimation procedure at-

tempts to correct potential simultaneous equation regression biases and biases

due to autoregressiveness in the residual terms of the regression equation,

the constant elasticity format used in this analysis may be inappropriate

due to considerations spelled out in Section II. Most important, perhaps,

the empirical counterparts of the conditional probabilities of conviction

and execution for capital murders may not be efficient estimatars of :he

true •'ariables as the discussion in Section II.A.2 suggests. Future inves-

tigations into the issues raised in this paper that may use superior data

and/or more satisfactory measures of the theoretical constructs would un-

doubtedly reach different quantitative conclusions.

            At the same time it is not obvious whether the net effect of all the

shortcomings noted above necessarilyexaggerates the regression results in

favor of the theorized results. For example, the aggregation of data from

abolitionist and retentionist states indicates that the regression coefficients

 associated with measures of the conditional probability of execution are

 likely to be biased downward because the latter measures relate, in principle,

 to retentionist states only. Also, the results of the time series analysis

 of variations in the national murder rate are compatible with results from

 regression analysis of variations in murder rates and other crimes across

 states in the United States. In view of this new evidence one cannot reject

 the hypothesis that law enforcement activities in general and executions in

 particular do exert. a deterrent   effect on acts   of murder. Strong inferences

 to   the   contrary drawn from earlier investigations   appear to have been   prema-
 ture.
        As the analysis of Section I.A.l demonstrates, the magnitudes of thc

partial derivatives and the elasticities of the murder rate with respect to

the conditional probability of execution reflect the differential effects of

execution over alternative punishments imposed onconvictedoffenders. Thus,

the observed partial effect of capital punishment on the rate of murder durinc

the period studied in this investigation is partly a function of the actual

severity of imprisonment and of other penalties imposed on capital offenders.

These punishments have been less severe than actual imprisonment for life and

a far cry from the severity of punishments other than execution which were

imposed on offenders in the time of Beccaria,as indicated by the excerpt

cited from his treatise in the introduction to this paper. It may not be

surprising, therefore that the magnitude of the differential deterrent effect of exe-

cution over imprisonment in recent decades has been ostensibly higher than

what Beccaria believed it to be in the eighteenth century.

        Even if one accepts the results concerning the partial effect of

the conditional probability of execution on the murder rate as valid, these

results do not imply that capital punishment is necesarily a desirable form

of punishment. Specifically, whether the current level of application of

capital punishment is optimal cannot be determined independently of the ques-

tion of whether the levels of alternative punishments for murder or other de-

cision 'variables affecting the murder rate are optimal. If the severity of

punishments bymeans other than execution had been greater in recent years,

the apparent elasticity of the murder rate with respect to the conditional

probability of punishment by execution would have been lower, thereby :'aki

capital punishment ostensibly less efficient     in deterrinLz or prevcntii; n:ur-
ders. Again, this observation need not imply that the effective period of
incarceration imposed on convicted capital offenders should be raised.
Given the validity of the anaiysis   pursued   above, incarccraton or exccution
                                   )49




are not exhaustive alcrnatives for effectively defending against murders.32

Indeed, these conventional punishments may be considered inefficient means

of deterrence from an economic point of view because the high "price" they

exact from convicte offenders is not transferrable to the rest of society.

Adequate monetary fines seem eminently more efficient alternatives because

they may provide, in principle, an equivalent deterrent to potential off end-

ers, an adequate punishment to the guilty, and retribution as ell as compen-

sation to the families of victims. These alternative punishments may be too

costly to administer in some instances, but their relative expediency as a

penal instrument in criminal cases has not been sufficiently explored. More-

over, the results of the empirical investigation indicate that the rate of

murder and other related crimes may also be reduced through increased employ-

ment and earning opportunities. The range of effective means of defense

against murder thus goes beyond conventional means of law enforcement and

crime prevention. There is no unambiguous method for determining hether

capital punishment should be utilized as a legal means of punishment without

considering at the saii time the optimal values of all other choice variables

that can affect the level of capital crimes.
                       S




                                                      TABLE       3.



                                                                           (PERCENT      DISTRIBuTION).
                     MURDER BY CIRCUMSTANCE IN 1966 AND 1969

                                                                                                          Knownb    Suspected
                                      Parent     Other                 Romantic                      a
                           Spouse                                                  and         Other      Felony     Felony
                                      Killing    Family                Triangle
                           Killing                                                            Arguments    Type       Type
                                      Child      Killings              Lovers'   Quarrels
Region        Year          Spouse


Northeast—                                                                                      36.1       16.6        9.5
                                       6.1         7.0                      9.14
em   States    1966           15.3
                                                                                                37.9       22.6       13.5
                              10.7     5.14        14.7                     5.2
               1969

North                                                                                           141.14     15.14       6.6
                              15.14    14.3        8.14                      8.5
Central         1966
States                                                                                          140.3      22.5        5.14
                                       3.5         9.3                       6.0
                1969          13.0

Soui hem                                                                     8.6                146.i      ii.6        6.2
Sta,es          1966          i6.i     2.5          8.9
                                                                             8.5                146.i      13.5         5.5
                              114.1    2.2         10.1
                1969
Western                                                                      7.2                30.7       21.3         7.0
States          1966          19.7     6.6          7.5
                                                              •                                                         6.8
                                                                             6.9                 314.14     25.5
                1969          13.5     6.0          6.9
                                                                             8.5                 140.9      114.8       7.0
                1966          16.3      14.2        8.3
Total
                                                                                                 141.3      19.3        7.2
                               13.1     3.7         8.                       7.0
                1969
                                                                                                       act.
                                                    were most frequently acquainted prior to the fatal
         aPersons Darticipating in these arguments
                                                                                                 other
                                             from  robberies, sex motives, an1and slayings and
                         are those resu1tinr
         bFelony murders
 felonies.

 Source:      Uniform Crime     Peports , (1966, 1569).
                                             TABLE 3
                          VAflIAI3IES USED   IN TF REGRESSION ANALYSIS
                                ANNUAL OBSERVATIONS
                                                      1933-1969
                 (Means and. Standard Deviations in Natural
                                                                   Logarithms)
 —

       Variable                                                                    Standard
                                                                     Mean         Deviation
y1 (    ()° = Crime rate: offenses 1own per 1,000                   -2.857
                   civilian population.                                             0.156
         P°a = Probability
                                   of arrest: clearance rates
       P01
         c1a Conditional
                          ..                  .
                              probability of conviction:
                                                                     4.997
                                                                           1
                                                                                   0.038
                  fraction of those                                  3.71          O.15
                  victed of murder.acharged who were con-
       P0ec = Conditional
                          probability of execution.
                             the no. of executions                  0.176          1.749
                in year t+l as a percent offor    murder
                                                the tot-
                aJ. number of
                              convictions in year t.b
            L = Labor
                      force   participation rate of the
                  civilian population.                             -0.546         0.030
            U Unemployment rate of the civilian
                  labor force                                       1.743         0.728
X1       A = Fraction
                               of residential
                 the   age   group 14-24.         population in    -i.4o          0.118
        Y    =
                 Friedman's estimate of permanent
                 per capita                       income           6.870          0.338
         T =
                 Chronological     time (years)
        NW = Percent
                     of nonwhrte         residential
                 ation.                                  popul-   -2.212
                                                                                 0.063
         N =     Civilian
                     population in 1,000's.
     XGOV = Per
                                                                  Ji.944         0.161
                capita (real) expenditures on all
            governments in million dollars.                       -7.661         0.501
            =   Per cLa (real)
        1
                in dollars            cxi'1iturcs on p.c 2.U
                                laccI one ar.                                    0.306
Table 3      (Cont'd.)



          aTh figures for P°ca (1933-1935) and XPOL (aU the odd years
1933-1951)   were interpolated via an awd.liary   regression   anal,ysis.

          beactual number of executions in l8, l9 and 1970 as
zero. However the numbers were assumed equal to 1 in each of these
years in constructing the value of PX in 1967-1959.
                                                                                  TABlE       4
                                                MODIFIED FIRST DIFFERENCES OF        MURDER        1lAI1fl (TN NALURAL ILXARITHMS)
                              REGRESSED AGAINST CORRESPONDING MODIFIED          FIRST    DIFFERENCES        OF SEIEC1ED VARIABlES SET    I   (1933-1969)
                                                                                  In parentheses)
                                                                                                                   =—
:'rective      Period   (coRc)                                         I     Alternative L P dc
      :. statistic                                   t*Ia
                          e          (Constant)                            *(Q                *pxQ2      *p)(Q      L             *A          y            *y           A*T


       1935-1969         0.257        -3.176       -1.553    -O.4           -0.039                                   -1.336     0.630        1.481     0.067      -O.+7
        :.               0.052       (—0.78')     (—0.78)   (—3.58)        (-1.59)                                  (-1.36)    (2.10)    (4.23)       (2.00)      -.6)
2.    1935-1969          0.135                     -1.182
                                      -4.19Z                 -0.386                           -o.o68                 ,-1.277    o.48o     1.318       0.062       -O.C7
        1.2              0.042       (-1.25)      (-1.83)   (-3.85)                          (-3.69)                (-1.59)    (2.19)    (4.86)      (2.38) (-6.61)
3.    1935-1969          ').077       -4.419       -1.203    -0.374                                       -0.065     -1.405     0.512        1.355    0.068       -0.
        1.81             o.o4        (-1.25)      (-1.78)   (-3.)                                        (-3.29)    (-1.63) (2.26) (4.88)            (2.55)     -6.)
                          .                                                 *                  *
                                                                                                PDL1
                                                                                                           *
...   1937-1969         0.291         -2.447       -1.461    -0.487        -0.049                                    -1.393     0.524     1.295       0.063       -O.C.4
        2.00             ).046       (-0.61)      (-2.03)   (-3.38)    (-2.26)                                      (-i.8)     (IL.94)   (3.90)      (2.09) (-'P.53)
5.    1939-1969         -0.207        6.868        -2.225    -o.8o                            -0.062                  -0.457    0.059        0.580    O.O1       -0.032
        2.15             0.050       (1.39)       (-3.04)   (-4.124)                         (-3.82)                 (o.o)     (1.23)    (i.to)      (0.43)     (-.c)
6.    1935-1969         0.081        -3.503                  -0.424                      .
                                                   -1.516                                                 -0.060     -1.368     o.48                  0.064      -0.U50
        1.76            o.o1        (—0.85)       (-i.3)    (-3.37)                                      (-1.73)    (-1.38)    (1.42)    (4.25)      (1.93)     (-'.   .7)
                                                                                     .




          The e3timatic)e procedure is outlined in the statistical                                 All
                                                                   appendix.variables, except T, are in natural 1ogarith denoted by lo;er case
 etters,    The
              definitions of    these variables are given in Table 3.    AX
                                                                        denotes the linear operation X -       . Thc vai'.c of
   io estimated via the Cochrane—Orcutt iterative procedure (CORC).
                                                                    e iz defined in  the stati3tical appendix. *Pa and t?ca n equation: -5                                    a
                                                                                                    .,
cputed via a reduced form regression equation including: C(constant),       Pa1, PcIa1, P0ec, L, A, Yr,, U, T, P°Ic,,
A1, Y1, U1, XPOLj, XGOV, N1, N• *Pa, iFcJa and *pxQ1 in equati& 4 are computed via the some reducod form with FXC
(7°eo) exc1ued.
                                         I      I




                                                                                            TABlE
                    '.OJIFIED FIRST DIFFERENCESOF               MURDER           (IN NATTJRAL IOGARITMS) REGRESSED        AGAINST CORRESPONDING MODIFIED FIRST
                                                                                                 AL1ERNATIVE
                                         DIFFERErFCES OF SE1ECLED VARIABIES,SET            II:                   SETS OF EXPlANATORy VARIJLBIES
                                                                                            in   parentheses)

     ffccti-;      rc        }p(CORC)                                    I            I   Pe(c
 D.   i.   Sztic                             (Constant)         *Pa
                                 0e                                          *P0cIa       *PxQ                                     *NW                      *J        óT
 1.                             0.838           -5.68
       9-!9                                                                                -0.0214      -2.139         0.834     -2.080     -0.282
        :.2                     o.o6                                                                                                                  -0.038         0.022
                                                (i.44)                                    (-0.99)      (-2.23)        (1.92)    (-1.76)    (-0.62)   (-0.93)        (1.30)
2.     19_lc9                   0.073           -4.385        -1.395         -0.357        -0.063       -1.413         0.502
            L.73                o.o4           (-1.22)
                                                                                                                                 -0.791      1.187        0.050    -0.037
                                                             (-1.84)     (-3.37)          (-3.11)      (-1.62)        (2.18)    (-0.75)     (3.42)       (1.140)   (-2.62)
3.         _199                 0.117               24.831    -3.65          -0.084        -o.o6        -0.717                   -3.075      0.272
            1.75                0.059           (i.oo) (-3.83)           (-o.-)           (-2.69)      (-0.62)                  (-4.27)     (1.42)
 .     1935-1'S9                0.508               0.563     -1.173         -0.273        -0.047      -0.854          0.435     -i.4246
            1.77                0.051           (0.14)       (-1.25)     (-1.86)          (-2.36)     (-1.03)         (1.76)    (-2.54)
5.     1935..1c9                0.700          -0.175         -0.195      -0.1414          -0.010
            1.56                                                                                       -1.879          0.713
                                0.0514         (-o.o)        (—0.22)     (—2.44)          (—0.62)     (—2.33)         (2.40)

           Iot:    Sczr.e    references as In Table 4 but the reduced form
the                                                                               to compute t*0a and *POcIa is adjusted so
      sc.fic       set      of exogeneous variables Introduced in each of theused                                                  to Include        a
                                                                              structural (supp]r of murders) functions roportod ln Table
                                                                                  TkBIE 6
                       MODIFIED FIRST DIFFERENCES OF MURDER RMES (IN NAIURAL
                                                                             IOGAflITflJ3)
                                                                                         REGRESSED AGAINST CORRESEONDING MODIFIED
                               FIRST DIFFERENCES OF SElECTED VARIABlES SET            III;
                                                                                ALTERNATIVE TINS PERIODS A11D OTHER TESTS


                                                                            (n/s; in parentheses)
 Zffctive Period                                                                                          I
                            (C0RC)                                                        :PoeIc
                                  .      c                                                                                                                      War   Years
 D.      .. Statitjc                  (Constant)        P    a                    *             *                                        .                        Dur
                                                                                               L
                                  e
                                                                     (,P c(a       PXQ1            TXQJ
                                                                                                                    *L
                                                                                                                                  A      óy            .    U   (19142-45)        £   T
                                                                                       -1                                                      P
     .    1935-1969         0.059        -4.060      -1.247        -O.34          -0.066                       -1.3114
             1.80           0.044                                                                                         0.450         1.318       0.068                      -o.c.6
                                        (-1.00)     (-1.6)        (-3.07)        (-3.33)
              (a)                                                                                             (-1.49) (2.20)           (14.81)     (2.60)                     (-6.14)
2.       1937-1969          0.287        -2.568     -1.435
            1.99            o.o46                                                              -0.049          -1.388     0.526        1.289        0.063
                                        (-0.61)    (-1.87)       (-3.22)                      (-2.31)         (-i.)      (1.94)
              (a)                                                                                                                     (3.91)       (2.10)                     (-14.6)
3. 1937.4059                  -          -3.608 -1.385            -0.345                      -0.064           -1.218     0.482                     0.068
            1.149          0.046        (-1.02) (-2.12)                                                                                1.348                                   -O.C.7
             (b)                                                 (-3.2)                      (-3.52)          (-l.4o) (2.13)          (14.)        (2.59)                     (_5.50)
4.       1935-1969         0.061        -4.882      -1.172        -0.383
            1.84           o.o46                                                 -0.069                        -1.487     0.477        1.393        0.077        0.018         -O.c3
                                       (-1.32)     (-1.73)       (-3.20)        (—3.22)                       (-1.61)    (1.89)       (4.3°)       (1.9)        (0.31)        (-5.7,)
5.       1937-1969         0.250        -2.086      -1.634        -0.508                      -0.055           -1.444
            2.08           0.048                                                                                         0.406         1.334       0.077         0.035
                                       (-o.i)      (-2.i)        (-2.83)                     (-2.36)
                                                                                                                                                                              0.C5
                                                                                                              (-1.51)    (1.23)       (3.73)       (1.80)       (0.50)        (-4.2)
6.       19141-1969       .0.164         3.025      -1.744                      -0.0714
            2.21           0.048                                                                              -1.008     0.141        0.734        0.028                      -0.C6
                                        (0.57)     (-2.21)       (-3.70)       (-3.70)                        (-i.o4)    (o.6)        (2.06)
                                                a




 Table      6' (Cont'd.)

 Effective Period              (coRc)                                                              AP0e   c                                                                 Y:...•
                                    'S              C
 t.   W.    Statistic                                              *'So       *'So        *               *                           *                              *
                                    0e       (Constant)           APa        APcIe.      APXQ,            A                                           AY         AU
                                                                                                              TXQ1                                                       (l942-1)

7.    1941-1969             -0.029             3.752                                           -
                                                              1.9147       -0.723                      -0.066          -0.962      0.152           0.771
         2.13                0.048            (0.68)                                                                                                         0.0311                      -0.034
                                                          (-2.33)         (-3.69)                     (-3.34)        (_o.)        (o.)            (2.00)    (0.96)                       (-.13)
8. 1933-1966                 0.061            -5.673          -o.64        -o.26         . 0.055                      -2.111       0.283           0.922     0.036                       -0.036
            1.90             0.033           (-2.21)      (-1.10)         (—3.49)        (—3.72)                     (—3.1.8)     (1.67)          (14.16)   (1.714)                      (-6.3c)
9.    1939-1966              0.016            -2.691         -0.946        -0.360                     -0.051          -1.766      0.212           0.780
            1.96             0.037                                                                                                                           0.027                   I   -0.033
                                             (-°.55)      (-1.38)         (-1.984)                   (-3.23)         (-2.2511)   (1.03)           (2.920)   (1.11)
           -4-                                                -
           1oe: sazr referencesas             in Table            but   the reduced   formusedto compute        AP0a   and     AP0cia does   not include N.
      a5 as equations               3    and 4 in   Table 4       tth the missing data pertaining to                                      via a
procedure.                                                                                                     XPOL1 interpolated                 smoothing

                   as equation 14    in Table       4 with        p assumed to be zero (leveiregression).




                                                    3.
                                                                            TABlE    7
                                          MODIFIED FIRST DIFFERENCES OF MURDER RAS (IN NA1RAL IOGARITHMB)
                                  REGRESSED AGAINST CORRESPONDING MODIFIED FIRST DJ.F ENCES OF SEIECIED VARIABlES
                                         SET IV: STING THE EFFECT OF THE OVERALL ffiOBPBIIITY OF CONVICEON


                                                                     (/s    in parentheses)

E'fective Period        P(conc)                                             Alternatjve,A*pOetc
                          '            C                                               -             —
                  .                                              *           *
D.   W.   Statit.c        0       Constant      AP                                           * .                                *                 *         *
                                                     ac      A              A
                                                                                                                       *L
                                                                 PXQ.1          PXQ2        A PX1     •*                       AA     A*Y        AU        AT
1.    1935-1959        0.304      -10.050      -0.549        -0.040                                                -1.705    0.809    1.525 0.067       -0.047
         1.79          0.052       (-4.61)    (-.o8)        (-1.63)                                               (-1.81)   (2.93)   (4.30) (1.97)     (-4.2)
2.    1935-1569        o.18        -9.545      -0.454                       -0.073                                 -1.585    0.581    1.358 0.063       O.oi.8
         1.76          0.043      (-.7)       (-5.71)                      (11.o3)                                (-2.10)   (2.82)   (5.oo) (2.35)     (-6.73)
3.    1935-1959        0.094       -9.56].     -0.449                                       -0.071                 -1.777    0.607    1.407    0.069    -0.049
           176         0.045      (-5.85)     (-5.2)                                       (—3.68)                (-2.24)   (2.82)   (5.o6)   (2.53)   (-6.76)
4.   1937-1959         0.334      -10.360      -0.473                                                    -0.055    -1.893    0.703    1.450 0.067       -0.048
           1.75        o.o46      (-5.05)     (-4.8)                                                 (—2.60)      (-2.26)   (2.89)            (2.20)   (-5.27)

          Note:   So r€ferences as in Table     4   with   Pac       PaPela replacing      P, Pc!a
                                                   TPBIE 8

                           MURDER RATES REGRESSED  AGAINST SEIIC TED VARIABlES:
                           A CR0SS-STTE   REGRESSION ANALYSIS, 1960 (Ii.8 sTATEs)

                                                   in parentheses)
                                             (/s

                                                                                             mu        nL
iab1e                                                                               fnA     15-214    15—214
                Constant    fn P       ,(n T       ,(nW       ,(nX      fn N
Methoá-
                                       —0.087      0.175      1.11)9    0.5314
2S   L          0.316       —0.852

                (0.085)     (—2.1492) (—0.6145)    (0.3314)   (1.914) (8.356)

                             —0.913     —0.018     0.186      1.152     0.5142
SUR            —1.198

               (—0.033)     (—3.062)   (—1.710)    (0.361) (2.1'2) (8.650)
                                                                                    1.293   —0.3214    —0.822
                                        —0.1421     0.1457  o.8SO   0.501
2SLS            —7.2814      —0.8515
                                                                        (7.921)   (1.698) (—1.227)    (—1.966)
               (—1.1486)    (—2.578)   (—0.333)    (0.903)    ('.5'r)
                                              P = probability of imprisonment for murder (number
                                                                                                           of
The                                                     offenses known); T average time served in
    variables included in the analysis are: number  of
ccrit.ments to  state prisons divided by the
                           W   median        income in  a state;   X = proportion of failiec with in—
state prisons  for murder;            fai1y                                                    urban
                                                              15-214; U = unemployment rate of
core less than 1/2w; A = fraction of males in the age group rate
                                   labor force particiaticn         of urban males in the age group
males in the age group 1-214; L a natural
                                           logarithm.  P  dnotes   the regression estimateof P cori-
17-2.L. The symbol fn eriotes                                         2SLS indicatesthat the rcgrssion
puted. v-iaa  reduced form regression    analysis. The abbreviation
                                                                     STJR indicates that the regression
 equation -,as cstimated by    a tro-stage least-squares procedure.
                                                         of estimating seemingly unrelated equations
 ecuatior ':as estimated. by applying ZellnerTs method          refer to the crimes of rape and aggravated
                    Ti-io other (seemingly unrelated) equation;
 simultaneously.
 aj1.
 Source:   Ehrlich (1973)
                          STATISTICAL APPENDIX


        From a purely econometric point of view the problem underlying the

empirical investigation is assumed to be that of estimating a simultaneous

equation model with first order serially correlated disturbances



                             YA' =XB' +V                              (Al)



where



                            V=V1R'-fE .                               (A2)


Y and X are matrices of endogeneous and exogeneous or predetermined vari-

ables, V and E are matrices of disturbance terms; A and B are coef-

ficient matrices and R is a diagonal matrix with elements between -1 and +1.

The subscript -1 denotes one period lagged values of the relevant terms.

The equation of interest is the supply of murders equation which is, say,

the first equation in (Al). It can be written as



                        y1 =         +          +                     (A3)
                               Y1A        X1B        w1   ,




where



                          v1 =                + e1    •
                                                                      (Au)
                                         -l


                                     Al
                                                 A2


              Equations (A3) and (Ai-) can bew'itten for any value of p11, ,                         as



          -                    - Y1)A+ (x1 -                     +      - )v      +
                                                                                      e)   .       (A5)



Equation (A5) is estimated in this study via a nonlinear estimation procedure

proposed by R. C. Fair (1970), 'which is based on the following three-round

procedure. In the first stage predicted values of Y1, denoted by

are derived via a reduced form regression analysis that includes as instru-

ments y1 ,
                —1    -l
                              , X1
                           and a sufficient nuniber of exogeneous or predeter-
         -l
mined variables associated with other structural equations in (Al), X2.

A list of variables subsumed under X2 is included in Table 3 and the

rationale for including these variables in the model follows, generally from

the specifition of the simultaneous equation model of crime and law en-

forcement discussed in Ehrlich (1973). In the second stage, equation (A5)

is then estimated for any            given   value of p by classical least squares,

using the modified difference                    -     Y        in place of Y -
                                                                              1       Y1       .    Equa-
                                             1             1_                              1
tion (A5) thus becomes



      -
                      l       y1 )A + (x1
                                             -
                                                                + [(q - )v1   +e1 + W1A]             (A6)




 'where          =
                     Y1
                          -
                              . This   second stage is then repeated for various values

 of           between -1 and +1 through an iterative procedure (I have here used

 the Cochran-Orcutt method (CORC)), and the estimation procedure stops at

 the choice of that value of                 and the corresponding values of A1 and

 B1 'which yield the smallest sum                of   squared residuals of' the second stage

 regression. The values of A1 and B1 thus estimated are shown in Fair

 (1970) to be consistent statistically. These estimates along with                                   and

 the estimated standard error of e1, denoted e' are reported in Section II.B.
                            FOOTNOTES



       *University of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research. I

have benefitted from comments and suggestions from Gary Becker, Harold Demsetz,

John Gould, Richard Posner, George Stigler and Arnold Zellner, members of the

Industrial Organization Workshops at the University of Chicago and the Univer-

sity of California at Los Angeles, and members of the workshop of the National

Bureau of Economic Research. I am particularly indebted to Randall Mark for

useful assistance and suggestions and to Walter Vandaele and Dan Calal for

helpful computational assistance and suggestions. Financial support for this

study was provided by a grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research

from the National Science Foundation.


          detailed discussion of the evidence of Sellin is contained in an

unpublished version of this paper (dated July 1973). Omitted here due to

space considerations, that discussion will be made available in a future

publication. A few remarks on this evidence are contained in the final section

of this paper.


         ssentially the same formulation of consumption decisions in the

presence of interdependencies in utility across persons has been developed

and illustrated in Becker (1969). For a related analysis see Hochman and

Rodgers (1969).


         t might be argued that although the wish to harm other persons can-

not be rejected on economic grounds, nonetheless the execution of such de-

sires (as opposed to benevolent actions) must be considered irrational in

the sense of violation of Pareto optimality conditions. If there were no



                               Fl
bargaining, transfer or enforcement costs associated with mutually acceptable

and enforceable contracts between a potential offender (o) and his potential

victim (v), and if v's wealth constraint were not binding, then it would

always be optimal for v to offer compensation to o for not committing a

crime against him and for o to seek such compensation or extortion. The

reason is that a reduction in vts consumption level is thus achieved by o

simultaneously with a net increase in his own consumption level, rather than

an expected decrease, due to the direct costs of committing a crime and the

prospective cost of legal sanctions. Indeed, there exists some range of

compensations that would increase both 0'S and v's utilitLes relative

to their expected utilities if crime is committed by o against v. Many

crimes against persons, and some cases of property crimes as well, may oc-

casional].y be avoided by such arrangements--successful extortions involving

kidnapping or hijacking constitute obvious examples. Yet in many situations

compensations may be too costly to pursue or to enforce just as fully effec-

tive private or public protection against murder may be too costly to pro-

vide. (This may be especially true in the case of crimes against property

where the victim-offender relationship underlying such crimes is less enduring.)

 The incidence of murder must then be expected on purely economic grounds.

          The case in which crime is committed in pursuit of material gains

 has been analyzed explicitly in Ehrlich (1973). Note that in such a case the

 victims' level of consumption need not directly enter the offender's utility

 function.


           51n particular,the introduction of specific explanatory variables re-

 lating to other crimes against person and property in the supply of murders

 regression equation has been avoided in the empirical investigation in           vie

 of the   relatively   small sample size   and the   relatively large number of   variables
 that   must then be introduced in the reduced form regression analysis.
                                                           F3


           Differentiating equation (lj.) with respect to Pa, PcJa. and Pete,

using the contingent outcomes of murder as illustrated in Table 2 ,                                      it   crtn


easily be demonstrated that



              Pa =         -                = j [Pa(i - PcIa)[U(Ca)                  u(cb)1                   (5.1)




                           +                    -                    -
                               PaPca(i              PeIc)[U(Ca)          u(c)]

                           +                                              >
                               PaPcaPec[TJ(C               ) -
                                                                 u(c)])
                                      Pea
      PcJa
                      -
                          PIa
                                             =
                                                      [PaPcJa(i      -
                                                                         PeIc)[U(Cb)
                                                                                           -
                                                                                               U(c)]          (5.2)




                      +PaPcIaPeIc[U(Cb) _u(cd)]) >0


              =   -               Pee       =
     Pelc                 PeIc                       [PaPc laPeIc[U(C ) -          U(c)]       > 0   .        (5.3)


Clearly,     CPa > sPcIa >                          > 0•


           7For example, differentiating equation (5.3)                              in    footnote 6    with   res-

pect to Peic we obtain


                                 Fe
                                                 2 {U*PaPC Ia [u(c) -              u(cd)]
                                  elc        (U*)

                                                                            arj*
                               - PaPcIaPelc[U(C)                 -                   > a



since by equation (5.3)                              < 0.   Analogous results can be demonstrated by

differentiation of                      and                  with respect to, say, Pa or Fe a.
                                 Cpa                cpIa
                                               F4


          8Thjs   implication of the theory supports a line of reasoning advanced

by Mr. Justice Stewart in connection with the Supreme Court's important ru-

ling in the case of Furman v. georgia (1972, p. 312).                  "Common sense and ex-

perience tell us' said Mr. Stewart, "that seldomly enforced laws become inef-

fective measures for controlling human                conduct   and that the death penalty,

unless imposed with sufficient frequency, will make little contribution to

deterring     crimes for which it       may be exacted."

          9

                         Pe1c =     1     r
                           c      (u*)
                                        2 iPeUc
                                                -PeU      c Pec j>O

                                        iff.€Pe c <1

In   Section I.B, it is        shown that   the optimal value of              must be less

than 1 if execution is regarded as inflicting a net social cost. Therefore,

an increase in the value of Cc caused by a reduction in the severity of'

imprisonment      can   be ecpected to increase the differential deterrent effect

of   capital punishment.
          10Per    capita loss from      murder is employed here as the relevant target
function      in lieu of the aggregate social loss considered in Becker (1968)

because   the latter is not known with certainty whereas the former can be spe-

cified as a unique magnitude,azsuming that the risks of victimization, convic-

tion, or execution are largely independent across a large number of offeridcrs

and victims.

           1L
               More generally Pc          Pa        Pchia .   Pcich, where Pchla denotes
the conditional probability that a suspect be charged with murder once ar-

 rested, and      Peich denotes the conditional probability that he he conv:icted
                                       F5


once charged. The costs of "producing" each of these probabilities are of

course different, and optimal social policy may require their separate de-

termination. For simplicity, attention here is focused upon the determina-

tion of the overall or unconditional probability of appithension and convic-

tion, Pc, as a unique means of deterrence.

        12Pc and 9 would be proportionally related if both a and the prob-

ability that innocent persons be apprehended and indicted remained constant

as more resources were spent on enforcement activity through arrests and

prosecutions. Alternatively, it might be argued that Pc and 9 are highly

(positively) correlated because of the well-known proposition that at any

given level of evidence presented in court in reference to the defendants'

guilt or innocence, the probability of legal or type I error, a (that of

convicting the innocent), is negatively related to the probability of type

II error,        (that of acquitting the guilty), and hence a might be

negatively correlated with Pclch        1 -   . (This argument   is discussed more

elaborately in Arichai and Ben-Zion (1972).) However, the assumption that

Pc and 9, or Pc ch and a,            are mutually dependent is made mainly   for

methodological   convenience   without affecting the basic implications of the

following   analysis. More generally, the direct costs of law enforcement
activity,    C, may be specified as a function including Pc and the uncon-

ditional probability of legal error as independent arguments so that optimal

values of these probabilities may be determined separately via appropriate

expenditures. Note that in this more general case changes in Pc need not

affect the social costs of punishment due to punishing innocent persons (see

the discussion in the following paragraph).


        l3 is tempting to argue that an increase in the ite of innocent

persons who are convictcd of murder may produce the additional social cost.
                                                '6



of encouraging murder or other crimes, because the costs of legitimate be-

havior are thereby increased. The opposite effect is perhaps more likely,

since there would now be an incentive to engage in a subset of "strictly

legitimate" activities, particularly those promoted by the revealed pref-

erences of enforcement agencies, as a means of self-protection against ar-

bitrary arrests and convictions. This argument suggests that conviction of

innocent as well as guilty persons ,can produce scene discouraging effect on

offenders. Regardless of the specific impact                  errors   of justice may have on

legitimate or illegitimate behavior, however, these errors necessarily in-

crease the social costs associated with law enforcement activity since they

distort the optimal allocation of individuals' resources to productive pur-

suits.


         ll1•Sufficient conditions are analyzed in a mathematical appendix to

this paper that is available upon request.

         15        .
           By definition,



                  -(Q/PeIc)(pelc/Q.)             €f(f/Petc)(PeIc/f)               CfCf
         Pelc


Clearly,



              6fe =    Pec[d   -
                                    (y2/y1)mJ/[(y2/y1)m
                                                              +   PeIc[d   -
                                                                               (y2/y1)m])


is 1oer than unity if              [ci -
                                           (y2/y1)m] > 0. Under this condition, and the
condition that l > o                         <    < 1.
                                    PeIc
         l6By like reasoning and some simplifying assumptions it can                        also   be

sho\Yn that, in eqiilibrium, CPa >                       >
                                                 £PcIa       Petc
                                                        VT


          17Since the modified equation (9) now includes the additional term

'"(v)(v/PeIc), the value of
                                                PeIc may exceed unity in equilibrium if
that term is positive in sign. However, thetheorern that in equilibrium

€Pc > 6PeIc need not be affected. Note that the analysis here and pursuant

implications differ from a related analysis in Becker (1968) where the coef-

ficient of variation of actual punishments imposed on offenders is assumed

to be the source of additional social costs rather than the variance of the

punishments.

          18
           For any value of 0 < Peic < 1 v reaches a minimum zero) at        .




Pc = 0.     Similarly, for any value of 0 < Pc < 1 v reaches a minimum,
                     2
PeIc(1 - PeIc)rn         ,   at       Peic =   0.       In the special case where Pc =           1,
v =   PeIc(l    -
                    PeIc)(d       -   rn)2   and v/Pe!c = (1        -
                                                                        2PeIc)(d   -
                                                                                       in)2     0 as
Pec 1/2. Similar results hold in cases when Peic is either zero or

unity.

          l9 should be pointed out that equation (12) may                        not    be strictly

linear in the parameters associated with Pa, Pcfa, and Pete. For

example, equation (6) implies that the elasticity of murder with respect

to Pete is positively related to the absolute level of Fe                                     PaPctaPelc.

The same problem arises, however, in the context of a regression equation

that introduces the natural values of y1, Y1, and X1 instead of their

natural logarithms, as can easily be inferred from the analysis developed

in foonotes 9 and 10. The double-log format of the regression aia1ysis is

chosen partly because many of the variables used as proxies for the desired

theoretical constructs are expected to be proportionally related to the lat-

ter variables (see Section II.A.2 below).

          20                                        .
               1 am indebted to the Uniform Crime Reporting Section of the Federal

Bureau    of    Investigation for making available to me their revised annual
                                      F8


estimates of the total number of murder and other index crimes in the United

States during the period 1933-1965.

       21Another important reason for introducing chronological time as an

exogenous variable in equation (12) is to account for a possible time trend

in missing variables, in particular, the average length of imprisonment for

both capital and noncapital murders for which no complete time series is

available. Scattered evidence shows rising trends in the median value of

prison terms served by all murder convicts over a large part of the period

considered in this investigation, but this increase may have been largely

technical. With executions being imposed less frequently over time, the

frequency of life imprisonment sentences for murder convicts may have risen

accordingly, thus increasing the mean or median time spent in prisons by

these convicts.

       22         o       C
            Let P cIa =   -, where   C denotes the number of' persons convicted,

and A the number of those charged. Also let A =G +           I   and C   Cg +

where 0 and I, and the subscripts g and i, represent guilty and in-

nocent persons, respectively. Then



                PocIa_G._+I.i=PcIch+(l_)a

where a -         denotes the probability of legal error. Clearly, if \

were constant, and if' Pclch and a were proportionally related, °c!a

and Pclch would also be proportionally related. In other cases. aritiors

in P°cla may either overstate or understate the variation in Peich.

       23Execution figures are based on NT'S statistics. Conviction figures

                                           Statistics on the time elapsed betveert
are derived by C =              P°ca.
 sentencing and execution can be found in NT'S numbers 20 and !t5.
                                            F9


       21i


            TXQ =      .9593 PXQ       +     .1266   PXQ   +      .11.155 PXQ
              1
                    (5.951i.)     _i       ('.973)             (-2.1105)        13

(t-values    in parentheses).



        PDL1 =        .8053 PXQ
                    (5.233)
                                     +
                                                       1
                                            .55711. PXQ,
                                         (3.977)
                                                           +    .1109 PXQ        -   .5311.1
                                                                           13 (-3.222)
                                                                                               Px
                                                                                                1_1l




The coefficients associated with lagged values of PXQ1 in the last equa-

tion were estimated via the Almon method (Almon, 1965) which constrains the

coefficients of the distributed lag equation to lie along a polynomial of a

chosen degree (here degree 2).

              am indebted to Edi Karni for making available to me his calcula-

tions of Y
          p
       26m regression           coefficients associated with estimates o± Pec are

found to be even lower in absolute magnitude when all variables are represented

in the regression equation by their natural numbers rather than by their na-

tural logarithms. For example, the regression coefficient associated with

the natural value of PXQ1 in the context of equation (1) in Table 14. is -0.00385

with a standard error of 0.00127.

       27The partial effect of L on the rate of murder as well as other crimes

against the person was also found to be negative across states (see Ehrlich

(1973) and Table 8), but its partial effect on the frequency of crimes

against property across states was found to be inconclusive. A possible

explanation for the significant negative association between L and par-

ticularly crimes against the person is that interpersonal frictions and so-

cial interactions leading to acts of malice occur mostly in the nonmar'cit or
                                            FlO


home sector rather than at work. An increase in the total time spent                 in the
norunarket   sector   (a reduction in L) might        then   generate a positive sc.1e ef-

feet on the incidence of murder. This ad hoc hypothesis is ever                     es
ported   by UCR evidence on the seasonal pattern of murder. This crime rate

peaks twice a year: around the holiday season (December) and around the

summer vacation season (July-August) in which relatively more time is spent

out of work. It is also supported by evidence that the frequency of rnur-

ders on weekends is significantly higher than on weekdays (see William F.

Graves, "The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment             in   California,'t reprinted

in Bedau (1967), p.     327).

               addition, it is also possible that the severity of imprisonment

had also decreased during the period of practical abolition of capital punish-

ment, which would have contributed to the increase in the differential deter-

rent effect of capital punishment in this subperiod. The interval of time

1962-1969 is found      to   be particularly important in the regression analysis,

mainly because of the greater variability exhibited in this subperiod by
 0       0               0
P a, P cIa, and P elc. Indeed, regression results pertaining to the ef-

fect of these variables in the subperiod 1935-1962 or 1937-1962 are found                 to
be generally weak compared to the results reported in Table 6. Note that

in view of the large number of variables used in the reduced form regression

ana].ysis, experimentation with different intervals of time is constrained to

subperiods including         a   sufficient number   of   observations.


                  reader     should note that P0a, P% and P0e here         refer to the

fractions    of all                    Jerers who are apprehended, isprisoned and
executed in a given year, respectve, rather than to the corresponding frac-
tions of actual perpetrators of rder who are apprehended, iaprisCed and
executed. The latter have constituted y original definitions of P0a, P%
and P0e. Th. alternative definitions of the syRbole in question would be
identical, of course, if the ni.er of irders coitted by an averaqe                   aurderer
                                    P11

in   a given year, C, were greater than or equal to unity. More generally, these

alternative definitions would be proportionally related if ç were constant.

Under the latter assumption the qualitative prediction summarized by equa-

tion (15) holds for equal percentage changes in P°a and P°cla, regardless

of the exact definition of P°a.


        29The average value of Te is estimated at about 40 years, which is

the life expectancy of an average person whose age is the same as the age of

an average offender committed to state prisons for the crime of murder (33

according to NPS (1960), p. 64). Tm is estimated to be between 10 and 16

years (see Sellin (1959), pp. 74—75), and g is found to be roughly 1.25

percent per annum. P°m is estimated at 0.38, which is the average value
                  01     0          0
of   the product P a • P cIa (1 — P ejc). (These variables are defined in

Section EI.A.2, with P°elc being approximated by PXQ1.) Finally, P°e, the

fraction of all potential murders who are executed in a given year, is es-

timated as .008, the ratio of all persons executed during 1935—1969 to the

total number of murders reported in that period. Both P°m and P°e are con-

structed on the extremely unrealistic assumption that any offender at large

commits one murder each and every year. Under this assumption 0PeIc is

estimated to lie between .020 and .037, depending upon the specific value of

Tm assumed in it calculation.

         30A decrease in the number of executions in 1960 from 44 to 2 (the

actual number of executions in 1967), which implies a decline of 95 percent

in the value of Peic in that year, would have increased the murder rate

that same year by about 6.2 percent from 0.05 to 0.053 per 1,000 population

if the true value of a3 were equal to 0.065. The implied increase in the

actual number   of   murders in 1960 would have been from 9,000 to 9,558. For

comparison, note that the actual murder rate in 1967 was 0.06 per 1,000 pop-

ulation and the number of murders was 12,100. The values of other explanatory

variables associated with the supply of murders function were, of course,
                                F12

quite different in these two years. By this tentative and rough calculation,

the decline in PeJc alone might have accounted for about 25 percent of the

increase in the murder rate between 1960 and 1967.


        31The elasticities associated with
                                             PXQ1, PXQ1        ,   TXQ, and PDL1 in
                                                          —1
this modified reduced form regression analysis relating to the period 1934—

1969 are found equal to —0.0269 (—0.83), —0.0672 (—2.29), —0.0414 (—1.99),

and —0.052 (—5.81), respectively, where the numbers in parentheses denote

the ratios of the coefficients to their standard errors.


        32lronically, the argument that capital punishment should be abolished

because it has no deterrent effect on offenders might serve to justify the

use of capital punishment as an ultimate means of prevention of crime, since

the risk of recidivism that cannot be deterred by the threat of punishtnent

is not eliminated entirely even inside prisonwalls. In contrast, since

the results of this investigation support the notion that execution exerts

a pure deterrent effect on offenders, they can be used to suggest that

other punishments, even those which do not have any preventive effect, can,

in principle, serve as substitutes.
                                  REFEBENCES



Arichai, Y.,   and Ben-Zion,   U. "Crime Rate and the Optimal Level of Legal

        Error,"    unpublished note, 1972.

Beccaria, C. B. An Essay on Crimes and Punishments. London, 1767 originally

        published   in 1764.

Bedau, H. A. (ed.) The Death Penalty in America. Garden City, N. J.        1967.

Becker, G. S. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach." J. Pout.

        Econ., March/April 1968, ,          169-217.

                "A Theory of Social Interactions," unpublished manuscript,

        1969.

Ehrlich, I. "Participation in Illegitimate Activities: An Economic Analysis,"

        unpublished doctcra1 dissertation, Columbia Univ., 1970.

_________       "The Deterrent Effect of Criminal La Enforcement." J. Legal

        Stud.,    June 1972, 1.

___________     "Participation   in Illegtimate Activities: A Theoretical and

        Empirical Investigation." J. Polit. Econ., July/August 1972,

        81.

_________, and Becker, G. D.        "Market Insurance, Self-Insurance and Self-
         Protection."    J. Pout. Econ., July/August, 1972 80, 623-6-8.

Fair, B. C. "The Estimation of Simultaneous Equation Models ith Lagged

         Endogenous Variables and First Order Serially CorrelatedErrOrs."

         Economctrica, Nay 1970, .



                                       El
                                            112


Furman v. Georgia, Vol.             U.S., p. 238 (1972).

Hochinan, H. M., and Rodgers, I.D. "Pareto Optimal Redistribution."               Amer.

           Econ. Rev., September 1969, .
President's    Commission on Law      Enforcement     and Administration of Justice

           (PcL). Crime and Itslmpact--An Assessment, Task Force Reports.

           Washington 1967.

Sellin, T. The Death Penalties. The American Law Institute, 1959.

_________       "Capital   Punishment." Fed. Probation, September 1961,

           ,    3—11.

________ (ed.).         Capital Punishment. New York 1967.

Stigler,   G. J.     "The Optimum   Enforcement of Laws," J.     Pout. Econ.,
       March/April       1970, ,     526-536.
U. S. Department of Justice, Bureau of            Prisons.   National Prisons Statistics
           Bulletin (NTPS).             numbers as cited; prior to 1950
                                 [Various                                    by   epart-
           mtne of   Commerce,   Bureau of the Census.) Washington.
_________       Characteristics     of State Prisoners, 1960. National Prisoner

           Statistics, Washington.

U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation. Unifoi Crime

           Report (), annual,         Washington.
