NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES

UTILIZATION OF SURGICAL MANPMER
IN A PREPAID GROUP PRACTICE

Edward F.X. Hughes
Eugene M. Lewit
Richard N. Watkins
Richard Handschin

Working Paper No.

19

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016

December, 1973
Preliminary; Not for Quotation
NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.
This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.

The research reported herein was performed persuant to a grant from
the U.S. P.H.S. Bureau for Health Services Research and Evaluation to the
NBER for research in the area of health and economics. The opinions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the U.S. Public Health Service.
This paper was presented before the Medical Care Section of the American
Public Health Association at the 101st Annual Meeting, San Francisco, Nov.7, 1973.
Authors affiliated with the Dept. of Coninunity Medicine, Mt. Sinai School
of Medicine, CUNY; NBER; and Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound, Seattle

.
Abstract

The median operative workload of seven general surgeons comprising
the general surgical staff of a prepaid group practice of 158,000

enrollees was 9.9 hernia equivalents [HE] per week. The value was
over three times that of a previously studied population of 19 general
surgeons in fee-for—service community practice, and approximated a

consensus standard of a full surgical workload. The median complexity
of o7erations was 1.00 HE. similar to the community practice, and evidence
suggested the most complex operations were handled by the surgeons with
the most training. 3.6i.'

of

operations were performed on an ambulatory

basis. The results suggest that the prepaid group practice under study
possesses administrative mechanisms to efficiently utilize both general
surgeons and the resources devoted to general surgery.

.

Introduction
Prepaid group practice has been shown to be associated with

economies in the delivery of surgical services. These economies have
resulted from reduced rates for all inpatient operations, with operative

rates markedly reduced for certain procedures.4 (A recent study of
utilization patterns of union members in a prepaid group practice
versus a fee—for—service setting found this difference in operative

rates to be less clear cut than in previous studies.5) To date, no
attempts have been made to assess the utilization of surgeons who

comprise the staffs of prepaid group practices. There has been one
attempt to measure the utilization of internists in three prepaid group
practices and to compare that with a population of internists in a fee—

for—service setting.6 This study did not show any increased productivity
associated with prepaid group practice. Studies by economists in non—
prepaid group practices have suggested that, at best, only modest

productivity gains may be associated with group practice. They have
also suggested possible areas of increased inefficiency in group

settings due to decreased incentives to control costs.79 In view of
the

previously

demonstrated economy of decreased operative rates in

prepaid group practice and in view of the incentives in prepaid group
practice toward the efficient utilization of scarce resources, this study
was designed to Investigate whether there are any ecoromies in the
utilization of surgeons in such a setting.

—2—

A recently developed methodology allows for the measurement of the

workloads of surgeons0 The methodology expresses the operative work
of surgeons in terms of hernia equivalents (HE). One hernia equivalent
is defined as the amount of work involved in the operative and in the pre—
and post—operative care of a patient undergoing an adult unilateral

ingulnal herniorrhaphy. A consensus of surgeons from a variety of
practice settings has suggested that a weekly workload approximating
10 HE would comprise an active surgical practice yet still leave time
for continuing education.'° A recent study of the workloads of 19
general surgeons in fee—for—service, community practice showed thet the median
weekly workload was 3.1 HE, less than one third of the suggested

standard0 The size of these workloads suggested an underutilization
of the precious skills of these surgeons and an excess capacity of
general surgeons in this particular community.

To investigate whether a prepaid setting may have an effect in adjusting
the supply of surgeons to the demand for surgery in a defined population,
the weekly workloads of seven general surgeons who comprise the entire
general surgical staff of a prepaid group practice of 158,000 enrollees

were measured for a recent six month period. The workloads measured
comprised those operations performed in the operating room of the prepaid
group practicets hospital on both hospitalized and ambulatory patients.

Surgery performed in the surgeon's office was not recorded. The
workloads of these seven surgeons were then compared with those of tne
previously studied population of nineteen general surgeons practicing
in a suburban community in the New York metropolitan area.

.

—3-.

.
Methods
Methodology Employed:
Hughes et al. have demonstrated that the relative values for

surgical procedures in the California Relative Value Studies are valid

weights that accurately reflectboth the operative and the pre— and

post—operative work involved in a procedure°'11 In developing
their weighting scale, the relative value of an adult iznilateral

inguinal herniorthaphy was designated as one hernia equivalent o
surgical work and the relative values of all other procedures were

ranked as multiples of it. The resulting quotient was termed the
hernia equivalent (HE) of the procedure. Thus a radical mastectomy
with a relative value of 70,0, twice that of an inguinal herniorthaphy,

35.0, may be said to be equiva'ent to 2 HE of surgical work. In order
to account for some of the increased work involved in an operation
with more than one procedure, a relative value equal to twenty per
cent of the first secondary procedure in such an operation was added
to the relative value of the primary procedure to arrive at a total
HE for the operation.

In the present study, heri4a equivalent values were assigned to
all of the operations performed in an operating room during a given
six montn period by the seven surgeons

com,risjng the general surgical

staff of the prepaid group practice. Weekly workloads for inpatient,
ambulatory, and total operations were calculated. The vorkloads were adjusted
for seasonal variation and extrapolated for a 48—week working year. The

—4—

complexity of operations performed (HE/operation) was also determined for
each surgeon, for each classification of operation, and for the entire

population of operations. The specific operations performed by the
surgeons were enumerated.

The findings were then comiared to those of a study of 19 general

surgeons in community practice. The workloads of the surgeons in community
practice contained only Inpatient operations. The comparison of the
workloads of the two populations of surgeons is facilitated by the fact
that the surgeons in the community performed very few ambulatory procedures
and, for the most part, admitted as inpatients those patients who were
treated on an ambulatory basis In the prepaid group practice.

Population of Surgeons:

The seven general surgeons were graduates of American medical schools

and were all certified by the American Board of Surgery. Two were also
certified by the American Board of Thoracic Surgery. The surgeons
ranged in age from 40 to 56, with mean age of 47.6 years.

The mean

duration of association with the prepaid group practice was 11.7 years, with

a range of from 5 to 20 years. These seven

surgeons performed all the general

of
surgery presenting from the enrollees of the plan with the exception

open—heart, plastic, and transplantation surgery,

surgeons outside the prepaid group.

which was referred to

It was the policy of the prepaid

group that general surgeons not perform surgery from the specialties of
gynecology, otolaryngology, or orthopedic surgery.
by appropriate specialists within the prepaid group.

That surgery was handled
in the community previously

studied, the general surgeons performed surgery from these specialties.
During the period of the study, the seven surgeons did no surgery outside

—5—

the

prepaid setting and very little surgery on non—enrollees was performed

within that setting. It was the opinion of the surgeons that enrollees of
the prepaid group underwent very little surgery outside the group, other

tnan for the specific procedures which were referred out. The particular
prepaid health care plan owned its

own hospital.

In the prepaid practice under study, the surgeons were compensated according
to a formula based on the number of years they have been associated with
the group, the duration of their residency training, and the number of

years of their experience before joining the group. Compensation was not

related to the workloads produced. The general surgeon to population
ratio in tne prepaid group practice at the time of this study was 4.4/

100,000, a low ratio compared to other prepaid group practices, which
ranged from 5.6 to 12.4/100,000, and 45% of the ratio of the U.S. in general
*12
(9.8/100,000).

the

general

surgeon to population ratio in the fee—

f or—service community was 10.1 surgeons to 100,000 population, roughly

comparable to that of the United States as a whole at the time of that
study.

excludes general surgical interns and residents. With them
as surgical specialists, the ratio of general surgeons to
population in the United States in 1970 was 13.1/100,000.
This

figure

included

—6

Results
During the six months of observation, the seven general surgeons
performed 1,523 operations with 377 secondary procedures, totaling

l,43.6 HE of surgical work. Of these 1,523 operations, 1,163 (76.4)
were performed on an inpatient basis and 360 (23.6%) on an ambulatory

basis. These operations account for 94.6% and 5.4% of the total surgical
work.

The mean total weekly workload in the population of surgeons was
9.1HE per week, close to the consensus standard for a full workload of

10 HE, elaborated in the community study (Table I). The median weekly

workload was 9.9 HE. Although four of the seven surgeons were producing
at or modestly above the consensus standard, there was variation among
the individual surgeons such that the weekly workload of the lowest
producer (6.8 HE) was 65% that of the highest (10.5 HE).
The size of each surgeon's workload was a function of both the frequency
and the complexity of his operations in both the inpatient and ambulatory

settings. The frequency and the comp1eity of inpatieut procedures
were greatly in excess of those in the ambulatory setting and were the

major determinants of the size of a surgeon's total workload. In fact,
in no case did a surgeon's inpatient HE comprise less than 89% of his total work-

load. The volume of each surgeon's inpatient workloads was determined
equally by the frequency and the complexity of his operations. The frequency
of inpatient operations per surgeon ranged from 4.8 to 8.3 per week, with

a mean of 6.9. The surgeon with the highest frequency of inpatient
procedures was only the third highest producer. Inpatient operations
were distributed among the surgeons in such a way that the highest mean
HE per inpatient operation (1.68 HE) belonged to the highest overall
producer, and was 75% more complex than the mean of the surgeon performing

tne least complex work (0.96 HE), the second lowest producer. The

Table 1

2.0
2.6

6.0

7.4

8.3

6.5

7.8

7.2

4.8

6.9

7.2

Surgeon

A

B

C

D

E

F

c

Mean

Median
2.3

2.2

2.3

3.5

2.1

1.1

1.7

Ambulatory
Operations
Per Week

No. of

3.9

8.6

6.1

6.9

8.7

8.

9.7

10.0

10.1

H.E.s
Per Week

Inpatient

.40

.52

.75

45

.40

1.01

.39

.27

.35

Per Week

H.E.s

Ambulatory

9.9

9.1

6.8

7.3

9.1

9.9

10.1

10.3

10.5

Total
H.E.s
Per Week

1.27

1.27

1.27

.96

1.11

1.36

1.17

1.36

1.68

Inpatient
Operation

H.E. Per

Mean

.23

.23

.28

.23

.17

.29

.19

.25

.20

Mean
H.E. Per
Ambulatory
Operation

Volume and Complexity of Inpatient,
Ambulatory, and Total Operative Workloads
of Seven General Surgeons in a Prepaid Group Practice

No. of
Inpatient
Operations
Per Week

.

.97

1.02

.91

.80

.89

.99

.97

1.23

1.36

Operations

All

H.E. Per

Mean

.

—7—

median complexity for inpatient operations by surgeon was 1.27 1I.E. The freuen•
of weekly ambulatory operations per surgeon ranged from 1.1 to 3.5, with

a mean of 2.2. The mean complexity of ambulatory operations by surgeon
ranged from 0.17 to 0.29, with a median value of 0.23. The mean complexity
of all operations by surgeon was 1.02 1-IE and the median complexity
0.97 NE.

Though all the surgeons performed operations ranging in complexity
from relatively minor ambulatory procedures as resection of skin lesions
(0.16 HE) to major inpatient work as abdominal—perineal resectlons (2.86 HE),
the distribution of mean HE per inpatient operation by surgeon tends to
suggest that there was some specialization among the surgeons in the handling

oftheirwork. This impression is supported by the fact that, of the 17 operations
more complex than 4.0 liE (vascular surgery), all but 3 were performed by

surgeons A and D. These were the two surgeons certified in thoracic surgery.
Further support for specialization among the surgeons is found in a negative
correlation (r=—0.4) between the volume of each surgeon's inpatient and

ambulatory workload. This would tend to indicate that there was some
specialization among the surgeons in the handling of ambulatory as well
as inpatient cases.

Comparing the prepaid group surgeons with the 19 general surgeons
in community practice studied earlier (Table 2), we note that the median

workload of the prepaid group surgeons is over three

times that of the

community surgeons. The distribution of workloads among the community
surgeons was such that 16 out of the 19 surgeons in that setting had
workloads less than the lowest workload observed in the prepaid group (6.8 HE).

.

.
Ta11e 2
Comparison qf the Surgical Workloads of 7 Gnêra1 Surgeons
in I'repad croup Practice and 19 General Surgeons
in Community Practice

Practice Setting

Weekly HE Per General Surgeon

Mean HE
Per
Operation

Stan4ard

Rat

Median Meap Deviation

Prepaid Group Practice

10.5—6.8

Community Surgeons

13.0—0,9

3,1.

4.3

3.1

13.0—1.!0

5.3

5.6

3.

(N = 7)
(N

= 19)

Community Surgeons

years

old

(N=10)

56

9.9

94

1.6

1.01
•9,

.94

—8—

It is interesting to note, however, that the workload of the highest
producer in the fee for service setting was 13.0 HE per week, 124% that

of the higiest producer in the prepaid group. In the prepaid group practice,
the workloads were distributed more evenly among the surgeons than in the
community——the coefficient of variation of mean weekly workload was 0.18

in the prepaid group vs0.73 among the community surgeons.
In the community, a surgeon's age and the number of his hospital
affiliations were found to be significantly correlated with his workload.
In tnis prepaid group practice setting, however, neither a surgeon's age
nor his number of years with the group were significantly correlated with
his surgical workload; and a surgeon's hospital affiliations was not a

relevant variable. A possible reason for the absence of a relationship
between age and workloads in this prepaid group may be the relatively

small range in age of the surgeons in this setting. The prepaid group
surgeons ranged in age from 43 to 56 years, while the community surgeons

ranged from 35 to 69 years. The mean age of the surgeons in the two settings,

48years in the prepaid group and 52 years in the community, did not differ
markedly. The distribution of ages in each setting differed, however,
such that nine of the community surgeons were older than the oldest surgeon

in the group (56 years). These nine surgeons

would seem to be at that point in

their careers where workloads might fall off most sharply. Indeed, it would
appear that this older age distribution in the community might account for
some of the difference in the median workload between the two settings.
As indicated in Table 2, the median weekly workload of the 10 community surgeons

equal to or less than 56 years old was 5.3 HE per week. This value is
about 30% closer to the median in the prepaid group of 9.9 per week than the
overall community median of 3.1 per week, but still 46% less than that value.

—9—

The iistribution of all,

opratioas

and of ambulatory operations in

the prepaid group practice by complexity is given in Figure 1. Forty—six percent
of all operations are less complex than an inguinal herniorrhaphy (1.00 kj)
and 79>. are less complex than a ch9lecystectomy l,7l HE).

Only 6% of the

surgery is more complex than a partial gastrectomy (2.29 HE) and 2% mqre
complex than an abdominal—perinea]. resect4ón (2.36 HE). Particularly
striking in Figure 1 are the high peals at 0.1—0.3 HE (resection of skin

lesion) and at 1.0 RE (inguinal herpiorrhaphy). More than two—thirds of the
operations in the range of 0.1—0,3 HE were performed on an ambulatory
basis. Ambulatory operations, comprising 23.6% of al,1 operations,

accounted for 50.2% of operations less complex than 1 HE. Ninety—four
per cent of ambulatory procedures were less complex than 05 HE and all

bu two (vein strippings) less complex thIn 1 HE.
The mean and median complexity of operations in the prepaid group
practice, l.Dl HF and 1.00 H1 per operation, were not substantially

different from those values found i the fee—for-service community
practice, 0.95 HE and 0.94 HE per operation respectively (Table 2).

Figure 2 compares the frequency distribution of all operations
performed in the prepaid group practice with that of inpatient operau.ous

performed by the community surgeons. (Though the
community study contains only inpatient surgery, the comparison of the

two populations of operations are, in the aggregate, appropriate or the
reasons previously stated,) With a few exceptions, the distributions are
quite similar. The first exception is the fact that 33% of all surgery

in the prepaid group occurs i the 0.1—0.5 range as opposed to 24% in
the community. The large volume of surgery in this range in the
prepaid group practice is, in large measure, accounted for by the

.
10.

7.

0
4J

cj

05.0
'4-4

0
...-Prepaid Group, All Operations

4J

()
ti)

2.

0

3.0
4.0
2.0
Hernia Equivalents per Operation

5.0

0

1.0

Figure 1:

Distribution of all Operations and of Ambulatory Operations
by Complexity for 7 General Surgeons in Prepaid Group
Practice

Note:

Data smoothed by four—term moving average.

6.0

.

.
• 10.0

7.5
U)

0

Prepald Group, All Operations

r1
4-i

I-.
a)
c.

o 5.0
'44

0

a)
C.)

I-I

U
p4

2.5

0
0

1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

5,0

Hernia Equivalents per Operation

Figure

2:

Distribution of all Operations and Ambulatory Operations by
Complexity for 7 General Surgeons in Prepaid Group Practice
and of Inpatient Operaios for 19 General Surgeois in

Connnunjtv Practice
Note:

Data suoothed by four-term moving average,

—10—

procedure, resection of lesion of skin (0.16 HE), which comprises 17%
of all the operations in the prepaid group practice and 53% of surgery

within this range. It is tempting to speculate that some of the difference
between the two settings in the volume of the workloads in this range
stems from the fact that the community surgeons were probably performing
an additional number of these relatively straightforward procedures in their

private offices. Accordingly, these procedures would not appear in
their inpatient workloads. There is not, in the prepaid group setting,
a facility exactly comparable to a surgeon's private office.
The second exception appears in the range of 0.4—0.8 HE where
there is a greater relative frequency of cases in the community as

compared to the prepaid group. This is largely a result of the fact
that 8.0% of the surgery performed by the general surgeons in the
community was in the categories of tonsillectomy with and without

adenoidectomy, and dilation and curetage. The HE values for these two
categories of procedures are 0.5 HE and 0.43 HE, and they account for

42% of operations in that range. In the prepaid group, all of this
surgery is performed by surgeons in specialties other than general
surgery and accordingly does not appear in the workloads of the general

surgeons. Finally, two per cent of cases in the group setting are in

excess of 29 HE, as compared to 0.5% of cases in the community. The
resulting skewed tail of the prepaid group curve includes the substantially
larger number of complex vascular cases, clustering about 4 HE, in
that setting.

Despite the differences enumerated above and the fact that the
two curves were found to be significantly different at the 1% level by

the Ko1mogorov_Smiflov test, it is important to note two important

—11—

similarities between the surgey performed in each setting. In both
settings, operations in the range of complexity from 1—2.3 RE account

for almost half of all surgery and are simjlaly distributed within
that range. Also, the five most frequently performe4 operations in both

settings: inguinal herniorrhaphy, resection of skin leion, cholecystec—
tomy, appendectomy and breast biopsy/partial mastectomy, are identica.,

accounting fçr 50% of all operations in the pepaid group and 36% of all

operaUons in the community.

—12—

Discussion

The prepaid group practice under study appears to be achieving

economies in the delivery of surgical services through: (1) the relatively
hign volume of the workloads of its general surgeons, (2) the rationing
of surgical. resources to handle specific procedures, and (3) the utilization

of an ambulatory modality for the performance of almost 1 in every 4
operations.

A median weekly workload approaching 10 HE suggests that the skills
of this population of seven general surgeons are being more efficiently
utilized than those of a previously studied population of 19 general surgeons

in community practice. At the time this study was performed, five years
had passed since a new surgeon had been added to the group. During that
time, the number of enrollees had grown by over sixty per cent. This fact
suggests the possibility of a previous underutilization of or of a

present rationing of surgeons' services through a number of means. In
this light, it would be worthwhile knowing where the prepaid group practice
stood, at the time of the study, in relationship to the equilibrium between

tue supply of surgeons and the demand for surgery. Shortly after the
completion of this study, the prepaid group added an additional general surgeon.
The addition of this surgeon would imply that the surgeons in this study
perceived their current workloads as approaching a maximum for a desirable

workload. Assuming that the addition of a new surgeon entailed no change in
the incidence of surgical procedures in the group enrollees, a 12.5%

diminution in the mean workload per surgeon would be expected. Interesting
information as to the dynamics of the surgical staffing of prepaid group
practices could be gathered by analysis of workloads of surgeons over time
in relationship to increases in the number of enrollees and in the number

—1.3—

of

surgeons. It woul.d be impprtant to couple such information with analysis

of

the non—operative tasks performed by surgeons in prepaid groups to see

jf variations In the
variations

surgeon to population ratio are associated with

in the amount of non—surgical work performed and, in the case

of general surgeons, associated with changes in the frequency of the per—

formance of non—general surgical procedures. A study of the non—operative
tasks of the general surgeons In this

It

prepaid group is currently undeway.

is interesting to note that the seven general surgeons in this

particular prepaid group practice maintained thejr high workloads despite
the fact that their compensation was not related to the volume of their

individual workloads. This finding is ip line with the hypothesis that the
success of prepaid group practice in delivering medical care at lover cost
may be a function of the type of physicians attracted to such a setting as

well as a function of the prepayment mechanism itself.9"3
It's important to note that the findings in this study are not,

per se, generalizable to other prepad group practices. The general
surgeon to population ratio n the particular pepaid group practice was
kept low as compared to other prpaj.d groups.

12

It would appear,

however, that the prepaid group practice modality of organizing the
delivery of surgical care, as exemplified in this particular setting,
provides the necessary administrative controls that enable the supply of
surgeons for a defined population to be adjusted to the actual

demand fpr surgery from that population. Similar controls might
also be found in non—prepaid group practices and in foundations for

medical care. It would be worthwhile studying the surgical vorkloads of
surgeons both in other prepaid group practices with differing surgeon o
population ratios and in other forms of organized practice to elucidate the

—14—

impact of various forms of organization on surgeon utilization.

The

importance of the ratio of surgeons to population is further exemplified

by the fact that if the surgeon to population ratio in the fee—for—service
community previously studied were the same as that in the prepaid group,
and if the total volume of surgery performed in the conununitv remained irn—

changed, the mean operative workload of the community surgeons would be
9.9 HE per week, approximating that in the prepaid group practice.
A further benefit in this pai.icular prepaid group practice Is the
fact that the two surgeons with the most specialized post graduate training
(tiioracic surgery residency training) were able to utilize their skills

in tne performance of complex vascular work——for the most part, aneurysms of

the abdominal and thoracic vessels. This finding was reflected in the fact
that these two surgeons had the two highest mean complexities for inpatient

operations. This economy might also entail the possibility that, in view of
the relative frequency with which these two surgeons were performing this
type of work, the patients undergoing these operations were receiving

an increased quality of care. This is in contrast to the community of
19 general surgeons where it was noted that the few complex cases per-

formed during the year of study were scatteredalmost at random among the
surgeons with no regard to their qualifications. A further quality of
care benefit may acrue to the enrollees of the prepaid group from the practice

of having specialty surgery performed only by specialists trained in that
field.

Pernaps the most substantial economy in the delivery of sur;ical
services in the prepaid group practice is the handling of 24% of all

cases on an ambulatory basis. The prepayment mechanism in prepaid group
practice encourages practices as this. In the fee for service community,
however, hospitals can receive no compensation for unfilled beds or for
unused operating rooms and the patient can receive little, if

any, compensation for elective surgical work performed in a doctor's

office. The pressures from both directions work toward the hospitalization
of patients for minor surgical procedures.

Fifty per cent of cases

chosen for ambulatory work were less complex than 0.5 HE, a range of

complexity that would, for the most part, appear to create no undue
to the patient. Were almost one in four operat.ons in otter prepaAd group

settings to be performed on a similar ambulatory asig, such a practice
would appear to account for much of the difference noted in the rates of
hospitalized surgical procedures between health p]an members enrolled in

prepaid plans vs those receiving care in feelor—service settings5
The efficacy of the practice of am1ulatory surgery

is becoming

Increasingly recognized. In recent years, a number of ambulatory
surgical services have arisen in medical settjngs with favorable
results and hints of major cost savings. 14—17

The economic nature of

the ambulatory practice in this prepaid group is further heightened
br the fact that the operations were performed in a regular hospital

operating room. Thus, this practice entailed the use of a facility that
would otherwise be Idle and did not require the construction of a
special facility.

The similarity of the frequency distributions of the operations in
the group practice and in the community and the similarity of the ranking
of specific procedures in each setting is worth noting, especially in view of
previous studies showing decreased rates, and at times markedly
decreased
settings.

rates,

for surgical procedures in prepaid vs. fee for gervice

To a large extent, these decreased rates have been demonstrated

for otolaryngologic and gynecologic operations which do not fall within

—16—

the workloads of the general surgeons in the prepaid group practice.
The similar frequency distributions in the range 1.0 to 2.3 HE suggest
that general surgery of middle level complexity is performed

in the same

proportion in the two populations. Studies are now underway to ascertain
the incidence of specific general surgical operations in the two settings.

.

References

1. DensenPM, Balainuth E, and Shapiro S: Prepaid medical care and hospital
utilization. American Hospital
Asn, Hospital Monograph Series 3, 1958

2. Densen PM, Jones EW, Balamuth E, Shapiro S: Prepaid medical caze and
hospital utilization in a dual choice
situation. Amer J Public Health
50:1710, 1960
Perrott GS: Utilization of hospital services. Amer J Public Health
56:57, 1966
4.

.

:
The federal employees health benefits program: enrollment
and utilization of health services,
1961—1968. Department of Health,
iducatjon and Welfare, Health Services and Mental Health Administration,
Washington, D.C., 1971

Hastings JEF, Mott FD, Barclay A, Hewitt D: Prepaid group practice in
Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario: Part I: Analysis of utilization records,.
Medical Care 11:91, 1973

.

Kopplin P, Vayda E: The characteristics of internists in three prepaid
group practices. Health Services Reports 88:541, 1973

7. Halley RN: A comparison of internists in solo and fee—for—servic group
practice in the San Francisco Bay area. Bull NY Acad Med 44:1293, 1968

8. Reinhardt UE: A production function for physicians' services. Rev Eco &
Stat 54:55, 1972

9. Newhouse JP: The economics of group practice. J

10.
11.

Hum Res 8:37, 1973

Fuchs VR, Jacoby JE, et al: Surgical work loads in a
community practice. Surgery 71:315, 1972

kiughes EFX,

Committee on Fees of the Commission on Medical Services: 1960 Relative
Value Studies. Third edition. San Francisco, California Medical
Association, 1960

12. Mason FIR: Manpower needs by specialty. JAMA
219:1621, 1972
13. ReinhArdt UE: Proposed changes
de1ivery an overview and

in the organization of health—care
critique. Hea1t and Society 51:169, 19/3

14. Craig GA: Use of day beds in

gynecology. rit Med J 2:786, 1970

15. Davis JE, Detmer, DE: The ambulatory
175:856, 1972

surgical unit. Ann Surg

16. David JE: Ambulatory surgical

care: basic concepts and review of
1,000 patients. Surgery 73:483,
1973

17. Egdalzl RN: Ambulatory health—care delivery and the surgeon. Surgery
73:637, 1973

