                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CONTRACEPTION AND FERTILITY:

               HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION UNDER UNCERTAINTY



              Robert T. iichael and Robert J. Willis




                     Working Paper No.     21.




CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF II1ThAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                 National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                  261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                         December, 1973

                   Preliminary; Not for Quotation

      NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
 number for coimnents only. They should not be quoted without written
 permission.

      This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
 publications; in particular., It has not yet been submitted for approval
 by the Board of Directors.
I
                        CONTRACEPTION AND FERTILITY:
                   HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTION UNDER UNCERTAINTY

                   Robert T. Michael and Robert J. Willis



                             Table of Contents


             I     Introduction                        1

             II    The Analytical Framework            8
             III   i.      Birth control and the dis-
                           tribution of fertility out-
                           comes                       9
                   ii.     Benefits of fertility con-
                           trol                       17
                   iii.    Costs of fertility
                           control                    25
                   iv.     Optimal fertility control
                           strategy                   32
             IV    Pure and Mixed Contraceptive
                        Strategies                    35
             V     Contraception and Fertility Out-
                        comes                         41
             VI    The Diffusion of the Pill          59




                           November 1973
          This study has been supported by a population economics program
    grant to the NBER from the National Institute of Child Health and Human
    Development, PHS, Department of HEW. This paper is not an official NBER
    publication since it has not been reviewed by the NBER Board of Directors.
    We want to thank Lee A. Lillard for useful suggestions and C. Ates Dagli,
    Kathleen V. McNally and Joan Robinson for their careful research assis-
    tance.
          This paper was prepared for presentation at a November 1973 NBER
    Conferenée on Research in Income nd Wealth and is forthcoming in
    hold Production and Consumption, NBER Income and Wealth Conference Volume.
                                                                            S

 I   Introduction


       Over the past century fertility behavior in the United States

 has undergone profound changes. Measured by cohort fertility the

 average number of children per married woman has declined from about

 55 children at the time of the Civil War to 2.4 children at the time

 of the Great Depression. it is seldom emphasized however that an even

 greater relative change took place in the dispersion of fertility a—

mong these women: the percentage of women with, say, seven or more

 children declined from 36% to under 6%,1    While students of population
have offered reasonably
                            convincing explanations for the decline in

fertility over time, they have not succeeded in explaining the fluc-

tuations   in the trend             surprisingly little effort to ex-
                          and have made

plain the large and systematic decline in the dispersion of fertility
over time. In this paper we attempt to study contraception behavior
and its effects on fertility. One of the effects
                                                     on which we focus

considerab]e attention is the dispersion or variance in fertility.

Our analysis is applied to cross—sectional data but it also provides

an explanation for the decline in the variance of fertility over time.




      1These figures are taken from the report of the President's
Commission on Population Growth and the American Future (see Taeuber
1972). They are indicated below in Table I—i.

                                                                            S
S        The study of fertility behavior has received increasing atten-

    tion by economists in the past few years. Much of this analysis has

    been conducted in the context of the new theory of consumer behavior

    pioneered by Becker (1965) and Lancaster (1966). The work on fertili-

    ty behavior complements many other studies dealing with aspects of

    household production. One of the specific topics in the fertility

    literature has been the relationship between child bearing and several

    life cycle production decisions such as marriage, schooling, women's

    career choices, life cycle time and money allocations and so forth.

    A second and related topic of the economics of fertility behavior is

    the tradeoff in household production between the family's number of

    children and the expenditure of resources per child, particularly the

    expenditure of time devoted to children at the pre—school age. A

    third focus of this research has been the fertility demand function——

    the form and stability over time and across groups of the household's

    demand function for children.2

          Nearly all of these studies of household fertility behavior as-

    sume that the household can produce exactly the number of children

    it wants, costlessly and with certainty. We have previously pointed

    out that costly fertility control operates as a subsidy to child bearing,




          2For a thorough model of fertility demand and the quantity—
    quality trade—off s in the context of a static framework see Willis
    (1973). For an extensive set of papers pertaining to topics in fer-
    tility behavior see the two NBER conference volumes New Economic
    Approaches to Fertility and Marriage, Family Human Capital and
    tility, Schultz (ed.) (1973) and (1974). These volumes indicate, we
    think, that much of observed fertility behavior is amenable to eco—
    nomic analysis.
  lowerimg the marginal cost of having
                                          additional children (see Willis
  1971) and we have suggested a framework
                                             for analyzing the household's
 fertility control decisions (see MIchael 1973). In this paper we con-

 sider the household's fertility control behavior both in terms of the

 selection of specific fertility control strategies (the costs and bene-

 fits of specific contraceptive
                                    techniques) and in terms of the effects
 of different control strategies on household fertility.

       One   could   introduce fertility control costs   into.adetejnjgj
 model of fertility behavior by treating these costs as transaction

 costs associated with acquiring any given level of fertility. In this

 framework, the household can select any number of children with cer-

 tainty provided it pays the requisite costs of fertility control. As—

sinning that total fertility control costs are larger the smaller the

number of children chosen, the
                                   positive marginal cost of fertility con-

trol raises average fertility by acting as a subsidy to childbearing.

In this paper, we have treated the
                                       costs of fertility control in a
somewhat different framework. We have adopted a model in which the

household can select with certainty
                                        any particular monthly probability
of conception,3 but in which the household's actual fertility, N, is a

stochastic variable. By selecting and producing a particular monthly



      3The probability is bounded by zero add by the probability im-
plied by natural or intrinsic fecundability, say, a probability of
about 0.2 per month.




                                                                              S
I   probability of conception, the household selects a distribution of

    fertility outcomes. The mean ofthat distribution is its expected

    fertility; its varianceindicates the uncertainty that the house—

    hold faces.

             As Table I—i indicates, the decline in average fertility




                                   Table I—i

                Mean Number of Children and Frequency Distribution
                    by Number of Children for Selected Cohorts
                      from 1835—1930 for Ever—Married Women


                   Mean                  Percent Distribution
                               0          1—2        3—4        5—6         7
                  No. of
    Cohort       Children   Children   Children   Children   Children   Children


    1835—39        5.40        7.7       17.3       20.0       18.7       36.3
    1845—49        5.27        8.2       18.5       20.3       18.3       34.8
    1855—59        4.97        8.9       20.6       21.3       17.9       31.3
    1865—69        3.90       12.3       26.6       26.1       16.0       18.9
    1875—79        3.46       15.0       30.4       25.2       14.4       15.0
    1885—89        3.15       16.6       33.1       25.1       13.1       12.2
    1895—99        2.71       18.6       39.0       23.9       10.0        8.4
    1905—09        2.36       20.8       43.2       22.4        7.8        5.9
    1915—19        2.60       13.9       43.7       28.1        8.9        5.4
    1926—30        3.08        8.0       36.5       36.2       12.3        7.0


    Source: Taeuber 1972 (with the exception of the most recent cohort
    the women were at least age 45 at the time of the enumeration; for
    the 1926—30 cohort the women were age 40—44 at the time of the survey.)

    over the past century has been accompanied by a significant reduction

    in the dispersion of fertility. The stochastic model of fertility con+

    trol which we discuss in the following section emphasizes the rela-

    tionship between the mean and variance of fertility and offers an ex-




.   planation for the observed decline in the disperàton in fertility over

    time.
          Child rearing is an
                            exceptionally costly activity, both in terms
  of direct dollar outlays and forgone time and human capital.,4
                                                                 Probably
  few events in one's lifetime
                               affect subsequent behavior more exten-

  sively than having a child. While other
                                              important life cycle decisions
 such as marriage and career choice are subject to considerable uncer—

 tainty, the uncertainty generally pertains to the quality or the char-

 acteristics of the object of choice.
                                          Uncertainty about the charac-
 teristics of the prospective child also
                                             exist of course, but in addi-
 tion there exists the
                          uncertainty which we are emphasizing__uncertainty

 about the acquisition of a child itself.

         At the individual household level
                                             this uncertainty about the num-
ber of children affects at least
                                     three aspects of behavior.   First,
it may   affect   decisions about the expenditures of resources on exist—

Ing. children——if ordinary substitution
                                           between quantity and quality
is relevant to children, then
                                 not knowing the final number of children
may   affect   the household's expenditure decisions on its first—born

children. Second, there exists Sbtitti0 between expenditures
                                                             on



      4For estimates of the direct costs of children
                                                      see Cain (1971) or
Reed and McIntosh (1972). Lindert
                                   (1973) presents a useful discussion
of existing evidence on various aspects of the costs of children. Michael
and Lazear (1971) emphasize the potenttal cost of children in terms of
forgone human capital and Mincer and Polachek (1974) estimate the de-
preciation in the mother's human capital related to her noninarket child
rearing activity.




                                                                               .
    children and on other household goods and *eriiceB and also between

    expenditures over time. So uncertainty about the number of children,

    and about the timing or spacing of children, can be expected to af-

    fect   the composition and timing of consumer expenditure and savings
    behavior.    Third, because of important interactions with other house-

    hold production and with the relative value of family member's time,

    uncertainty about the number of children may have effects on the parents'

    occupation choices, schooling decisions and general orientation toward

    market and household activities.

            At the aggregate level, positive fertility control costs and the

    stochastic nature of fertility behavior affect the observed mean and

    variance of fertility. The size and growth rate of the population

    affect the age distribution of the population and the rate of growth

    and the composition of the economy's output.5 The variance in fer-

    tility, on the other hand, influences the distribution of income and of

    wealth. If uncertainty about fertility outcomes affects household

    investment and savings decisions, it may have an important influence on

    the distribution of inherited wealth across generations.




          5See Kelley (1972) for a recent discussion of population growth
    and economic progress. See Kuznets (1960) and other essays in Demo—
    graphic and Economic Change in Developed Countries for discussions of
    the    effects of population on output employment and demand.




.
        These considerations are not the focus of our paper, but we

 think the points we emphasize here——the
                                              costs of fertility control,
 fertility as a stochastic process and the
                                                relationship between the
mean and variance of fertility——have; important
                                                Implications for the
level and distribution of the ecónonty's wealth. We do not explore

these aggregate relationships, nor do we resolve many of the more

esoteric problems which we encounter in
                                              oir analysis. We do how-
ever attempt to Integrate into an analysIs of contraceptive choice

and optimum     fertility   behavior the constraints imposed by biological

limitations and resource (or economic) limitations. We indicate

how   the   choice of contraceptive technique affects the observed mean

and variance of fertility. We also analyze the choice of contracep-

tive technique, in particular the adoption of the new oral contra-

ceptive in the United States in the first half of the l960's.




                                                                             .
    II The Analytical Framework



          The theory of the choice of a fertility control strategy treats

    the fertility goals of the household as given, wbile the economic theory

    of fertility demand focuses on the factors which determine thesegoals.

    If fertility control Is costly, however, these costs as well as the re-

    source costs of bearing and rearing children influence the couple's

    choice of fertility goals. The link between the theory of the choice

    of birth control technique and the theory of fertility behavior is

    provided by assuming that the household maximizes its lifetime utility

    subject to the constraint of a fertility control cost function as

    well as the conventional economic resource constraint. The fertility

    control cost function is simply the combination (the envelope) of

    least—cost birth control strategies for all possible fertility outcomes.

          In this section we describe a stochastic model of reproduction,

    emphasizing the relationship between the mean and   variance   of fertility

    outcomes. We then discuss the economic benefits and costs of fertility

    control and conclude with an exposition of the optimal fertility control

    strategy.




.
  i   ______
        control
      Birth        and the distribution of
                                              fertility outcomes
       The number of children born to a couple and the pace at which
                                                                              .
  these children are born is
                               ultimately constrained by the fact that

  reproduction is a biological process. The observed reproductive

 behavior of an individual, woman
                                    over her life cycle may be regarded
 as the outcome of this biological process as it is modified by non—

 volitional social and cultural factors and by the effects of deli-

 berate attempts to control fertility.    In the past two decades, the
 nature of the biological constraint
                                       on fertility choices has been
 greatly clarified and given rigorous expression in stochastic models

 of the reproductive
                       process by Henry, Potter, Perrin and Sheps, and
 others. The basic reasoning
                                underlying these models and their main

 implications for average fertility were recently summarized by Key—

 fitz (1971).

       These models suggest that the number of children a woman    bears
during her lifetime is a random variable whose
                                                   mean and variance de-
pend on her (and her partner's) choice of
                                              a fertility control strategy.
In this section we draw heavily on this literature in order to
                                                               pre-
sent, under simplifying assumptions, analytical expressions for the

mean and variance of live births as a function of two sets of para-

meters, one representing the coupl&s biological characteristics and

the other Its fertility control
                                  strategy.

      The simple observation that it takes a random amount of time to

produce a baby provides the point of departure for recent biological

models of fertility. Suppose that a woman faces a probability p'of
conceiving in a given month. If that monthly probability of con-

ception Is constant over time, the probability that she will con-

ceive in exactly the jth month (j —               1,2,,,,)   is p(1—p)'vhere

(1—p)1is the probability that she fails to conceIve in the first

j—i months. Employing the demographer's term "conceptive delay",

i.e. the number of months, v ,             it   takes a fecund woman   to   conceive,

the random variable v is distributed geometrically with mean
                                                                               p
and    variance    2
                  a i,"   (l-p)/p 26
        Once a woman      conceives      she becomes sterile during her preg-

nancy and the anovulatory period following pregnancy. The lenbh

of the sterile period, s ,          is   also a random variable whose value de-

pends on the type of pregnancy termination (i.e., fetal loss or still-

birth or live birth) and on the physiological and social factors

(e.g., age, parity, breast feeding practices, time to resumption of

sexual activity) which determine the length of the anovulatory period

following each type of pregnancy termination. For simplicity, we

shall   assume that all      pregnancies terminate       in a   live birth and

that   the length of      the   sterile period, s,     is of   fixed, nonrandom
length.7 The length of one reproductive cycle——the number of months


      6See Sheps (1964)          for a derivation of this result, It should
be noted that conceptive delay is defined to be zero months,if the
woman conceives in the first month.


      7See Perrin and Sheps (1964) for a model in which pregnancy
terminations other than live births are allowed and the sterile
period associated with each type of pregnancy is of random length.
Compared with the formulas we shall present, the Perrin and Sheps
model implies a smaller mean and larger variance in the number of
live births a woman has over her reproductive span.
                               — ii   —




  it   takes a fecund woman to become pregnant, give birth and revert

 to a fecund, non—pregnant status——can be expressed as t v + s,
                                                                                .
 a random variable with mean 'j
                                 t
                                      iV +     and variance a2
                                                                 t   a2
                                                                          v•
         The number of children the woman bears during a lifetime, say

 a reproductive span of T months, depends on the number of repro-

 ductive cycles completed during this period. Since each cycle is

 of random length, the woman's fertility will also be a random vari-

 able. The probability distribution of the number of births can be

 represented in a simple way if the model of reproduction is repre-

 sented as a Markov renewal process. In order to qualify as a re-

 newal process, the intervals between successive births must behave

 as independent, identically distributed random variables (Potter, 1970).

To meet these qualifications, it is necessary to assume that all of

the parameters of the reproductive process (i.e., p and s) are con-

stant over time and that the reproductive
                                                   period, T, is sufficiently

long (i.e., infinity). Assuming reproduction to be a renewal pro-

cess, the distribution of the number of births N is
                                                            asymptotically
normal with mean8


                             T/llt           (1)



      8See Sheps and Perrin (1966) who warn that the asymptotic
normal distribution above does not adequately approximate the
exact probability of N for the relevant (finite) range of T. In
another paper Perrin and Sheps (1964) suggest more accurate ap-
proximate expressions for the first two moments of N. Since the
qualitative implications of these approximations are quite simi-
lar to those of the more exact approximations, it does not seem
necessary to encumber the discussion with more complicated ex-
pressions for mean and variance. A more serfous problem is sug-
gested by Jam (1968) who fund that the actual mean of natural
fertility tends to fail progressively below the theoretical. mean,.
given by the Perrin—Sheps model as T increases, while actual
variance rises progressively above the theoretical variance.
                                          — IL —


    and variance
I    •
                             a2
                              N
                                      T
                                                       (2)


          Equations (1) and (2) provide a useful way of suimnarizing the

    insights provided by mathematical demography into the determinants

    of a woman's fertility behavior. Her mean fertility varies in di-

    rect proportion with the length of her reproductive span, T, and in

    inverse proportion with the expected lengLi1 of her reproductive cy-

    cle. The variance of her fertility outcome depends upon these same

    two factors and also upon the variance in the length of her repro-

    ductive cycle. The three variables which determine both the mean

    fertility N and the variance of fertility a2N in this framework are

    the length of the reproductive span T, the monthly probability of

    conception p, and the length of the sterile period s following con-

    ception. Given T, p and s, the mean and variance are jointly de-

    termined. Treating T and s as parameters, the mean and variance of

    N are related, at all values of p, as

                        a2
                          N       pN —kp2
                                       1 N +ki3
                                             2 N'
                                                                 (3)

                        with k            2s—1 ; k       s(sl)
                                  1                2
                                           T

    where k1 and k2 are positive constants.

          Consider, next, thedeterininantsof the monthly probability of

    conception p. A woman's biological capacity to reproduce may be repre-

    sented by her intrinsic fecundability, 0,            which is defined as the
    probability of conception from a single unprotected act of coition

    at a random time during the menstrual cycle (            which is assumed to
    be one month in length). In the absence of conception the probability
 p that she will conceive during a given month is then equal to the

 product of    and her monthly frequency of coitlonc,9 Demographers

 frequently discuss "natural fertility" defined, following Henry (1961),

as the number of live births a woman expects to have in a reproductive

lifespan of T months In the absence of any deliberate attempt to control

fertility. If we suppose there is some "natural" level of coital fre-

quency     for a given couple, then ê =    p*,   the couple's monthly pro-

bability of conception in the absence of any fertility control. We

will generally assume     = 7 and    =   0.03 (see Tietze, 1960), hence we
will asste that p* =    0.2.   Given p* and given the reproductive time

span T and the length of the period of infertility s, the mean and

variance of natural fertility, )J and cii, are defined by equations

1 and 2.

      Variations across couples in the monthly probability of concep-

tion p may result from variations in fecundity—-which affect '$-— or

from variations in coital frequency. Variations may also result from

contraception. If the adoption of a particular contraceptive strategy

i reduces the monthly probability of conception by e1 percent, then

                  i= p* (—)                   Oe1*1.
So the couple's actual monthly probability of conception p1 Is deter-

mined by Its fecundity, coltal frequency and contraceptive practice.

     As we emphasized above, to qualify as a Markov renewal process

of reproduction the monthly probability p1 is assumed to be constant



       Intrinsic fecundability is discussed In the demographic liter-
ature, which contains an empirical justification for expressing p as
approximately proportional to c over the relevant range of variation
in monthly frequency of coition.
    for all fertile months in the reproductive timespan of

    T months. Under these circumstances figure lI—i indicates the re-

    lationship between the mean and variance of fertility as summarized

    in equation 3. Curve A assumes T—240 months ( a reproductive span

    of 20 years) and s=17 months (a 17 month period of sterility following

    conception, see Keyfitz 1971). Each point on Curve A corresponds to

    a different constant monthly probabil'ty of conception ranging from
                                                curve).10 Curve B in
    pO.O ( the origin) to p"O.2 (point f on the
    figure 11—i depicts the same relationship under the assumption that

    T equals 240 months and s equals only 11 months.

          Suppose a couple, at the time of their marriage, were charac-

    terized by the parameter values T   240 months, s   17 months and p*

    •0.2. They would then face an ex ante distribution of fertility out-

    comes with a mean of 11.4 births and a variance of 0.5 (point f on

    Curve A in figure Il—i). The couple could, however, alter this ex-

    pected outcome by adopting a strategy of fertility control which

     lowered their constant monthly probability of conception below p*.

     If, for example, the couple selected a contraceptive technique with

     efficiency e1   0.5, then their monthly probability would be p1

                 0.1 and their ex ante distribution of fertility outcomes
     p*(i_O.S)
     would have a mean of 9.2 births and a variance of 1.2 (point e on




           '°For example, if p'O.OOO8 then p = 0.19 births and       0.18
     which is shown as point a on Curve A.  he values of p which  correspond
     to points a,b,c,d,e,f in the figure are 0.0008, 0.0120, 0.0182, 0.0336,
     0.1000, 0.2000 respectively. These values refer to specific forms
     of fertility control and are discussed below.



.
    Figure ri—i




                  an   ,
.                      .
                                — 15 —




    Curve A). Thus the couple affects its expected fertility and its

    uncertainty about the number of its births by its selection of a

    contraceptive strategy."

            Both the contraceptive technique used and the care with which

    it is used can affect e1 which in turn determines p1. In general,

    the couple can also affect p1 by altering its frequency of coition,

    c, and can also affect the distribution of fertility outcomes for

    any given p1 by altering the length of the reproductive period at

    risk, T, through decisions about the age at marriage and the age at

    which   either   partner is sterilized2 So the full range of fertility

    control strategies includes considerations other than the choice of

    contraceptive method, but it is the contraceptive choice on which



          "In reality, it is plausible to suppose that the frequency of
    coition and contraceptive efficiency will tend to vary over time to
    accommodate a couple's preferences for childspacing as well as for
    total number of births, or to accommodate any changes in their fer-
    tility goals.
             It is also plausible to suppose that the choices of c and e1
    will be conditioned on past pregnancy and birth outcomes. Thus, in
    general, the values of p in a given month will tend to be a function
    of time (i.e., age), past reproductive history (I.e., parity) and
    random fluctuations in variables that detemnine fertility goals.

            Unfortunately, the analytical simplicity of considering the
    stochastic model of reproduction as a renewal process is lost under
    these conditions. While it is possible to write out probability state-
    ments in which a couple's contraceptive strategy (i.e., its choices of
    c and e) is defined conditional on all possible fertility outcomes at
    each period of time, it is not possible to derive the implications of
    the resulting stochastic process for completed fertility outcomes using
    analytic methods. Moreover, the dynamic optimization problem involved
    in selecting a contraceptive strategy that maximizes a couple's expected
    utility under conditions of uncertainty may itself be analytically in-
    tractable. At this stage, it appears wiser to minimize the formal dif—
    ficulties , thus the contraceptive parameters, c and
                                                             as well as
.   the biological parameters,
    time.
                                 and a, are assumed to remain constant over

            12
           Interruptions of exposure within the time span T caused by cessa—
    tions of sexual relations due to divorce or separation are ruled out by the
    assumption that the parameters of the process remain constant over time.
                                 — 16 —



 we viii. focus. By selecting
                                     contraceptive strategy i which yields
                                                                                 S
 a monthly probability of conception p1, the couple has in effect

 selected a particular ex ante distribution of its fertility outcomes.

 The mean of that distribution Is
                                          N and Its variance is a2 We
                                                                  N1
 will assume for now that the couple is constrained to a pure contra-

 ceptive strategy, defined as the adoption of some form of fertility

 control which aets p at some fixed level (during fertile periods) for

 the entire reproductive span.

           From studies of the average contraceptive failure rates of various

contracpetive techniques, the efficiency—in_use            of each technique
can   be   computed. Table 11—1 lists the contraceptive
                                                            efficiency e1 and
the implied monthly probability of conception           for several contra-

ceptive techniques.13 The table also computes for each technique the

mean and variance of the length of the reproductive cycle and the mean

and variance of the fertility outcomes in
                                                 a 20 year reproductive span.

Thus, given the biological constraint on its fertility (e.g. Curve A

in figure 11—i) the couple can determine the expected distribution of

its fertility (       Its   UN and aj) by selecting a contraceptive strategy

which achieves any particular p . The various points labeled on Curve A
                               I
indicate the mean and variance of births associated with various con-

traceptive techniques (point a: pill; b: diaphragm; c. suppository; d: rhythm;

e: 50% reduction in coital frequency and no other contraception; f:no

fertility control).


       '3The estimates of contraceptive efficiency were compiled by
Michael (1973) from the demographic literature ( see especially Tietze
(1959) and (1962) ). See Michael (1973) for a discussion of the dif-
ficulties In estimating and the hazards in using this comparative
list of the efficiency of contraceptive methods. In particular, note
that these values represent average observed use—effectiveness and
will in general be affected by the intensity and care with which they
are used.
  .                                                                  Table IT—i

                                                                                      Mean                       Reproductive lifetime
                                                                     Monthly         Lth         Variance           of   240 months
                                                         Contra-     Birth           Repro-      of Repro-        Expected    Variance
                                  Observed               ceptive     Prob-           ductive     ductive          Number of of Number
Contraceptive                     Use-Effect-           Efficiency   ability         Cycle       Cycle            Children of Children
  Technique                           iveness              e                                                                         C
                                                                                      Jut           0_ta           PIY


    Pill                               1.0               .9958       .0008      H    1266      1,561,250          .19          .18
    IUD                                2.5               .9896       .0021            492        226,100          .48          .46
    Condom                            13.8               .9425       .0115            103          7,482         2.33         1.64
    Diaphragm                      14.4                  .9400       .0120            100          6,723         2.40         1.61
    Withdrawal                        16.8               .9300       .0140             87          4,970         2.74         1.79
    Jelly                             18.8               .9217       .0157             80          4,032         3.00         1.89
    Foam Tablets                      20.1               .9167       .0168                                                               a'
                                                                                       76          3,540         3.17         1.94
    Suppositories                  21.9                  .9088       .0182             71          2,970         3.36         1.99
    Rhythm                            38.5               .8396       .0312             47            930         5,11         2.15
    Douche                         40.3                  .8321       .0336             46            870         5.2].        2.15
    50%   Reduction       in
    Coital Frequency                                     .5000       .1000             26           ---90        9.24         1.23
    No   Method                                          .0000       .2000             21                20     11.42          .51

     R = (no. of conceptions/no, of months of exposure) x 1200 —                             failure rate     per 100
           years of use           (Source:        Tietze, 1959, 1962,   1970)

          =         ÷ 1200    =   monthly probability of conception
     Pj       R1
                    —             p* —
     ei       (p*       p1)                  percentage reduction in p* where p* is a constant equal to 0.20

     t_ [i_j                                       wheresl7
                    —         +
                                  p+s
              (1                  p
           = T                               =                   where T     — 240
                                                 Ta
        In   this framework the number of children born to a couple

  is a random variable which results
                                       from a stochastic process. Ex
                                                                             .
 post, the couple has only one number of children N. But the couple

 cannot determine its number of children with
                                                absolute certainty.
 Rather it can select any particular
                                       value of p, the monthly proba-

 bility of conception, which yields a particular distribution of fer-

 tility outcomes summarized by the distribution's mean and variance.

       So long as we assume that the couple selects one value for p

 and retains that particular
                               monthly probability of conception for
 all the fertile months in the 20 year span——an assumption we will

 characterize as a "pure"
                             strategy model—-. the couple cannot alter its

expected fertility UN without also altering the variance a. In short,

the pure strategy model restricts the couple to the biological con-

straint (Curve A in figure lI—i if T=240, s=17). Before we relax the

assumption of the pure strategy we discuss the determinants of the

couple's choice of Its most preferred position along the biological

constraint. We consider in turn the benefits and the costs of fertility

control.


ii Benefits of fertility_control

      Recent economic theories of household behavior postulate the ex-

istence of several constraints (e.g., a money income constraint, a time

constraint, production function limitations) on the household's maxi-

mization of utility. The utility is derived from a broad set of de-

siderata which are produced by the household itself In the nonmarket

sector, using purchased market goods and services and the household
I   members' own time as the inputs in the production.'4 These pro-

    duction functions emphasize the distinction between the household's

    wants (the output) and the means used to satisfy these wants (the

    goods and time inputs).               I




         Willis (1973) recently utilized the household production frame-

    work to formulate an economic model of hutn fertility control. We

    will generalize a simple version of Willis' model to deal with im-

    perfect and costly fertility control. The formal analysis is con-

    ducted in a static lifetime framework, although we informally sug-

    gest how the implications of the model might be altered in a more
                                                       15
    dynamic or sequential decision making framework.

          In Willis' model it is assumed that the satidfaction parents

    receive from each of their N children is represented by Q1, Q2

       and the satisfaction from other sources of enjoyment is represented

    by S. The Q1, or "quality" of each child, and the other composite

    commodity S are produced within and by the houshold using the family

    members' time and purchased market goods as inputs. The household

    production functions characterize the relationship between inputs of time and

    goods and the outputs of Q and S. Assuming (among other things) that



           14
            See Becker (1965) and Lancaster (1966) for early statements of
    this model. Several monographs and articles in recent years, notably
    through NBER, have utilized this framework. For a recent brief survey
    see Michael and Becker (1973).

           15
             For a model of sequential decision making regarding contraceptive
     behavior in a heterogenous population see Heckman and Willis (1973).
 parents   treat all their children alike, the total amount of child—

 services C may be written as a product of quality per child Q and
                                                                            .
 the number of children N: C = NQ.     It is assumed that Q Is positively

 related to the amount of time and market goods devoted to each

 child——Q Is perhaps best considered an Index of the child's human

 capital. The household's preferences for number and quality of

 children and for all other forms of satisfaction are summarized

 by its lifetime utility function

                     U   U(N, Q, S).                (4)

      The household's capacity   to produce   C and S Is limited by its

lifetime real income and by the quantity of its nonmarket time. Willis

 (1973) discusses in detail the relationship between the relative prices

of N and Q, and considers how various changes in the household's char-

acteristics and circumstances would be expected to affect its demand

for N, Q and S.

      One important implication of the economic model of fertility

demand should be noted. From an assumption that children are relatively

time—Intensive in the wife's time (i.e. C—production requires more of

the wife's time per dollar of goods—input than does S-production), the

relative cost of C rises as the wife's wage rate rises. Hence the

cost of both number of children N and quality of children Q also rises

with the wife's wage rate. If the relative price of N rises with the

wife's wage rate, then abstracting from the change in income, women with

higher wages (or higher levels of education) are expected to have lower

fertility. This is the basis of the1'ost of tlme"hypothesls (Ben—Porath,
    1973) which has, since Mincer's pioneering paper (Mincer, 1963), re-

    ceived much attention as an explanation for the observed negative

    relationship between the wife's wage and her fertility.

          The household's lifetime money income constraint, its time

    contraint and its production function constraints can be treated

    as a single constraint on the household's lifetime full real income, I.

    Defining the marginal costs of childservices       and the composite

    other commodity ir, the formal optimization problem characterizing

    the household's choice is the maximization of the utility function

    (equation 4) subject to the full real income constraint.

                    max    UT (N, Q, S) — x[i— q,(ir,,rJ    }   (5)

    where A is the Lagrangean multiplier. This optimization problem

    assumes that the household can costlessly and with certainty select

    any number of children (N) it wishes and can achieve any given level

    of the child's human capital (Q) it chooses.

          To relax this assumption, we consider the benefits to the house-

    hold of achieving any given number of children. Suppose the household

    had the utility function and the full real income constraint indicated

    in equation 5 but that the household was endowed with some arbitrary

    number of children N' where N' —   0, 1, ,.. (To   simplify the mathema-

    tics N' will be treated as a continuous variable.) Given its arbi-

    trary N', the household's only remaining choices would be the optimal

    values of child quality, Q, and other satisfaction, S, which must be

    chosen subject to the lifetime full real income constraint. If N and




.   Q as well as N and S are substitutes in terms of the parents' preferences,
                            -- h.L —




 the levels of both Q and S will tend to fall as N' is increased. This

 azalysis implies that sub—optimal values of Q and S would be chosen
                                                                           .
 if fertility were arbitrarily constrained.    Q and S would tend to be

 larger than (or smaller than) the optimal values, Q* and S*, as the

 arbitrarily constrained level of fertility, N', is smaller (or larger)

 than the freely chosen desired level of fertility, N*. 16

      This hypothetical experiment of assigning some arbitrary N to

the household is equivalent to maximizing equation 5 while treating

N as a parameter, for all possible values of N, Such an exercise

yields the household's net utility level as a function of its assigned

level of fertility N' and the economic variables. Written as an im-

plicit function the net utility, V, is

                      V   V(N; I,                   (6)

      For each arbitrarily assigned value of N' there is a maximum

achievable level of utility, obtained by the appropriate mix of Q and

S. By definition, the maximum   value   of V, indicated as V*, will be

achieved at the desired level of N (N* =   N'),   as depicted on Curve A
in Figure 11—2.



      16

       It should be noted that we are implicitly assuming that the
couple knows In advance what number of children it will have and
can plan accordingly for its level of child quality and S.




                                                                           .
                 V
                                                           Figure 11—2
                  V4

                  "2




                                                                   (cr:o)

                                                              :   (cr2

                       0           N1                'V2                 'V


    Deviations of fertility from N* in either direction, such as N1 or

    N2, result in reduced utility levels such as V1 or V2 in Curve A

    of figure 11—2. Given the emphasis in discussions of family plan-

    ning on the problem of excess fertility and unwanted births (i.e. N)N*),

    it is worth stressing that deficit fertility (i.e. N<N*) may reduce

    welfare by at least as mucit as excess fertility.'7

           The opportunity cost of deficit or excess fertility (V* —V1 or

    V* —          is a measure of t1e benefits from improved fertility control.
           V2)
    If in the absence of fertility control the household's fertility would

    have been N1 (yielding V1) but with a given level of fertility control

    the household achieved N1 (yielding V1 such that V1)V1) then (V* - V1)

    —   (V* —          —       —        is a' measure of the benefit from that level of
                 V1)       V       V1



            17
            As indicated above, in the case of deficit fertility quality
    per child, Q, would be higher than it would be in the case of optimal
    fertility or a fortiori for excess fertility. If from some ethical
    point of view parents are judged to place too little weight on their
    children's welfare, and if we measure child—welfare by the level of




.
    Q, it could be argued that the effect on Q of deficit fertility reduces
    or outweighs the parents' welfare loss V* — V1.
 fertility control. The utility benefits, then, are the gains in 11—

 tility which accrue from moving nearer the
                                                      optimal allocation of re-
 sources which would exist if fertility control were perfect and cost—

 less (i.e., N*, * and S*).

       We suggest above that the choice of particular values of fer-

tility control parameters such as ei yield particular ex ante distri-

butions of fertility summarized by
                                              1N and a. We can, therefore,
formulate the discussion of the benefits of fertility control in terms

of     and c3. For purposes of illustration, suppose the functional

form of equation 6 is quadratic in N:


                               Va+bN+N2                   b>O, c<O             (7)
where I, ,r       and 11       are held constant. Since the unconstrained maximum
              C            S

of V gives the desired value of fertility, N*, it follows from (7)

that

                  N*=....                                                       (8)

We may now treat N as a random variable and take the
                                                     expected value of
(7) to obtain:

                      E(V)a+bJN+ j+ci .                                        (9)
Recall that equation (3) indicates the relationship between
                                                                           a, and
'4'    '4 "N
        i            i
                           where    is a cubic function). If E(V) is the value

of equation 9 in the absence of any fertility control, and E(V1) is

its value when fertility control of
                                              e (yielding UN , '4       ) is   employed,
                                                             i      i
then the benefit from fertility control strategy I i E(V1) —
                                                                               E(V).,
       If we maximize the expected V (equation 9) with respect to


            —(E(V))O=b+cp
            duN          N +p'                                   (10)
    where $,     is   a quadratic equation derived from equation 3. Noting that

    IP' may be roughly approximated by a positive constant K(p' = K) for

    values of          <   5 (see figure lI—i), the optimal value of
                                                                       , from   equation
    (10) is

                                                                (11)

    The optimal expected fertility
                                          u   is   somewhat lower than the desired

    fertility N*. Equation 9 implies that the lower the variance               the

    higher the net benefit V, ceteris paribus. Since the mean and variance

    are positively related at low values of N (i.e., K ' > 0 if N <              5),
    the   induced reduction in mean fertility represents the adjustment to

    the variance associated with N*. This is indicated by Curve B in figure
            18
    11—2.        By subtracting an amount proportional to N from Curve A, Curve B

    peaks at a level of N below N*.

             So far, we have shown that imperfect fertility control implies that

    a couple's actual fertility N is a stochastic variable. The couple, by

    its choice of a contraceptive strategy, acquires some distribution of

    expected fertility outcomes, and by the nature of the biological process

    involved, the higher the mean of the distribution the greater its variance

    (up to at least N          5). Thus the greater the expected fertility, the greater

    the   uncertainty about the actual fertility, or the greater the expected de—
    viation between the mean and the actual fertility. Since deviations from


               N increases along Curve A, a2 rises bKK per unit of N (up to
    N — 5), thus an amount of V proportiona to N, (1-)N Is subtracted from
    Curve A yielding Curve B.



.
 desired fertility reduce net utility, V, and since higher levels of

expected fertility, N' are associated with greater uncertainty, the

household is induced to reduce its optimal expected
                                                      fertility u be-
low its desired fertility N* in order to reduce the uncertainty or

variance a.


iii Costs of fertility control

      The costs of fertility control are the amounts of other desir—

ables forgone in achieving the control. These costs include money

costs but also include forgone time, sexual pleasure, religious prin-

ciples, health, and so forth. It is, at best, difficult to measure

these costs empirically. We will Instead discuss some of the deter-

minants of these costs and seek to derive testable hypotheses about

the relationship between observed fertility and contraceptive behavior.

      By definition, couples which avoid all the costs of fertility

control have an expected level of fertility p, which is frequently

referred to as natural fertility. 19 We will assume that costly fer-

tility control strategies are limited to two dimensions: (1) the choice

of contraceptive technique (including regulation of coital frequency) and




      '9See the discussion of natural fertility in an earlier section.
Throughout section II of this paper we continue to assume that the
couple's fertility control strategy is determined at the outset of the
period—at—risk of conception and remains constant throughout the re—
productive span. uNaturalt fertility results when the age at marriage
(which affects T) and the rate of coition, c, are determined without
regard to effects on fertility.




                                                                            .
    (2) the care or intensity with which a given technique is used (i.e.

    we assume that the contraceptive efficiency, e1, of the 1th technique

    is a variable which may be increased at increased cost to the couple).20

    In this section we also restrict the choice of contraception strate-

    gies to "pure" strategies. Thus each strategy yields a different monthly

    probability of conception and hence a different point on the mean—variance

    curve (say, Curve A) in figure lI—i.

          Associated with each contraceptive strategy is an opportunity

    cost measured by the utility loss associated with the change in behavior

    required to implement that strategy. Some strategies cost money, some

    coat sexual satisfaction, some cost real or imagined decreases in phy-

    sical health. The assumption of utility maximizing behavior implies that

    couples will choose the least costly strategy they are aware of in order

    to achieve any give level of p which yieUs TMN and its associated cy.



          20
            Thus we rule out for now abortion and sterilization and we
    assume age at marriage to be exogenous. To emphasize this restriction
    we will use the term "contraception" in place of "fertility control"
    in discussing costs, strategies, etc. For a study of abortion as a
    means of fertility control see Potter (1972) or Keyfitz (1971) or for
    an economic analysis see a study in progress by Kramer (1973).




S
                                                                              .
                                     — 27 —




                                         Suppose the couple's cost schedule

for achieving any given p or its fertility outcome           is

                      F =                                   (12)
                            F(UN)
where F is the total cost of achieving N using the least costly

contraceptive strategy. More specifically let the cost of the 1th

contraceptive strategy be the simple linear function

                   F. =c +           =
                                              1.            (13)

where B is the difference between i, the       coupl&s   natural fertility,

and PNthe mean of the distribution of its expected fertility while

using strategy i. Thus B is the expected number of births averted.

     Equation (13) Imi lies that the total cost of contraception using

the th technique may be divded into two components: (1) a fixed cost,

   (c 0) which must be incurred if the jth technique is to he used


                                .1




                                                                              .
                                     — 28 —




S
    at   all, and (2) a variable cost,1 B, which is proportional to thTe num-

    ber of births averted by the use of technique i The terrn

    is the marginal cost per birth averted.

            It is important to stress that the classification of the contra-

    ception costs F1 of a given technique as fixed (o<.) or variable       B)

    is distinct from the classification of costs by their source. An eco—

    noniic (e.g. money or time), sociological (e.g. teachings of the Catho-

    lic church, deviation from class norms), psychological (e.g. inter-

    ference with sexual pleasure, fear of adverse effects on health) or

    physiological (e.g. health) cost may he either fixed or variable.

           Some factors, however, are more likely to affect1 thanB1 or

    vice versa. Lack of contraceptive knowledge, for instance, is often

    cited as a reason for imperfect control. To the extent this is true,

    it is sensible to suppose that the acquisition of Information about

    fertility control methods is costly. A characteristic of the cost of

    information is that it does not depend on the amount of use to which

    the information is put. It follows that the oosts of information tend


          21
           Each contraceptive strategy involves both the adoption of a con—
    traceptive technique and the care and precision In its use. The adop—
    tion of technique 1 and its careless use results in less efficient
    contraception, a lower e1, higher p1 and fewer births averted. Nearly
    all contraceptive techniques are capable of achieving a low e1 with
    careless use or a high e1 with proficient use.


         22The linearity of the cost functions in (13) is not a particular-
    ly crucial assumption in the sense that the implications to be derived
    could be obtained under less restrictive assumptions.

S
to influence the fixed cost:s of contraception (the       , but not
                                23
the marginal costs (the 1's). The cost to a Catholic of violating
the Church's precepts with respect to the use of a contraceptive, for
example, might   be   a once—and—for—all cost in which case is higher
for   Catholics than non—Catholics for all forbidden contraceptive tech-

niques. Alternatively (or additionally), a Catholic may experience

greater guilt the more intensively the technique is used, in which
                                                     24
case     is higher to Catholics than to non—Catholics.

       The loss of sexual pleasure occasioned by contraception almost

surely affects only the marginal costs of contraception and not the

fixed costs. Thus, the number of births averted by condoms depends

on how frequently and with what care condoms are used. The most ancient

contraceptive techniques——abstinence or educed coital frequency, and

withdrawal——probably have zero fixed cost and   rather high (psychological)
marginal    costs. By way of example, consider the choice between re-

duced coital frequency or withdrawal as alternative contraceptive

techniques.


      23
        This argument should be qualified to the extent that information
is acquired by a process of "learning by doing" or that information de-
teriorates with d1susey a process of forgetting. In this case, the
marginal cost of the i   technique ($.) would tend to shift downward
as the volume of use increases. Analytically, the learning hypothesis
and the once—and—for—all hypothesis have the same implication, namely,
that the average contraception cost per birth averted decreases as B
increases.

       24
        The cost to an individual Catholic of violating the Church's
precepts may also be a function of the behavior of other Catholics or
of other members of the society at large. Thus, the dynamics of dif-
fusion of the pill use among Catholics might be interpreted , in part,
as he progressive lowering in the cost of contraception to each mdi—
vidual Catholic as he or she sees others using the pill. Of course, the
equivocation within the Church itself also presumably lowers the costs
of using forbidden techniques (see Ryder and Westoff, 1971, chapter 8
for evidence on the effect of the Papal Encyclical on the contraceptive
behavior of Catholics.).
                                         — 30 —




    If a husband and wife use neither technique at all, they will expect
    to have      births   and they will avert no births (i.e. B =                   0).   The

    more persistently either technique is used, the smaller will he the

    expected fertility, the larger the expected number of births averted,

    and the larger the total contraception                              Uhich technique is least

    costly depends solely on which technique has the lower marginal cost.

    If the marginal cost of reduced coital frequency exceeds the marginal

    cost of withdrawal, for example, the couple would not use the former

    technique whatever its desired number of averted births (note that

    we are limiting the choice at this point to pure strategies).

          It is not always the case that one technique dominates all

    others for all possible fertility goals. Suppose, for example, that

    a third technique, condoms (i =          3),   has a lower marginal cost than

    does withdrawal (i = 2) (i.e. f3
                                         3
                                              <    l   2
                                                           )   hut   that it has a positive fixed

    cost (i.e.     > a    =   0).   This situation is depicted in figure 11—3

    where line OF2 indicates the total contraception cost incurred if with—

    drawal is used to achieve each possible value of expected births averted

    (reading the upper horizontal, scale from left to right) or, equivalently,

    at each possible level of expected fertility (reading the lower hori-

    zontal scale from right to left). Similarly, line a F shows the

    cost of using condoms to achieve each possible outcome.

          To avert fewer than seven births (i.e. to have five or more

    children), the least cost strategy in figure 11—3 is withdrawal. How—


S
                                        — 31



                                                                            .
 ever, to avert more than seven births, condonis are a less costly con—

 traceptive method. The point of equal costs (where lines OF and
                                                                    2
    F
             intersect) is called the "switching point": as the number of

 births to be averted rises, at some point (e.g. seven in the example

 illustrated in the figure) it becomes cheaper to incur the fixed costs

 or make the investment in an alternative technique——to switch to the

 technique with the lower marginal cost.

                                  Figure 11—3




                                                           F3

                                                           F1,



                                                             I
                                                           F1,




                                                   B   ,
                                                           S,,-ti5 4vereL
        lz    'I   i' q      ,3    c,      2 P 0 /1N Etpecteci Fett,

        Additional contraceptive techniques with still higher fixed costs

and lower marginal costs may have lower average cost at higher numbers

of averted births. The total cost function F (equation 12) is defined

as the collection of line segments which represent the least—cost method


                                                                            .
                                  — 32 —




of   achieving each number of averted births. It is the envelope of

segments of the F1 curves in figure 11—3. The limiting case would be

a contraceptive with zero, marginal cost (i.e. method i=4 in the figure).

A relatively low, marginal cost appears to be a major advantage of modern

contraceptive methods such as the pill aed IUD. If line F represents

such a technique in figure 11—3, note that it represents the optimal

contraceptive choice only if the couple wishes to have fewer than one

child (as the figure happens to be drawn). That is, only couples wishing

to avert nearly all potential births would select that high fixed cost,

zero marginal cost technique.




iv. jimal fertility control strategy


        The preceding sections have discussed the separate elements

in the determination of an optimal fertility control strategy. Using

the simplifying assumption that a household must follow a pure stra-

tegy (i.e. must choose a constant value of p for the entire reproduc-

tive span), we derived a biological constraint on fertility choices

illustratcd by the mean—variance curve in figure Il—i.

       Next, we derived the expected utility of the household as a

function of the mean and variance of fertility outcomes. This rela-

tionship Is depicted in figure 11—2. The fertility level with the

highest net value, N*, under conditions of certainty (i.e.ci    0)

and costless contrapeption is defined as the couple's "desired fer-

tility". If, however, the couple is constrained to choose points on
   the mean-variance curve in figure. TI—i           (but may choose any point with—

   out incurring any fertility control cost), the decrease in uncertainty

   associated with decreases in expected fertility makes it optimal to

   choose a level of expected fertility u that is somewhat lower than

   its desired fertility, N*.

          Finally, we introduced the (utility) costs of controlling fertility

  by means of specific contraceptive techniques. We derived a fertility

  control cost function as the envelope of least—cost segments of the cost

  curves of the individual techniques which is shown in figure 11—3.

  Holding the couple's expected natural fertility, p, constant, its total

  cost of fertility control, F, is larger, the smaller the level of its

  expected fertility, 11N•


          The selection of the couple's optimal fertility control strategy

  1nvolves two steps. First, for any given choice of UN and, jointly,

       the couple selects the least costly contraception technique—— say

  the ith technique—with total cost                              —          Second, it
                                          F1       a1 +              UN).
  selects a level of UN (and a) such that total expected utility (i.e.,

  the expected net utility from children, E(V), minus the total cost F1)

 is maximized. That is, using the specific functional forms in equations
 9 and 13,



          max f E(V) -
                       F1    }   = max   a+         +        +        —     —


The necessary condition for maximization with respect to

                  O=b+cpN+p'+.                                                  (15)

Solving for        and again approximating p'           (see equation 10) by the constant
K>0
                          b K i                K
                                                                 +1k, (16)
where k = ---i---- > 0.
                                    — 34 —




          Equation 1.6 summarizes the influence on fertility outcomes of
 imperfect and costly fertility control. If the couple could select

 any level of fertility costlessly and with certainty, it would select

 N*, its "desired fertility" determined by its tastes, economic circum-

 stances and so forth. Since fertility outcomes involve an element of

 uncertainty (i.e. result from a stochastic Dror'ess), there is a variance

 associated with each level of fertilii-y, and since this uncertainty

 lowers the expected benefits or utility from each level of N, this un-

 certainty induces the couple to prefer an expected level of fertility

        lower than N*      = N* —   ). Furthermore   since it is costly to

 avert births, the costs of fertility control further modify the optimal

 fertility outcome, raising the optimal above the level ii            =      + k).
 In effect, 8 is a per unit subsidy to child hearing because a couple

 may reduce its contraceptive cost by        with every additional birth it

 has.

         The relationship between these various levels of fertility can be

 indicated by coibining figures 11—2 and 11—3 (see figure 11—4). Utility

 would be maximized at a level of N N* if the costs of fertility control

were zero and the uncertainty about fertility outcomes were ignored (e.g.

 the maximum of the net benefit function A is at a level of N =      N*).    The

 presence of uncertainty modifies the optimum by raising the peak of the

 net benefit function (function B) to the level N =         .   The presence of

 fertility control costs further modifies the optimum by lowering the pre—

 ferred N to N' the intersection of the marginal cost of fertility control

 and the marginal benefit from fertility control.
                                               -




V IL4
                                      Figure   11—4
                                                                                           .
                                                                 Net Benefit Functions

                                                                               o)

                                                                        (u;; iç14N))
                  Fertility Control




        0    I       a     3     'I    S               7

                                                           II
        12   II
                           t     9             4       3          z     I
                                                                                       N


                                            Marginal
                                            Benefit
                                           Function
                                               B-..
                  Margina' Cost Puj0




              I      2.                 a              7                 II


             H                          7—
                                                           "1"                8i •
                                 — 35 —




III Pure and Mixed Contraceptive Strategies
      In the previous section we restricted the discussion of contra-

ceptive strategies to a "pure" strategy defined as one in which the

couple selects some specific contraceptive technique and uses it with

some specific amount of care throughout th reproductive span of T

months. The pure strategy model, in which the couple uses one tech—

nique continuously implies a constant monthly probability of conception

p over the fertile months in the reproductive span. This implication

is essential for the Markov renewal process on which are based the

equations for the mean and varlaftee of fertility outcomes (equations

1 and 2) and the mean—variance curves depicted in figure Il—i. So the

pure strategy model lends itself to a simple analytical structure and

represents a boundary on the relationship between mean and variance of

fertility. As we have noted, this Markov renewal model also underlies

much of the important analytical work done in the past decade in mathe-

matical demography.

      However, it is evident that in reality a couple is not restricted

from altering its contraceptive technique over the reproductive span.

Even in the context of a lifetime strategy which could be mapped out

initially and carried out over time, a couple might choose to use dif-

ferent contraceptive techniques (including no contraception) in various

segments of that span of time. Furthermore, since the discussion of the

benefits of fertility control emphasized that under fairly general con—

ditions couples prefer to reduce the variance in their expected fertility,
                                                                             .
                                     — 36 —




 it   is economically sensible as well as technically feasible for couples

 to select a mixed contraceptive strategy which may result in a lower
                                                 2
 aN for any level of expected fertility 1.1

           For example, if a couple used the oral contraceptive at its

 average observed use—effectiveness throughout its twenty year re-

 productive span, Table 11—1 indicates that the distribution of its

 expected fertility has a mean of 0.19 births and a variance of 0.18

(point a on the mean—variance curve in figure 11—i). If this couple

wished to have about three children, it could use a less effective

technique or use the pill somewhat carelessly, thereby achieving a

monthly probability of conception of 0.0182 which over a twenty year

span would yield an expected fertility of 3.4 and a variance of 199

(point c on the mean—variance curve in figure lI—i). The couple could

also achieve a mean fertility of 3.4 however by combining periods of


      25
       The economic rationale,offered in Section II, for prefering a
reduced variance in fertility was that any deviation in actual fertility
from the desired level of fertility implies a reduction in utility. The
greater the variance a2 the greater the likelihood that the discrepancy
between actuá3. and desred fertility will be relatively large.

      There is an additional economic reason for generally preferring a
lower variance In the distribution of expected outcomes, risk preference
aside. The more certain the couple is about the number of children it
will eventually have, the more efficiently it can optimize on the allo—
cation of its resources. The couple which is more certain about the timing
and number of its children can more efficiently plan its savings pattern,
select an optimal size home, automobile, etc., plan the labor force be-
havior of the wife, and so forth. The same principles apply here as in
the case of a firm which can achieve lower average cost of production If
its rate of output is constant over the long run than if its rate of out-
put varies significantly from season to season or from year to year.
                                      - 37   -




    pill   use with periods of time in which no contraception was used. The

    result would be a mean of 3.4 children and a variance      considerably

    below that indicated by point c on the mean—variance curve. Indeed the

    variance would be no greater than that indicated by point f, the variance

    associated with the use of no contractf on over the entire twenty year
                 26
    time span.

            Furthermore, the pure strategy implies that the births will arrive

    at random intervals over the twenty year span, while the mixed strategy

    permits the couple to achieve the same number of children with considerable
                                27
    control over their spacing.    By combining the use of a highly effective



           26
           The logical extreme would be a mixed strategy in which natural
    fertility (no contraception)ls pursued in those segments of the repro-
    ductive span in which a birth is desired and perfect contraception (i.e.
    e1   0) at all other times. This strategy would enable a normally fecund
    couple to achieve any given number of children fewer than,say, five with
    virtual certainty and would also enable them to approximate many plausible
    desired spacing patterns fairly closely (see Potter and Sakoda, 1967).

          Such a strategy is not only a logical possibility, but it is also
    technically feasible since the monthly probability may be set to zeroát any
    time by reducing coital frequency to zero. The fact that couples do not
    appear to follow this "perfect contraception" strategy suggests that the
    problem of fertility control is not a matter of technical feasibility.
    The biological constraint on fertility choices must be considered simul-
    taneously with other constraints on behavior, with fertility goals viewed
    as competing with other family goals.
           27
           In the pure strategy cse the variance of the interval of time
    between successive births, °' is inversely related to p and hence
    Thus, reduction in expected fertility along the mean—variance curve is
    accompanied by an increase in the variance




I
                                   38 —



                                                                                 .
 technique with periods of no contraception, a couple can achieve its
 desired number of children with a relatively low variance        and rela-

 tively little uncertainty about the spacing of its children.

        The mean—variance curve in figure li—i represents the biological

 constraint on the distribution of expected fertility when a particular

monthly birth probability persists for the entire span of T months. By

using a mixed strategy, combining contraception with periods of no con-

traception, the biological constraint Is no longer an effective constraint—-

the couple can move off the mean—variance curve toward the horizontal

axis representing a distribution of fertility outcomes of mean         and

zero variance. The more efficient the contraceptive technique chosen

during periods of contraception, the smaller is the achievable variance

c2N for any given mean     .   Thus the more efficient the contraceptive

technique chosen, the weaker is the relationship between
                                                                      228
                                                              N and
 and   the smaller is the incentive to lower the
                                                 mean fertility as a

mechanism for_reducing   uncertainty or variance.
        The mixed strategy (defined in terms of using   One specific technique
while
        contracepting and no contraception otherwise) is feasible only when
the   expected number of births from the continuous use of the technique is

less than the number of children the couple desires. So this form of



        Some evidence that the correlation between mean and variance of
fertility is positive is found in the 1960 !T.S. Census of the Population.
Grouping white women married once and husband present into cells defined
by husband's occupatIon (8 categories), hushnnd's education (5 categories)
and wife's education (3 categories), the unweighted simple correlation
between     and     across cells Is 0.89 for women aged 45—54 and 0.77
for women aged 35—44. If the younger cohort used better contraceptive
methods on the average, then the reduction in this correlation across
cohorts is consistent with the implication of
users of better contraception.                  a weaker correlation among
                                      — 39 —




     mixed strategy is more likely to be used the greater is the efficiency of

     the contraceptive technique chosen.

           In this discussion of mixed strategies of contraception we have

     focused upon one particular type of mixed strategy—— that of going on

     and going off one contraceptive technique. Although shifting from
     contraceptive technique to technique is arther possibility, the theore-

     tical discussion of the costs of contraception suggested that this would

     not be the case. The fixed costs associated with the adoption of modern

     techniques would inhibit technique switching. Consistent with the model's

     implication, evidence from the 1965 National Fertility Survey suggests

     that technique uwitching has not been a prevalent practice in the U.S.

     in the past two decades. Ranking contraceptive methods by their mean

    monthly probability of conception (as indicated in Table Il—i) and limiting

     the subsample to women who had used some contraception in each of their

     first three birth intervals, Nichael (1973) found that the correlation

     among techniques used across the three pregnancy intervals was quite

    high (ranging from 0.57 to 0.97) for non—Catholic women partitioned by

     color and age cohort?9 Ryder and Westoff (1971) study the relationship




         29See Michael(1973) Table 4. One note of caution.   The NFS
    data are oriented by the woman's pregnancy intervals, so Michael had
    Information on only the best technique used by the woman in each in—
    terval. He could therefore identify switches in contraceptive techniques
    from pregnancy interval to interval , but not from technique to tech-
    nique within a given pregnancy interval.




S
                                 — 41) —



  between use and non—use of contraception
                                           across intervals and the rela—

  tionahip between contraceptive failures in successive intervals. They

  find considerable Continuity of contraceptive status across intervals both

  in terms of whether a woman does or does not use contraception in succes-

  sive intervals and in terms of the degree of success of use across
              30
 intervals.




      30
        For example, 90% of women who used some contraceptive
 In the first                                                  technique
              pregnancy Interval (from marriage to first pregnancy) used
 a contraceptive in the second Interval
the first interval used                 whi only 36% of non—users in
                         a contraceptive in the second interval. Similar
percentages are found for each successive
                                           pair of Intervals (i.e. from
the fourth to the fifth interval
                                  the comparable percentages are 95% and
18%). See Ryder and Westoff
                              (1971), Table IX-19 p. 255. Or, 95% of the
Women who had used contraception in each of the first three
                                                             pregnancy
intervals used contraception in the fourth interval while only
women who had not used contraception                             13% of
                                      in any of the first three intervals
used contraception in the fourth
                                  (see Ryder and Westoff, (1971) Table IX—
23, p. 260).

      Evidence of consistency of use across intervals is Indicated by the
following rather remarkable statistic: of women who used a contraceptive
"sJ1ccessfufly" in the first three
                                   pregnancy intervals, 20% experIenced
contraceptive "failure" in the fourth
who had experienced a                  pregnancy Interval, while of those
                       contraceptive "failure" in each of the first three
intervals, 77% experienced a "failure" again in their fourth interval
(see Ryder and Westoff for definitions of success and failure).

      This statistic and others
                                support quite strongly, we think, the
contention that couples act as If they adopt a lifetime strategy toward
contraception and that that strategy involves
in the use of a technique                     considerable continuity
                          throughout a lifetime. (The Princeton Study
begun in 1957 also suggested that
                                  across—interval changes in fertility
control are "clearly not a matter of couples shifting from ineffective
to effective methods " of
                          contraception. See Westoff, Potter and Sagi
1963 (pp. 232—235).)




                                                                               .
                                — 41 —



IV   Contraception and Fertility Outcomes

       In the model described in Section II the household's number of

children, N, is a random variable. The household adopts a contraceptive

strategy which yields a particular value of p, the monthly probability

of conception. Given p as a known and fixed parameter, the household has

an ex ante distribution of fertility characterized by a mean     and

variance

      The discussion has focused on the     ante distribution of fer-

tility outcomes for a single household, but in our empirical analysis

we focus on the corresponding distribution for relatively hoinogenous groups

of households. It is assumed that the observed mean and variance in births

among households with relatively homogeneous demographic—economic charac-

teristics reflect the mean and variance of the distribution of fertility

outcomes faced by each of the households in that group. Recall that

the equation for the variance in number of children (equation 2) assumed

that the unprotected monthly probability of conception and the length

of the period of infertility were constant over the couple's reproductive

lifetime. To apply the model across households implies not only constancy

of these parameters over time for a given household, but also constancy

across households. Heckman and Willis (1973) deal explicitly with the

problem of estimating the average monthly probability p in heterogeneous

groups of households. For our purposes, we will not pursue this issue'

     31Consider two populations of fecund, non—pregnant women with identical
mean monthly probabilities of conception, . One population is homogeneous
in the sense that p is identical for all members of the population and the
other is heterogeneous in the sense that p varies across women according to
some distribution with positive variance. It is known that the mean waiting
time to conception in the heterogeneous population will be    longer and the
average birth rate lower than in the homogeneous population, and that this
difference is a function of the distribution of p in the heterogeneous popu-
lation (see, for example, Sheps, 1964).
                                 — tL. —



          The model in Section II was set cut in a lifetime context and

 considered fertility control in terms of a lifetime strategy. Accordingly,

 in our empirical work we frequently use information about contraceptive
                                                                               .
 behavior at one point in the couple's marriage as an indication or index

 of the &ifetime contraceptive strategy. As we indicated in Section III

 there is considerable evidence that contraceptive behavior is not charac-

 terized by switching from contraceptive technique to technique over the

 lifetime. Consequently, in this section we will distinguish couples

 either by the best contraceptive technique used lk the time interval

 from marriage to their first pregnancy or by the best technique used at any

 time In their_marriage. 32
     32
      In addition to the evidence cited above
                                               regarding consistency
of technique use between pregnancy intervals, the
                                                   following table
indicates the percentage of users of a           contraceptive technique
in the first Interval who also used that            in the second
interval. The second column Indicates the percentage who used either
that same technique or no contraception in the         Interval. These
figures pertain to white non-Catholic women age 40-44 from the 1965 NFS.

             First Interval:
                                      % Using            % Using Same
             Technique Used       Same Technique      Technique or No
                                                        Contraception
              diaphragm               77%                    89%
              condom                  72                     82
              withdrawal              78                     85
              jelly,foatn,
                                      61                     67
                suppository
              rhythm                 65                      85
              douche                 62                      73
The table indicates, for example, that of those couples which used the
diaphragm in the first pregnancy interval, 77% also used the diaphragm
in the second pregnancy interval.
                                   Furthermore, of that same group another
12% used no contraception in the second pregnancy interval thus a total
of 89% used either that same contraceptive method or no method in the
second Interval. (The second interval here is defined as either the period
of time from the first to the second pregnancy or from the first pregnaney
to the time of the survey if no second
                                       pregnancy occured.)

      Since these data were collected by interview at the time these women
were 40—44 years of age and pertain to periods of time shortly after
marriage, there may be a tendency to give the same response for successive
                                                                               S
intervals. If so, these percentages overstate the consistency of technique
selection across intervals.
                                 —43—

I
          In   this and the following section we use the 1965 National

    Fertility Survey which was conducted by the Office of Population
                                    33
    Research at Princeton University. This cross—section survey of some

    5600 women aged 55 and under ,    currently   married and living with

    their spouse, contains information on the specific contraceptive

    technique used in each pregnancy interval, as well as information

    on the couple's actual fertility outcome. In this section we use

    this data set to document the relationship between contraception use

    and fertility outcomes. Since we are interested in studying the

    variance in fertility we group the data into cells and study between—

    cell differences in observed behavior.

          In this section we explore how contraception behavior is re-

    lated to the observed disttibution of fertility across groups of

    households; we do not attempt to explain ! couples differ in their

    desired fertility or in the dispersion of their fertility. Although

    we indicated in Section II that the model is capable of treating con-

    traception choice and fertility control choice in a simultaneous system

    of equations, we do not attempt to estimate the parameters of those



         33
           '1e wish to thank Charles F. Westoff and Norman B. Ryder for
    their help in obtaining these data. Our previously published research
    from this data set (Michael 1973) used a small data file obtained from
    Professor Westoff. Our current research uses the publicly available
    data tape from the 1965 NFS which was acquired through Professor Larry
    Bumpass. The data set is fully described in Ryder and Westoff,
    duction in the United States 1965, Princeton University Press, 1971.



S
                                    — 44 —




   structura]   eluationg. In the   tables
                                                                                  .
                                             be&ow, we partition the data set
  by household characteristics
                                 including color and religion and we use either
  the wife's educatf on
                       or expected fertility and either age of wife or marriage
  duration to isolate relatively
                                 homogeneous groups of households. In the
  Context of these homogeneous
                               groups we study contraception strategies as
  the mechanism for
                      affecting fertility outcomes.
       Figure IV—1 indicates the
                                 frequency distribution of live births for
  women age 35—55 for groups defined
                                     by wife's level of schooling, color
  and religion. Among the white
                                    non—Catholics(fjgure IV—la) the distri-
 butions appear to be less positively skewed and less dispersed
                                                                (or more
 peaked) among women with higher levels
                                             of school1ng4By contrast, the
 distributions for nonwhite
                             non—Catholics (figure IV—lb) are considerably
  less peaked and more skewed.
                                Among this latter group the level of
                                                                      schooling
 does not distinguish the
                           frequency distributions so clearly, although
 the percentage of households with, say, seven or more births
                                                               appears to
 decline as the level of
                          schooling rises. Among Catholics (figure IV-lc)
 the distributions are somewhat
                                 less dispersed than among the nonwhite
non—Catholics, and the level of schooling
                                                does not appear to influence


      34
        A few Chi—squared tests have been
 tions of live births for                   performed on pairs of distribu-
                           groups of white non—Catholics with different edu-
 cation levels from specific
                              S—year cohorts. These tests imply rejection
 (at a = .05) of the hypothesis that the
                                          grade school women's distribution
of live births and the
                         college women's distribution of live births might
have been drawn from the same population.
       For example, x 2 = 36.8 with 12 degrees of freedom for
of8 years versus. 13 years of schooling for women aged 40—44.  a comparison
                                                                     The cri-
tical value for x2 with 12 d.f. at a = .01 is 26.2.
                       Figure 1V—i
    Frequency   Frequency Distribution of
     3O         Live Births by Wife's Education,
                by Color and Religion for




                                                   0—8 'iears   uItlflhtIIliIittii
                                                   9—11 Years........
                                                     12   Years___
                                                   113 Years..
      /0




         0




    /0



S
                                                                                     Is/v
                                                                                         .
                                        -. 45   —




 the    distributions systematically.

         Among white non—Catholics there appear to be distinctly different

 distributions of live births by wife's education. These differences are

 further emphasized by the following table derived from Appendix Table 1.




               Percentage of Women with Six or More Live Births
                             (Calculated fromAppend1 Table 1)
                                 White Non—Catholic Women

                 Wife's                           Wife's Age
               Education        35—39           40—44     45—49       50—54


                         8       22.7            22.4        23.4      19.6
                 9 — 11          11.5            15.6         5.7      13.1
                     12           6.8             6.7         4.8       1.3
                     13           2.7               1.6       1.6       2.2
                 Total            8.8           10.1          7.9       8.7




Also,    the groups of nonwhites and Catholics             appear from figure IV—1 to

have    considerably different frequency            distributions than the most highly

schooled    white non—Catholic groups.          The discussion above has suggested

that different contraceptive strategies yield different distributions of

fertility, so we expect to find that groups which differ in the distribu-

tion of their actual fertility also differ In their contraception behavior.

The NFS data contain information on the particular contraceptive method

used by each woman in each pregnancy interval. The data do not indicate

                                                                                         S
                                                  — 46 —



S
    how extensively, regularly or carefully a contraceptive method was

    used; we know only that the woman indicated that between the time

    she married and the time she first became pregnant, for example, she

    used contraceptive method I (includin.g no method at all.).

          1igure Iv—2 indicates the percentage of women in each education,




                                     Figure IV—2
                               Percentage Ever Using
                               Good Contraception by


         /
         0/
                               Wife's Education for Groups
                               by Color and Religion
                                L
                          Women age 35—55
         70 _____________                                          _____
                        —      -—         —-                       ______    'wi-iiite 1Non—Catholjcs



                                                   I
         50
                                           7                             Nonwhite Non—Catholics
         4'O



         30    i
               r

                                       /
                                           .-..
                                                       —-—            ---4
                                                                   ---L---
                                                              1.u,-1p__1
                                                                              —-..           i.---




                                                                                             White Catholics
         20
                          r                                   -
         /0    —'_L____L_
                1  ...;
                                                       —- -

                                                          .
                                                                         -


                                                                  . —— —— 1          ___T_
                                                                                               ,




                                                                                               .
                                                                                               ,


                              .——i——


                                           -.                     4-L
                                                  9-u            /2

                                                                                 Wife's Education




S
                                                                                 .
                                    — 47 —




 color   and religion group which ever used a "good"35contraceptive technique.

The relationship between these percentages and the distributions of births

indicated in figure IV—1 is striking. Among white non—Catholics, the per-

centage of users of "good" contraceptive techniques rises significantly

with the wife's level of schooling, and this is also the group for which

schooling most clearly distinguishes the distributions of births. The

percentages rise less rapidly by education among the nonwhites, and for

these groups the frequency distributions of births are less clearly de-

lineated by education. Among Catholics neither the percentage of users

of good contraceptive techniques nor the frequency distribution of births

seems to be closely related to wife's education. Thus, in comparisons

among and within color and religion groups, there appears to be a quite con—

sistent relationship: groups characterized by a relatively high percen-

tage of users of good contraception are also characterized by relatively

low dispersion In fertility.

         Table TV—i summarizes this same relationship. The table indicates

for each education, color and religion group the percentage of couples

ever using "good" contraception and the actual mean and standard devia-

tion of live births. Groups characterized by a high percentage of users




     35Throughout this section, "good" contraception is defined to in-
clude pill, IUD, condom and diaphragm. For older cohorts the best a—
vailable contraceptive methods were the condom and diaphragm while for
the younger cohorts the more reliable pill and IUD were also available.
Since we are attempting at this time to distinguish use of highly re-
liable from less reliable techniques, the distinction was arbitrarily
made as indicated. All contraceptive methods other than the pill, TUD,
condom and diaphragm are categorized as "poor" methods. The use of no
contraception is called "none" and is distinguished from the "poor"
methods.
                                      — 'f/a —


                                     Table   I\T—1
                  Percentage of Couples Using "Good" Contraception,
              Mean and Standard Deviation of Live Births; by Wife's
                           Education, Age, Color and Religion




                                                     Education_of_Wife
                               8             9—11           12       e 13         Total


                             White_Non—Catholics

Age 35—44        Z good* 37.4            62.9             67.4           79.9      64.9
                            3.658         3.284            2.738          2.583     2.946
                            2.635         1.942            1.567          1.472     1.849
                             (155)           (232)          (503)         (230)    (1120)

Age 45—54        % good    29.9          45.4             57.2           67.8      50.9
                            3.645         2.616            2.136          2.189     2.579
                 MN
                            2.459         2.004            1.593          1.415     1.962
                  ()         (121)            (99)          (206)         (106)     (532)


                          Nonwhite Non—Catholics

Age 35—44        % good    21.7          35.3             41.8           46.9     32.7
                            4.968         3.613            3.493          2.531    3.980
                            3.855         3.231            2.636          1.796    3.355
                  (vt)       (124)           (119)           (67)          (32)     (342)

Age 45—54        Z good    11.3          21.2             25.0           35.3     17.4
                 MN         4.474         3.848            1.800          1.765    3.754
                            4.309         3.173            1.765          1.480    3.797
                 (n)         (97)             (33)          (20)           (17)     (167)


                               White Catholics

Age 35—44        % good    18.0          41.6             31.7           28.3     31.6
                 MN         4.213         3.217            3.353          3.567    3.467
                            2.659         1.831            2.027          2.126    2.111
                 ()          (61)            (106)         (218)           (60)     (445)

Age 45—54        % good    20.9          23.0             39.3           26.7     28.8
                 MN
                            3.646         2.564            2.705          2.133    2.896
                            2.497         1.832            1.395          1.598    1.949
                 (v')        (48)             (39)          (61)           (15)     (163)


*   percentage of couples in the cell which ever used "good" contraception (i.e.
  pill, IUD, condom or diaphragm).
** cell size
 of   good contraception are characterized by relatively lower variance and
                                                                                    .
 somewhat lower mean fertility. Simple correlations across these groups

 between the percentage of couples which ever used good contraception (at any

 time since marriage)         "%   good,"   and the mean fertility N' and be—
 tween " good" and the standard deviation
                                                       are consistently negative.
 As emphasized in the theoretical discussion of the mean—variance curve,

 the observed correlation between the mean and variance (oratandard deviation)

 in fertility is positive in all cases:


     Simple correlation coefficients
which ever used good                 between Z Good (the percent of couples
and G (the standard deviation in the (the
                     contraceptjon),A       group's mean number of live births),
                                        group's number of live births)

                                            Simple Correlation
                          % Good ,      -   % Good ,

White non—Catholics    —.647                —.896            .884     (8)
Nonwhite non—Catholics —.508                —.675            .952
                       — .334                                         (8)
White Catholics                             —.700            .879     (8)
All Combined           —.475                —.601            .864     (24)

       The relationship between contraception behavior and fertility

outcomes indicated by Table IV-1 is somewhat circumstantial——groups of

households which had relatively high rates of use of good contraception

also had relatively low mean and variance in fertility. To relate contra-

ception use to fertility outcomes more directly we partition the age, edii—

cation groups of white non—Catholics by their contraceptive strategies.

Table IV—2, for example, indicates the separate frequency distribution

of live births for users of good contraception and users of poor contra-

ception in the first pregnancy interval by wife's age for women with 12

years of schooling. That is, in Table IV—2 two of the cells in Table TV—i
                                       — 49 —




    (defined by wife's education equal to 12 years for women age 35—44

    and age 45—54) are partitioned by the contraceptive technique used

    in the first birth interval.

                                   Table IV—2
                  Frequency Distribution of Live Births for White
             Non—Catholic Women with 12 Years of Education by Contra-
         ceptive Method Used in the First Pregnancy Interval. andhy Wife's Age

           Contraceptive                     Number ,f Live Births
            Method                                                     ________
                                                                                  cell
                           0       1            2—4       5—6        .7           size


                                       Ag   35—44

          good *       1.4      7.0           81.2       8.9         1.4          (213)
          poor         2.0     13.9           69.3      11.9         3.0          (101)
          none        15.3     14.8           55.6      11.1         3.2          (189)
          total        6.8     11.3           69.2      10.3         2.4          (503)


                                            45—54

          good        0.0      16.7           80.3       3.0         0.0           (66)
          poor        0.0      12.8           71.8       7.7         7.7           (39)
          none       31.7      20.8           41.6       5.0         1.0          (101)
          total      15.5      18.0           59.7       4.9         1.9          (206)


         * "good" methods are defined to be pill, 11Th, condom and diaphragm;
        "poor" methods include all other contraceptive methods excluding abstinence

    For each of the two age groups the distribution of live births is con-

    siderably less dispersed among the users of good contraception than among

    users of poor contraception (e.g. the percentage of households with five

    or more live births was 10.3 and 3.0 among users of good contraception

    while the percentages were 14.9 and 15.4 among users of poor contraception).

    Notice, too, the large percentage of non—users in the first interval which

    had zero live births. Presumably a relatively large fraction of the users

    of no contraception knew themselves to be sterile or suhfecund. In the
S
                                  —50—

                                                                               .
 terminology   of the model developed in Section II, couples with a rela-

 tively low natural fecundity and a low expected fertility need avert

 fewer births to achieve any given level of desired fertility. So these

 couples have less incentive to use any contraception in general and

 less incentive to adopt high fixed cost techniques in particular.

      Table IV—3 also indicates the relationship between contraception

use and fertility outcomes. While Table IV—2 shows a frequency dis-

tribution of live births by contraception use for two of the cells of

white non—Catholic women from Table IV—1, Table IV—3 indicates the

mean and standard deviation of the live births by contraception use for

each of the 5 cells of white non—Catholic women age 35—44 from Table IV—1.

      Compare the fertility behavior of the "good" and "poor" contra—

ceptors for some given level of schooling in Table IV—3. In terms of

mean fertility, couples which used a "good" contraceptive method pill,

IUD, condom or diaphragm) in the first birth interval had somewhat lower

mean fertility than couples which used relatively "poor" contraceptive

methods. As Panel B indicates, however, very few of the differences in

means are statistically significant. By contrast, the comparison of

differences in the standard deviation of the fertility outcomes does exhibit

statistical significance——the users of poor contraception have appre—

ciably higher variation in their fertility outcomes than do users of
                      36
good contraception.



     36Note that in the tests of significance of the variances, the
few pairwise comparisons which were not significant involved the rela-
tively small cells containing 40 or fewer observations.
                                    Table IV—3

      Mean Nutber of Live Births , p , and Standard Deviation of Number
      of Live Births,      for White Ln—Catholic Women by Wife's Education
      and by the Contraceptive Method (Good, Poor, None) Used in the First
                Birth Interval, for Women Aged 35—44

                                        (A)                                      .
      Contraceptive Method
      Used in First Birth
      Interval                                      Education of Wife
      (Cell Size)                           9—11            12   —   ?13      Total

               pN           3.769       3.069             2.784      2.887   2.920
      Good                  2.065       1.476             1.274      1.076   1.334
               ()           (26)            (72)            (213)    (124)   (435)

                            3.840       3.800             2.941      2.706   3.185
     Poor                   2.444       2.028             1.515      1.488   1.802
               (ii)         (25)            (40)            (101)    (34)    (200)

                            3.587       3.242             2.577      2.000   2.872
               UN
     None aN                2.817       2.134             1.860      1.854   2.224
               (n)          (104)           (120)           (189)    (72)    (485)

               p            3.658       3.284             2.738      2.583   2.946
                   N
     Total                  2.635       1.942             1.567      1.472   1.849
               ()           (155)           (232)           (503)    (230)   (1120)

                                        (B)
     Tests of Statistical Significance of Differences in Means and Variances
             in Number of Live Births, for Specific Pairs of Cells
      Difference by          -_______________ Education of
                                                         — Wife
      Contraceptive Method8                                             13
                                         9—11         12            -   -
                                                                                      —
                               Test of Difference in Means (Student's t—test)
     Good vs. poor          0.11        2.03**       0.91      0.67
     Poor vs. none          0.45        1.47         1 .82*    2.08**
     Good vs. none          0.37        0.64         1 .20     3.70***

                               Tests of Difference in Variance (F—test)
      Good vs. poor         1.40        1.88**       1 .42**   1 .91***
     Poor vs. none          1.33        1.11         1 .50**   1 .56
     Good vs. none          1.86**      2 .09***     2.14***   2.97***

     Test of Differences in Mean and Variance of Number of Live Births by
              Wife's Education for Users of Good Contraception Only
     Difference by          Difference in            Difference by     Difference in
     Wife's Education       Means Variance           Wife's Education Means Variance
                            (t—test) (F—test)                         (t—test) (F—test)
     &8 vs. 9—11            1.59     1.95**         9—11 vs. 12       1.46     1.34**
     8 vs.             12   2.35**   2.63***        9—11 vs.. 13      0.92     1.88***
         vs.           13   2.12**   3.67***          12 vs.2 13      0.78     1.40**

•    Implies   statistical difference at a = .10 (two—tailed t—test).
    Imp lies statistical difference at a     .05 (two—tailed t—test).
      Imp lies statistical difference at a = .01 (two—tailed t—test).
                                     - 51   -




                                                                               .
          The lack of a stronger association between
                                                     contraception use and
    mean fertility in Table IV—3 is somewhat surprising.   However, recall
    that equation 16 emphasized two opposing forces influencing optimal

mean fertility. The marginal costs of fertility control raised optimal

mean fertility (ik), although the positive relationship between the

mean and variance lowered optimal fertility (—K/2) as a mechanism for

reducing the uncertainty about the number of births. We showed that

couples wishing to avert more births would be induced to adopt better

(higher fixed cost, lower marginal cost) contraceptive techniques. We

also suggested that users of better techniques are more likely to use

a mixed strategy of contraception which implies a weaker relationship

between the mean and variance of fertility. So users of good contra-

ception are expected to have lower marginal costs of fertility control

(    a lower    )   and also a weaker relationship between mean and variance

C    a lower K ).   Consequently, if wife's education      sorts couples

by their desired fertility in Table IV—3, the further partitioning by

good or poor contraception may not have a systematic effect on mean

fertility. The users of good contraception have lower marginal cost of

averting births, but less incentive to reduce mean fertility as a mechanism

for lowering the uncertainty or variance of fertility. As the relation-

ships in Tables IV—1--—Table IV—3 indicate, across relatively homogeneous




                                                                               S
                                      —




S   groups there is a negative relationship between the use of good con-

    traception and mean fertility, but within the homogenous groups,

    the use of good contraception systematically affects only the variance of

    fertility outcomes. Couples wishing     to   avert relatively more births have

    greater incentives to use good contraception, and within a group homo-

    genous with respect to their desired fertility, those who use good contra-

    ception achieve a lower variance of fertility.

             Table IV—3 also indicates that there is a tendency for the more

    educated women to have lower mean fertility and smaller variance of fer-

    tility for each contraception category. The differences in the means do

    not often exhibit statistical significance (see Panel B), but the differ-

    ences in the gariances among users of good contraception are statistical-

    ly significant, often at a= .01. The observed relationship between

       and       across education groups for good and for poor contraception

    users separately, mirror the observed relationship between        and

    across good and poor contraception users holding education constant. This

    observation is quite consistent with more educated couples being more

    proficient users of each given contraceptive method——the partitioning of

    the sample of women aged 35—44 by "good" and "poor' (holding education

    constant) yields the same qualitative differences as the partitioning by

    more and less education (holding contraception quality constant).

          To obtain another measure of the relationship between contraception

    choice, the wife's education, and fertility outcomes as indicated in

    Table IV —   3, a multiple regression was run using the twelve education—



.
                                     — 53       —




                                                                                                  .
 contraception method cells. Let           N1 and V1 he the. mean and standard

 deviation of live births in cell j,                  and P1 be dummy variables re—

 flecting the use of good contraception (compared to poor) and poor

contraception (compared to none), and E1 be the wife's education level

 (assigned     the values 7, 10, 12, and 14 for the respective columns).

The regressions, weighted by the square root of the cell sizes, yielded:

                 N = 5.23 - 0.18(E )+               0.34(G )   + 0.42(P     )
                     (8.51) (—3.63                   (1.13         (1.43)
and

                 V = 3.38    -    0.15(E    )   - 0.34(G.)     -
                                                                   0.31(P.)     .

                       (15.45)    (-8.27'           (3.25)1 (-3.03) .1

The wife's education has a significant negative effect on both the

mean and the standard deviation of the number of live births. Con-

traception use had no significant effect on the mean number of live

births, but users of poor contraception had a significantly lower

standard deviation in live births than users of no contraception, and

users of good contraception had a significantly lower standard devia-

tion in live births than users of poor contraception.

       Table IV--4   partitions    this set of househoiclq ,            th      wh?tp non—(tho—
lics, by duration of marriage and the expected number of children,

for women married only once and aged 35 and above. Since age at mar-

riage differs systematically by several socio-econornic characteristics,



      37
       The standard deviations of N. and V. were 0.559 and 0.517 and
the standard errors of the estimated were .359 and 0.127 respectively.
  .                  Mean Number of Live Births
                                                  1"N
                                                        Table IV-4
                                                      and Variance in Number of Live Births c2 for White
                      Non—Catholic Women Aged 35 or above and Married Once; by Marriage Durahon, Ex-
                      pected Number of Children and Contraceptive ethod (Good, Poor, None) Used in the
                                                First Pregnancy            Interval
                                                      Estimated Number   of Births*
                              2               3       Total      2         3     4          Total     2       3       4         Total
                                  Marriage Duration                  Marriage Duration                      Marriage Duration
                                   15—19 Years                         20—24 Years                                 25 Years
Good                         2.815        3.125       2.907     2.724    2.803   3.455      2.809   2.277   2.842    4.000      2.746
                             1.162        2.042       1.573     1.349    1.661   4.873      1.745   1.596   1.528    4.286      2.138
        (11)                 (108)            (88)    (204)      (76)     (61)    (11)      (157)    (47)     (57)        (8)   (114)

Poor                         3.300        3.095       3.301     2.952    3.000   3.200      2.946   2.864   3.333    4.636      3.383
                             2.537        2.283       2.713     1.948    2.455   3.700      2.326   1.933   3.121    6.655      3.464
        (n)                   (20)            (42)     (73)      (21)     (45)        (5)    (74)    (22)     (48)    (11)       (81)

None                         2.286        3.050       2.640     2.225    3.109   4.333      3.012   1.836   3.106    4.182      3.184
        1'N
                             2.790       4.368       4.006      3.512    3.087   5.884      4.182   2.991   5.860    7.466      7.001
        (n)                   (56)        (101)       (178)      (40)     (92)    (24)      (166)    (55)     (94)    (33)      (201)

Total                        2.707        3.087       2.866     2.613    2.990   3.950      2.919   2.185   3.085    4.250      3.098
                            1.881         3.079       2.746     2.107    2.497   5.331      2.867   2.380   3.957    6.623      4.914
        (n)                  (184)        (231)       (455)     (137)    (198)    (40)      (397)   (124)    (199)    (52)      (396)
* Estimated    from a   fertility    demand       cquation (see text footnote, p.54). The cells are defined on intervals: 2 is
1.5 to 2.5; 3    2.5
                is        to 3.5,    4   is    3.5  to 4.5. Total includes observations with estimated number of births '1.5
and>4.5 as well.
                                    — 54




                                                                                .
  the
      Partitioning by marriage duration should more adequately
                                                               standardize
  for the length of the period of time at risk of
                                                  conception. To standard-
  ize further for the incentives to avert births,
                                                  we have used a definition
 of expected number of children
                                  derivé,d by regressing the actual number
 of live births on a set of
                              economic and demographic characteristics.38
 We used this fertility demand
                                 function to estimate N for each
                                                                   household,
 then grouped households into
                                cells defined by nterva1s of .
         One observes in Table IV—4 that when
                                                the marriage duration and
 the household's expected
                            fertility      are held constant, users of good

 contraception had smaller variation in their
                                                 actual fertility than did
 users of poor or no contraception.
                                        Also, standardized for marriage
 duration and contraception
                              choice, households characterized
                                                                 by equal
to three tended to experience
                                 a larger variation in actual fertility than

households characterized by 1 equal to two. That is, there
                                                           appears


        38
          The regression was estimated from the 1965 NFS for white non—
 Catholic women aged 35 or above. The estimation yielded: N =
 — 0.35473 (MARl) —
                      0.00042 (I) — 0.34462 (ED) + 0.00003         10.09616
 CURB) + 0.09881 (MARD) —                                   (EDxI) + 0.30078
                            O.12119(AGE) where MARl equals 1 if married more
 than once or equals zero
                            otherwise; I is an estimate of the husband's in-
 come at age 40 based on an estimated
                                         earnings function using husband's
 education and market experience; ED
                                         is the wife's education level; EDXI
 is a multiplicative interaction
                                   term using ED and I; IB equals 1 if the
household lives in a rural area
                                   or equals zero otherwise; MARD is the
duration of the current
                           marriage in years; and ACE is the wife's age.
      39
         This procedure partitions the group of households into cells on
the basis of the economic and
                                 demographic chracterjstjcs which, on
average, are associated with one, two, three or four children. For our
purposes this procedure suffices, but it does not resolve the problem
of partitioning the household's
the "unwanted" components.         actual fertility into the "desired" and
I    to   be a positive association between mean fertility and the standard

    deviation of fertility. Furthermore, as figure IV—3 indicates, the

    positive relationship between     and GN appears to be strongest among

    users of no contraception.4°

            Since more educated women tend to marry at later ages, the total

    length of time at risk of conception probably differs by education for

    women of a given age. Table IV—3 partitions the sample by wife's age

    and education; for comparison Table IV—5 partitions the sample by wife's

    education and marriage duration for women married once and aged 35 and

    above. Although the cell sizes in Table IV—5 are smaller and the results

    somewhat more erratic, one again observes a tendency for users of good

    contraception to have somewhat lower mean fertility and, more systematically,

    lower variation in their fertility.

            The demographic literature has emphasized a distinction between

    wanted and "unwanted" fertility, and It is tempting to try to partition

    actual fertility into these two components for separate analysis.41



         40
           •The figure plots only cells based on 20 or more observations..
    Unfortunately the cell sizes for the users of poor contraception are
    quite small, making generalizations difficult.

              addition to Ryder and Westoff(1971), see Bumpass and Westoff(1970),
    Ryder (1973) and Part IV "Unwanted Fertility" of Volume 1 of the Commission
    on Population Growth (1972), particularly the essay by Ryder and Westoff (1972).




S
                                                                 -                                       Figure          IV—3
                                                                                                 Variance In Live Births
                               -
                                                                                                 by Expected Nber of Births
                                                                         -
                                                                                                 by Contraception Method                                                                                                          —

          ____                                                                                   and Marriage Duration
70                                                               L                                                                                                                                     H.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  —-
                  Marriage                                                                                                                                                                     .   .
                  - Duration                                                     -H-Marriage                                                                             Marriage                       /
                                                                                                    Duration                    —                                        Duration                  .1
                         15—19              Years                                                   20—24                                                                                                   —ii:
                                                                                                                 Years          -                                        25 Years
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                   H          H                                                 ::I
                                                         -                                                                                      -
                                             -                                HH—-
                                                              LJHIIi iHiLL ii:—                                                             -           --
                                                                                                                                                                                      kfJ
                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                         ii                                                                                                                                                 -          —-—       -—   -.

                                                                                                                      —----i-   —-II                            -a'---
S.C                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                     -   ---                                                                                                -
      HH.            1-
                                             --. ,4                      J-J1J' iEHH                               /i4
                                                 0
                                                                     —             HHtHji
                                       •0-
                  --4-                 •0
                                            -- —
                                                                                         -
                                                                                       4-- .FH---—--   __i____I___.                 -               —




                               .-                                        -—-             -                            -i---
                                                         -                                                                          —H
                                                                                         -   -
3.                                                                                                                                  I4
                           -       -
                                                                                                   Hjtr                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                                                  '-     --'-F-- -r
         LL                                                                                                                                                                               -.   HHI                4Good
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Poor        —        —X
                                                                     —       4-—-—   -                                                                                                    ----—H                 —4   None
                                                                                                       stP                                                                   Z4IH                           --        Total      nht,Iu,i,Jm
2."
                                                                                                                                        L                                -
              -    #!:                       --t                                --                           I--




                   2                                         3                       z                       3
                                                                                                                                                      h±t
                                                                                                                                                    iLi   :1     2                    3                          it
     .                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                 Table IV—5
          Mean and Standard Deviation of Live Births and Unwanted Births
          for .Jhite Non—Catholic Women Aged 35 or above and Married Once,
          by Marriage Duration, Wife's Education, and Contraceptive Method
          (Good, Poor, None) Used in the First Pregnancy Interval
                                         (A)


    _____                Marriage_Duration_15—19_Years
    Contraceptive
        Method          — ducationoUt4Ifé
                                 9—11          12       13       total
                                    Live Births
    Good p             3.167     3.192         2.766 3.000       2.907
          aN           1.722     1.833         1.202 0.984       1.254
           (i)**       (6)        (26)          (107) (65)        (204)
                       4.182     2.857         3.098    3.429    3.301
    PoorPN
        a              1.991     2.410         1.428    1.453    1.647
           ()          (11)       (7)           (41)     (14)     (73)

    None ii            2.708     3.146         2.600    2.061    2.640
                       2.458     2.056         1.946    1.580    2.001
           ()          (24)       (41)          (80)     (33)     (178)

                       3.171     3.135         2.768    2.777    2.866
    TotalPN                                    1.543    1.327    1.657
          a            2.290     1.988
            ()         (41)       (74)          (228)    (112)    (455)


                                Unwanted Births*

    Good p             0.167     0.962         0.523    0.431    0.539
                       0.408     1.587         1.049    0.770    1.052
            (R)          (6)      (26)          (107)    (65)     (204)

    Poor p             2.091     1.714         0.512    0.714    0.904
                       1.921     2.563         0.952    1.139    1.474
                        (11)                    (41)     (14)     (73)
            (n)
    None p             0.667     1.268         0.837    0.455    0.843
                        1.341    2.013         1.354    0.905    1.480
            ()          (24)      (41)          (80)     (33)     (178)
                        0.976    1.203         0.632    0.473    0.716
    TotalU.d
         a              1.573    1.916         1.155    0.859    1.311
            (R)         (41)      (74)          (228)    (112)    (455)

    *  For definition see text
    ** Cell size


S
                                 — 55c —

                           Table IV—5
                          (continued)
                              B

                                                               —
                                                                   .
Contraceptive
  Method
                  Marriage Duration 20—24 Years

                 S8      9-11
                              Education of Wife
                                   12         13       Total
                                                               -
                                     Live Births


Good            4.000   2.571       2.784     2.610   2.809
                1.961   1.513       1.219     1.115   1.321
       aN
       (n)       (14)     (28)       (74)      (41)    (157)


Poor N          2.000   3.842       2.686     2.917   2.946
                0.926   1.642       1.430     1.379   1.525
       aN
       (n)       (8)      (19)       (35)      (12)    (74)

None            4.114   3.366       2.701     1.609   3.012
       a        2.285   2.009       1.715     1.616   2.045
       ()        (35)     (41)       (67)      (23)    (166)

                3.789    3.216      2.733     2.355   2.919
TotaluN                                               1.693
     a          2.169    1.765      1.459     1.402
       ()        (57)     (88)        (176)    (76)    (397)


                             Unwanted Births

Good            1.571   0.571       0.311     0.171   0.433
       a        1.910   0.920       0.720     0.442   0.942
       (R)       (14)     (28)        (74)     (41)    (157)

Poor 'i         0.0      1.211      0.400     0.167   0.527
       a1       0.0      1.273      0.604     0.389   0.879
       (ii)      (8)      (19)        (35)     (12)    (74)

None .i         1.971    1.561      0.881     0.391   1.211
           U                                          1.822
                2.419    1.988      1.332     1.076
       (R)       (35)     (41)        (67)     (23)    (166)

Totaip          1.596    1.170      0.545     0.237   0.776
       cU       2.203    1.613      1.013     0.690   1.419
       ()        (57)     (88)        (176)    (76)    (397)




                                                                   .
                                Table IV-5



I   Contraceptive
                               (concluded)
                                       C


                            Education of Wife
      Method
                                9—11         12      113      Total
                                 Live Births


    Good j          3.688      2.739       2.471     2.708   2.746
           a1       1.957      1.789       1.065     1.301   1.462
           (ti)      (16)       (23)         (51)     (24)    (114)

    Poor            4.105      3.400       3.62      2.667   3.383
                    2.105      2.113       1.523     1.658   1.861
           aN
           (n)       (19)       (20)         (33)     (9)     (81)

    None            4.240      3.580       1.932     1.706   3.184
                    3.004      2.548       1.680     1.359   2.646
           aN
           (n)       (75)       (50)         (59)     (17)    (201)

                    4.136     3.333        2.406     2.360   3.098
    TotalUN
                    2.724     2.295        1.516     1.439   2.217
         aN
           (n)       (110)      (93)        (143)     (50)    (396)


                                Unwanted Births


    Good i          1.063     0.435        0.392     0.208   0.456
           a11      1.843     0.896        0.666     0.509   0.961
           ()        (16)       (23)         (51)     (24)    (114)

    Poor 1.'        1.000     0.700        0.879     0.111   0.778
           GU       1.291     0.979        1.453     0.333   1.235
           (R)       (19)       (20)         (33)     (9)     (81)

    None            1.733     1.400        0.644     0.353   1.214
           a        2.658     2.356        1.283     0.702   2.182
           (R)       (75)       (50)         (59)     (17)    (201)

    Totalp          1.509     1.011        0.608     0.240   0.907
         aU         2.376     1.879        1.157     0.555   1.759
           (R)       (110)     (93)          (143)    (50)    (396)




S
                                                                               .
                                    — 56 —




 The difficulty, of course, is in obtaining an estimate of wanted births

 distinct from the household's actual fertility. The problem is not sim—

ply one of estimation. Viewed in the rontext of the stochastic model des-

cribed above, it is not possible even in principle to designate each preg-

nancy as !desiredIl or undesired. Also, we have emphasized that the house-

hold's optimal number of children Is affected by fertility control costs

(i.e.       In equation 16) and the relation between mean and variance of

fertility (i.e. —K/2). So the definition of "desired" fertility depends

critically upon what is assumed about fertility control costs, the   van—
ance in actual fertility, etc. 42

        Recognizing these limitations, we nevertheless attempted to consider

"unwanted" fertility since the NFS data set contains retrospective infor—

mation on the couple's fertility, goals prior to each pregnancy. By summing




     42That is, in the terminology of equation 16 one might define un-
wanted fertility as    — N* or    —
                                          However, since a > 0, actual
fertility N differs in general from N' so "unwanted" fertlity pre-
sumably includes not only the discrepancy between some fixed target fer-
tility and optimal mean fertility PNbut also the variation in actual
fertility around




                                                                               .
                                   —    —




S                                           43
    up the number of pregnancies "wanted" and subtracting this number

    from the total number of live births, we obtained an estimate of the

    number of births "unwanted" in each household. Panel B of Table IV-5

    indicates the mean number of "unwanted" births by marriage duration,

    wife's education, and contraceptive method used in the first pregnancy

    interval. There appears to be a relativeiy strong negative relation



        43
             The NFS data contain retrospective information about the con-
     traceptive behavior and the husband's and wife's attitudes about another
     pregnancy prior to each of the wife's pregnancies. Following Ryder
     and Westoff (1971) we considered each live birth as    "wanted" or
     "unwanted" on the basis of the behavioral and attitudinal circumstances
     prior to that pregnancy. The birth was considered "wanted" if any of
     the following three conditions was met: (1) The birth was "wanted"
     if the couple had used no contraception in the interval prior to that
     pregnancy and responded "yes" to the question "Was the only reason
     you did not use any method then because you wanted to have a baby as
                        "
     soon as possible?    (2) The birth was "wanted" if the couple had used
     a contraceptive method in the interval prior to that pregnancy and had
    "stopped using a method in order to have a child." (3) If the couple was
     not using contraception but responded "no" to the question quoted
     above or if the couple had conceived while using a method or while having
     stopped using a method but "did not want to become pregnant at that time,"
     then the couple was asked two additional questions. If the response
     was "yes" to either of these additional questions the birth was con-
      sidered "wanted." The two questions were "Before you became pregnant
      this time did you want to have a (another) child sometime?" and "Did
     your husband want to have a (another) child sometime?" Our definition
     of"wanted" differs slightly from the definition used by Ryder and Westoff.




.
                               — 58   —




 between the number of "unwanted" births and the wife's
                                                                            .
                                                        education
       44
 level, and a somewhat systematic relationship between the
                                                           number
 of "unwanted" births and the use of good contraception.

       We want to stress that the results pertaining to unwanted

 births are subject to many qualifications and are included here pri-

 marily as some evidence that this one measure of the
                                                        intuitively
 appealing notion of an unwanted pregnancy seems to be related to

 contraception use as one would expect. The arbitrariness of the

 precise definition of an unwanted pregnancy helps convince us that it

 is more useful in studying the uncertainty related to fertility be-

havior to focus on the distribution of actual births than to concentrate

on partitioning observed fertility into "desired" and "unwanted"

fertility. We have shown in this section that across broadly defined

groups of households there appears to be a systematic
                                                        relationship
between contraception strategies and the mean and variance of observed

fertility. Couples characterized by the use of more effective contra-

ception appear to have somewhat lower mean fertility, lower variance of

fertility, a weaker relationship between their mean and variance of fer-

tility and perhaps a lower level of "unwanted" fertility.



      44
       This finding is consistent with Ryder and Westoff's conclusion
that "*here is a strong negative association of education and unwanted
fertility" (See Ryder and Westoff 1972, p.483). Their conclusion is also
based on the 1965 NFS data and its sequel, the 1970 NFS, which is not yet
available to us.  It must be stressed however that Ryder and Westoff's
definition of "unwanted" pregnancies and their criteria for selection of
the subsample studied differ from ours and or should not make inferences
about fertility behavior from comparisons between their tables and ours.
    V Diffusion of the Pill


          The 1965 National Fertility Study and its sequel, the 1970 National

    Fertility Study, provide a unique opportunity to follow, at the household

    level, the diffusion of a major technical innovation——the oral contraceptive

    ——from its Introduction for sale in the TJ.S, in 1960. In addition to the

    intrinsic interest of studying the diffusion of new technology, the observed

    pattern of adoption of the pill provides an important test of hypotheses

    derived from our theory of contraceptive choice (see Section II).

          There are two main reasons why the study of pill adoption provides a

    more powerful test of our model of contraceptive choice than would he afforded

    by studying differential choices among techniques existing before 1960.

    First, the introduction of the pill was an exogenous event from the stand-

    point of potential adopters. Second, the pill is a truly new kind of con-

    traception in comparison with alternative methods available prior to 1960——

    it is eignificantly more effective and less coitus—related than alternative

    methods. This second consideration suggests that the pill has a significantly

    lower marginal cost of fertility control than other methods, at least in terms

    of the psychic costs associated with forgone sexual pleasure. Thus couples

    were confronted, after 1960, with a significantly different set of potential

    contraceptive rethods to choose from, and we investigate in this section the

    differential rates of adoption of the pil] aiong women fth different initial

    conditions in 1960 (e.g., marital status, age, parity and prior contraceptive

    practices).

          We first present a few hypotheses about the expected pattern of diffusion

    assuming contraceptive choice is governed by factors considered in our theoreti—

S
                                                                                    .
                                   — 60 —




 cal    model. Next, we utilize data from the 1965 NFS to test these hy-

 potheses and to estimate the probability of pill use as a logistic

 function of the household's economic characteristics, parity in 1960, and

 prior use of contraception.


         The main behavioral hypothesis underlying our theory of choice of

 contraceptive technique is that couples choose the least costly tech-

nique to achieve a given fertility goal (e.g. a given value of the mean and

variance of fertility outcomes). It was shown In Section lI—ui that the

same technique will not be least costly for a].l possible goals unless the

technique with the smallest marginal cost Is also the technique with the

lowest fixed cost. This proposition led to the derivation of the contra-

ception cost curve for a "typical" couple in Figure 11—3 as the envelope

of least costly segments of the curve associated with particular contra-

ceptive techniques. According to this analysjs, the more births a couple

expects to avert the more likely it is to choose a technique with rela—

tively low marginal cost and high fixed cost. 45

         To derive hypotheses about the adoption of the pill from this theory,

we shall assume that for most couples the pill has a lower marginal cost than

other contraceptive techniques available In 1960—65. Since It is easy to

provide examples of components of marginal Cost which are higher for the pill

than for alternative techniques (e.g., money cost, side effects on health,



        45
       For the time being, we shall Ignore risk considerations and argue in terms
of variations in expected fertility within an essentially deterministic frame—
work.
    etc.), the plausibility of this assumption depends on th further

    assumption that the major component of the marginal cost of contra-

    ception for most people stems from the conflict between effective use
                                    46
    of a method and sexual pleasure.     The fixed cost of the pill includes

    the cost of acquiring information about its existence, characteristics

    and method of distribution in addition to the money cost of visiting

    a doctor to obtain a prescription and various psychic costs (e.g. re-

    ligious principles) which are not related to information acquisition.

           We can use figure 11—3 (page 31) to il1utrate the hypothetical

    fertility control costs faced by a typical couple. Recall that the

    line OF2 represents a zero fixed—cost, high marginal cost techniciue such

    as withdrawal, and line a F represents another technique such as con-

    dom.   Suppose that the high fixed—cost, low marginal cost technique

    depicted by a4 F4 represents the costs of the pill at the time of its
                                        47
    introduction on the market in 1960.




          46
           The ITJD, a close rival of the pill in terms of effectiveness and
    coitus—related costs, was not widely available until after 1965.

          47
           While the line a F in the figure has a slope, or marginal cost
        of approximately zeo the cost curve for the pill could have been drawn
    with a positive although relatively low marginal cost.
           Also, for simplicity of exposition, we wtll assume here that these
    three techniques, withdrawal, condom, and pill, represent the entire envelope
    cost curve. In our empirical analysis all available techniqueg are included.




S
                                            — 62   —




          If ftg(Ir 11—3 dtipiri       tht toit tnti1tfon,            !v ci
                                                                                                 .
 couple   newly married in 1960, the couple will adopt the pill only If
 it wishes to avert all of its potential births (i.e if it wishes to
 have zero children). If the couple wishes to avert between seven                   and eleven

 births (i.e. if it wishes to have one to five children) it will use the

 condom as its contraceptive method. As the figure is drawn, if the couple

wishes to avert fewer than seven births (i.e. if it wishes to have more

 than five children) withdrawal will be used as its contraceptive method.

      The probability P that a couple will adopt the pill is equal to

the probability that the total contraception cost of using the pill, is

less than the total cost of using the least costly alternative technique.

This statement may    be expressed       as:

                    P =   Pr EF <
                                  Tnin(F1)J                            (17)



where F= a+
                      =
                          Pr[@+  ,      (NUN))m111(al+
                              is the total cost of the pill and
                    (— N)                                                     F=        +
.If all the a's, s's,
      — N)     is the total cost of the
                                                                                   a1
                                                       alternative method (1 = 1,2...).
                            and         were identical constants for all members
of the population, P would be either zero or one for everjone and the pill

would be used either universally or not at all.

      In fact, of course, these variables will be distributed according to

some joint pr?bability distribution across the population so that we should

expect to find some fraction       ,    0      P   1, for wh. the pill is least costly.

Moreover, our theory suggests that each of these variables is a function of

exogenous variables as well as purely random factors. For example,

is a function of husband's lifetime income and wife's price of time, two
variables hich help determine the couple's demand for children. Like—

wise,ii is a function of the couple's natural fecundahility and the wife's

age at marriage, and the ct's and 's are functions of variables such

as religion and education which determine the fixed and variable costs of

each contraceptive technique.

      These considerations suggest that we may express the aggregate

proportion of households using the pfll as



P =   fjPr [(F_min(Fj)         Ix1,.,   x)<u]   h(x,..., x,u) dx...dxu (18)



where Pr() is the probability of using the pill conditional on the

values of the exogenous variables x1 ,...,      x   which deteriine natural -.

fertility,   the demand for children and the costs of contraception, and

where u is a random variable and h(x,..., x, u) is a joint density func-

tion of the x's and u.

      If we ass*nne that u is distributed logistically and is independent

of the x's, the conditional probability of using the pill may be expressed

as a logistic function of the form

               P =
                     Ei + exp - (a + h x + ... + bnXn + u             (19)

or, alternatively, the natural log of the odds of using the pill becomes a

linear functior. of the form

                ln(1) a +                bx + u               (20)

which can be estimated using standard maximum likelihood procedures.

After discussing several hypotheses about the set of variables x1, x2,...,


X, we estimate the parameters of         logistic functions of the form sug-

gested in equation (20).
                                       - 64   -




        We shall first consider the
                                       pattern of pill use in a static
                                                                            setting
                                                                                          .
  in which the distributions
                               of natural fertility,         the
                                                       ii,         demand for children,
      and the costs of
                         contraception the a's and 5's, are stable in the

  Population. Subsequently we consider the question of diffusion
                                                                  of the pill
  over time. For convenience,
                              assune for the moment that all couples In the

  population face identical cost functions for the three techniques
                                                                    depicted
  in figure II-3, but differ in their natural fertility
                                                        or in their demand
 for children. If couples
                              are then distributed by the number of births they
 wish to avert, figure 11-3 implies that the proportion of
                                                                   couples in the
 population which adopts the pill will be equal to the proportion wishing

 to avert 11.5 or more births; the
                                      proportion which uses the condom will
 be equal to the proportion
                              wishing to avert between seven and 11.5
                                                                           births,
 and the proportion using withdrawal will equal the proportion
                                                               wishing to a—
vert fewer than seven births. In
                                   short, given a distribution of couples
by the births they wish to
                            avert, the switching points on the envelope
total cost curve determine the
                                proportion of couples using the various
available techniques.

      We have suggested three setsof factors determining the
                                                             proportion
of couples which might be
                          expected to adopt the pill. We will consider
each in turn. Polding constant factors
                                          affecting the fertility control
total cost curve (the a's and 8's) and the demand for children (the

any factor which increases natural fertility
                                                  will increase expected births
averted (B               Thus for a group of households, an increase in




                                                                                          S
                                      — 65 —




    d.ll, ceteris paribus, increase the proportion of households using the
                                                        48
    pill (and decrease the proportion using withdrawal). The major observable

    variable related to     is the wife's age when the pill became available.

    So our hypothests is that, ceteris paribus, the older the wife was in

    1960 the less likely she is to adopt the pill.49

            Alternatively, if we hold constent natural fertility,,u and the

    fertility control total cost curve, factors which increase the demand for

    children1 reduce the expected averted births B and, therefore reduce the

    probability of adopting the pill. In studies of completed fertility,



       48
           In the simple three—techniQue case the effect on condom usage is
    uncertain since some who previously used the condom are expected to switch
    to the pill while some who previously used withdrawal are expected to switch
    to the condom. In the more general case of several techniques an incresse
    in B is expected to increase the proportion using the high fixed cost, low
    marginal cost technique, ceteris parihus.



           That is, the older she is the shorter the remaining reproductive
    time span, so the smaller her remaining natural fertility and thus the
    smaller her remaining expected averted births. Since she wishes to avert
    fewer births, ceteris paribus, her incentive to adopt the high—fixed—cost
    pill is relatively slight.
          This hypothesis should he qualified in two respects. First, there
    may he an advantage to postponing the investment in the fixed cost asso—
    dated with pill adoption until the benefits of the reduced variable costs
    associated with pill use are close at hand. If these benefits are greatest
    when the couple wishes to contracept with high efficiency in order to
    prevent any additional pregnancy, the adoption of the pill might he post-
    poned until desired fertility is reached. Second, age at marriage is likely
    to be inversely   correlated with the couple's demand for children. So
    the younger the woman is at a given parity the more likely she wants to
    have a large family, which would tend to offset the effect of age on ex-
    pected births averted, unless desired fertility is explicitly held constant.




.
    Thus our inability to hold desired fertility precisely fixed may introduce
    biases on the other variables.
                                                                                            .
                                       — 66   —




the husband's        lifetime   income, H, and
                                           wife's education, W,
                                                   the

 (as a proxy for her potential lifetime wage or price of time), have
been   found   to be the most important economic variables. Sanderson
and   Willis (1971) and Willis        (1973) argued on theoretical grounds for
a   positive interaction effect between H and W.                Estimating an

equation   of the form
                 p
                     N   y0 +y H-VY 2 W+Y
                                1
                                              1-lW
                                               3
                                                                      (21)

in a number of samples of U. S. women, they found that                   and

are negative and           is positive, as expected. If we include these

three variables in the equation for P, since we hypothesize a negative

relationship     between N and P, we expect              to observe positive coefficients

on H and W     and a negative coefficient for


      50
      Briefly, the argument is this. When the wife is not supplying
labor to the market, the shadow price of her time is higher than her
potential market wage and is an increasing function of her husband's
income.   When she supplies labor        to
                                     the market, her price of time is
equal to her market wage and is independent of her husband's income.
Since children are assumed to be time-intensive, the positive income
effect of H on the demand for children is offset by a substitution
effect against children in families with non—working wives, while
there is no offset in families with working wives. Since the wife's
labor force participation is negatively related to H and positively
related to W, Willis (1973) shows that the effects of H and W on
number of children will be nonlinear with a positive coefficient on
the interaction variable, MW. See, however, Ben Porath (1973) for
alternative interpretations of nonlinearity in the demand function
for children.
      51
      The husband's lifetime income and the wife's education are not,
of course, the only variables relevant for the demand curve for
children. The demand curve used in the previous section, for example,
included several additional variables (see footnote 38 ) and also
pertained to white non-Catholics only. For the analysis of pill
adoption in this section we again restrict ourselves to white
non-Catholics.
          Estimating the effects on pill use of variation in the fixed

    and marginal costs of the pill and alternative methods of contraception

    presents a number of difficult problems. These costs are likely to

    be dominated by psychic or nontnarket components which may vary widely

    across households but cannot be measured directly. Certain variables

    such as Catholicism are known to inf1eice the costs of certain forms

    of contraception and it is frequently argued that education reduces the

    cost of acquiring birth control information (see Michael 1973). Pnfor-

    tunately, both of these variables also help determine the demand for

    children and it is not easy to see how this influence can be disentangled

    from their influence on the cost of contraception.

                       1




.
                                  — 68 —




                                                                            .
       One advantage of studying the adoption of the pill is the fact

that we may study the response to the introduction of the pill by

women whose initial conditions differed in 1960. This procedure

enables us to study the effect of prior use of other forms of

contraception before 1960 on the probability of adopting the pill

after 1960. The theory suggests that couples which have incurred the

fixed costs associated, with some other technique will, ceteris paribus,

be less likely to adopt the pill. Hence, we expect prior use of the

diaphragm and condom, for example, to be negatively associated with
               52
pill adoption.    A second aspect of prior use which may influence the

probability of adopting the pill is the success the couple has with

the   previous method. If   the couple's previous method   has had high
marginal costs, our theory    suggests   that it would be used relatively
inefficiently. The couple would have,      therefore, a higher risk of an

"accidental" pregnancy while   using that method. Since the pill has a
relatively   low marginal cost, the higher the marginal cost of the

alternative method, the more likely the pill will be adopted.


    52That is, after the fixed costs are borne, the fertility control
costs fall from c1 +         to simply B, There are difficulties in
this test of the suruc-cost hypothesis, however. A woman's prior
contraception history is not independent of residual variance caused by
variation in the couple 's demand for children, fecundability, or costs
of contraception which we are unable to hold constant with the other
variables in the model. Several potential biases tend to work against
the "sunk cost" hypothesis. For example, subfecundity or sterility,
which may   beone of the reasons that a woman has not contraceptod in
the past, would also tend to reduce her probability of adopting the pill.
If this bias dominated, we might find that prior users of contraception
have a higher rather than a lower probability of using the pill compared
with prior nonusers.
                                         — 69   —




I
    Consequently,   we expect prior "contraceptive failure" to be positively
    related to the probability of adopting the pill. This expectation is
    strengthened by the likelihood that couples whic)t have experienced
    contraceptive failure confront the prospect of larger losses of
    expected utility from additional "unwrted" births than do couples who
    have successfully contracepted in the past.
          While we have discussed three separate sets of factors influencing

    the probability of pill adoption in a static framework, we have not

    as yet considered the diffusion of the pill over time. A major driving

    force in any process of diffusion of new technology is the reduction

    over time   of the cost of   acquiring information about the new innovation.

    By   the simple act of adopting and using the new technique, early
    adopters convey information to later adopters about the existence of
    the   technique, how   it is distributed, etc. Since the pill is a
    prescription drug, its adoption is affected by the diffusion of infor-

    mation among doctors as well as among potential adopters. The dynamics

    surrounding the cost of      information about the   pill and   the   speed and

    pattern    of its diffusion will also be related to socio-econoaac dif-

    ferentials in rates of adoption since this information is spread by
                     53
    word of mouth.

          53
            Although they are not information costs, a similar mechanism may
    operate to reduce the costs associated with deviation from group norms
    as individuals in the group withess increased nonconformity with
    these norms. In the case of the pill, the interaction between the
    teachings of the Catholic Church and the behavior of individual Catholics
    might be interpreted along these lines (see Ryder and Westoff, 1971,
    Chapter 8).
                                                                                .
                                     - 70   —




       To   consider the effect of decreasing information costs of pill
adoption, we again make use of figure 11-3 (page 31). With the
passage     of time the fixed cost (which includes the information cost)

of the pill for the average household may fall from 0c4 to

Thus the switching point--the number of averted births at which pill

adoption is warranted--falls from about 11.5 births averted to about

6 births averted, as the figure is drawn. Obviously, in the        aggregate,
the   reduction in the fixed cost increases the proportion of couples
using the pill. Notice that the model implies that the users of the
next-best technique will be     those who most readily adopt the new

technique    as its costs of information fall over time.   The   new low-
marginal-cost technique first displaces the existing technique with
the   lowest marginal cost.54

       To test the hypotheses advanced above, we have selected three

samples of white non-Catholic women from the 1965 National Fertility

       54
      Hence, should a new contraceptive technique be introduced which
further lowers the marginal cost of contraception, our theory implies
that   the pill could be the first
                                 technique to be displaced. Ryder (1972)
shows that by 1970 pill use differentials by education, race and
religion had converged. Much of the convergence, however, was caused
by an absolute decline in the use of the pill after 1967 by highly
educated white non-Catholics, the group which has the highest rate of
pill use. It is interesting to speculate whether new techniques such
as the IUD and the increased pepularity of the vasectomy and tubal
ligation had begun to displace the pill, in this group. Ryder emphasizes
the effects of fears about long—term adverse health effects of the pill,
but   these alleged effects were not widely publicized until the U. S.
Senate hearings in 1969, well   after the 1967 peak in pill usage in




                                                                                .
the high-use group.
S
    Study   who began their first, second or third pregnancy interval in the
    period 1960-1964 (see Table V—i for a description of these san1es).
    In each sanp1e we estimate the probability that a woman uses the pill
    in the specified interval as a function of three sets of variables that
    determine, respectively, (1) the womn's potential (i.e. natural) fertility
    from the beginning of the interval until menopause; (2) the couple's
    demand for children; and (3) the couple's costs of contraception.
           These variables, which are listed in Table V—i, may be grouped
    as follows:

                             Variable                       (Expected Effect on P)
           I.   Potential. Fertility
                     Wife's age in 1965                             C—)
          II.   Demand for Children
                      Wife's education                              (+)
                      Husband's income    at age 40                 (+)
                      Income-education    interaction               (-)
         III. Cost of   Contraception
                (A) Date interval began                             (+)
                (E Used diaphragm in previous interval              (-)
                      Used   condom in previous interval            (—)
                      Usedpill in previous interval                 (+)
                      Used other method in previous interval        C-)
                (C)   Contraceptive failure in previous interval    (+)
          IV.   Age at Marriage                                     (+)


    The sign accompanying each variable indicates the hypothesized direction
    of   effect of that variable    on the probability of using     the pill in a
    particular pregnancy      interval.   These hypotheses stem from the discussion
    on the preceding few pages, and most seem to require no further discussion.
    Note that the "date the interval began" operates as a time trend in

I
                                         Table V—i

           Means and Variances of Variables Used in Logistic Estimates of Probability
                                        of Pill Use*
                                     First Interval          Second Interval      Third Interval
                                       (N    — 495)             (N = 502)           (N = 472)
           Variable                   Mean       Variance     Mean   Variance      Mean Variance

    % Contracepted in Interval        .471            .249    .775    .174          .828   .142
    % Used Pill in Interval           .083            .076    .183    .148          .242   .183
    % Used Diaphragm in Previous
            Interval                  ————        ————        .080    .073          .153   .129       F-

    % Used Condom in Previous
            Interval                  ————        ————        .267    .196          .324   .219
    % Used Pill in Previous
            Interval                  ————        ————        .046    .044          .028   .027
    % Used Other Method in
         Previous Interval            --——        ----        .173    .143          .269   .197
    % Had Contraceptive Failure
       in Previous Interval           ————        ————        .129    .112          .229   .176
    Date of Beginning of
                                                                                                           -.1
            Interval                                                                                       I-
       (Century Months)               748.2       297.2      750.1    272.5        750.8 320.8
    Wife's Age at Marriage            20.4        15.5       20.1     9.8          19.9 9.6
    Wife's Age in 1965                23.6        17.3       25.1     19.4         27.0    23.6
    Education of Wife                 12.1        4.1         12.1    4.3          11.9    4.2
    Husband's Predicted Income at
       Age 40 ($1000)                 8.58        2.2        8.56     2.6          8.44    2.7
    Interaction (Husband's Pre-
       dicted Income x Wife's
           Education($1000))          105.9           1041    106.2   1196         102.7   1186


    *   The samples consist of white Non—Catholic women married once whose pregnancy interval
        began in 1960—1964. The beginning of the interval is defined as the date of marriage
        for the first interval , the date of birth of the first child for the second interval
        and the date of birth of the second child for the third interval. These dates are
        stated in "century months." To find the year in which'interval began divide by 12 and
        add 1900 (e.g. 750 century months equals 1962.5).




S                                                                                                 .
                                        — 72 —


S
    this analysis, so it is assumed to be negatively related to the
    information cost of pill adoption. The prior use of other specific
    contraceptive techniques is compared with prior non—use of contra-
    ception, hence the fixed costs associated with each technique are
    expected to deter adoption of the pill.'5
          We have estimated the probability o adopting the pill, P, as a
    logistic function of the form in equation (20) by a maximum likelihood
    method.56   The results   are   indicated   in Tables V-2 and   V-3. Two

    different   versions   of the pill adoption model are investigated. First,

    we   considered the choicepill versus all other techniques including
                                 of

    no contraception. These results are labled as pertaining to the
    "total sample". Second, we considered the conditional choice of pill
    versus all other techniques, given that some contraceptive technique
    was used. These results pertain to the sample of "contraceptors".
    This latter dichotomy is the appropriate one if pill adoption is
    characterized by the two—stage      decision:     (1)   contracept or not
         55
          One might in fact offer hypotheses about the relative magnitudes
    of these negative effects based on the assumed ranking of the fixed
    cost components    (the ct) of each. But there may be persistent or
    serially correlated error terms across intervals, so we have refrained
    from emphasizing this hypothesis. For example, couples which chose the
    condom in the previous interval presumably did so for reasons only some
    of which we have accounted for. Also, each technique has its own set
    of characteristics which may be related to pill adoption (eg., the
    diaphragm is a prescription method, so some of its fixed costs which
    are related to a medical examination may in fact lower the fixed cost
    of pill adoption).
        56
         The computer program was written by Kenneth Maurer of the Rand
    Corporation. The advantage of the maximum likelihood estimation
    procedure is that the data need not be grouped. Thus the effects of a
    relatively large number of independent variables may be estimated from
    relatively small samples.
                                                                  Table V—2



                  Estimates of Probability of Pill Use by White Uon-Catholic Women in Pregnancy
                                         Intervals Beginning in 1960_1964*
                                        (asymptotic t—ratio in parentheses)



                                             First Interval                                 Second Interval                                Third Interval
                                                (p   =   .08)                                          =                                              =
                                                                                                  (p       .15)                                  (p       .24)
                                         (1)                       (2)                      (1)                         (2)    .           (1)                     (2)


Age at Marriage                  —0.003                       —0.005                   —0.004                         —0.004           —0.028                    —0.028
                                (—0.77)                   (—0.99)                  (—0.29)                        (—p.29)          (—2.30)                   (—2.29)      .


      of Wife                        -   —                    —   —
Age                                                                                    —0.023                         —0.023            0.001                     0.001
                                                                                   (—2.05)                        (—2.04)          (    0.13)                (    0.21)
Education of Wife                   0.008                      0.090                    0.019                          0.022            0.015                     0.084
                                C                         (                        (
                                    1.01)                      1.64)                    1.36)                     (    0.36)       C    0.98)                (    2.17)
Husband's Predicted
                                    0.03                       0.14                     0.06                           0.06             0.03                      0.19
   Income($1000)
                                (   2.30)                 (                        (                              C
                                                              1.85)                     3.05)                          0.76)       C    1.71)                (    2.32)
Income—Education                     —   —                    —0009                     —   —
                                                                                                                      —0.000           —   —
   Interaction($1000)                                                                                                                                            —0.013
                                                          (—1.52)                                                 (—0.05)                                    (—2.01)

Date Interval Began                 0.002                     0.002                     0.009                          0.009           0.007                      0.007
                                    3.22)                 (   2.86)                (    5.63)                     (    5.62)       (   4.72)                 (    4.77)

*   The coefficients reported above the t—ratios are
                                                     analogous to coefficients that would be estimated in a linear
    probability model of the form p = a + b1x1 + ... + b x     These are obtained from the 's estimated by maximum
    lijelihood in the          function
                         logistic                             +  ... +   x                                —
                                         P        + ea        i/[i     n    by the relation         — —
                                                                                                    —
                                                                                                      p(l—p)3. where
      is the mean proportion
                             using the        The
                                                pill.          —      asymptotic   t         b1=.-
    to the s's.                                                                             ratios, of course, pertain



    .                                                                                                                                                     .
                                           Table   '1
       Estimates of Prolahilitv of 'i1l T'se iw -Thite NonCatholic 'oren in
       Prenancv Intervals Beginnin2 in 19(—1)Rt for Total amnle and for
            Subsampe of honen who Contracented Purinp the Tnterval*
                          (asymptotic t—rat ios in parentheses)
                                 Second   Interval                 —     Third Interval
                             (1) **                  (2)               (3)                 (4)
                         total sample         çontraceptors       total samole      contraceptors
Ae at Marriage            —.014                 —.017               —.024              —.029
                          (—0.95)               (—0.86)             (—1.92)               (—2.00)
Age   of   Wife           —.015                 —.014               .004                  .004
                          (—1.27)               (_fl.R9)            (0.55)                (0.49)
Education of Wife         .017                  .027                .137                  .154
                          (1.15)                (1.29)              (2.07)                (2.07)
Predicted Income of
   Husband ($1300)        .050                  .041                .190                  .206
                          (2.6)                 (1.66)              (2.23)                (2.14)
Income—Education
Interaction ($1000)                             ----                -.013                 -.015
                                                                    (—1.94)               (—1 .90)
Date Interval Began       .009                  .011                .006                  .007
                          (5.33)                (5.19)              (4.51)                (4.25)
Used Diaphragm in
                          —
Previous Interval             .024              - .077              .076                  -.117
                          (—0.29)               (—0.75)             (0.94)                (—1.17)
Used Condom in
Previous Interval        —
                             .089              —.195                .118                  —.082
                         (—1.56)                (—2.71)             (1.74)                (—0.96)
Used Pill in Previous
  Interval               .286                   .419               .370                   .228
                         (3.24)                 (2.P0)             2.84)
Used Other Method                                                                         (1.41)
in Previous Interval     —.119                 —.223               .102                   —.095
                          (1J5)                (?.70)              (1.39)                 (—1.04)
Contraceptive Failure
in   Previous Interval    142                  .1'3                .138                   .153
                         (2.27)                (2.54)              (2.69)                 (2.62)
                         .15                   .23                 .24                    .29
*                                              ______
     See
      note at bottom of Table V—2
** Minimization technique did not converge after           11 iterations
                                   — 73   —




                                                                           .
contracept and (2) select a contraceptive technique.
       Tab1 V-2 indicates the estimates on the total sample for each
of the first three pregnancy intervals, excluding the variables
which indicate prior contraception use.       The   time trend (the date
interval began) is positive and statistically significant. This
conforms with our hypothesis regarding the effects of a decline in
information costs over time. The age of the wife has the expected
negative sign in only the second interval, while the age at marriage
has an unexpected negative effect on the probability of pill adoption.58
      The effects of the variables related to the demand for children
were computed both with and without the income-education interaction
term. In all cases the variables exhibited the expected signs. The
relatively stronger effect of husband's income than wife's education,
however, is quite surprising. In several studies estimating the effects
of   these variables on fertility demand, the wife's education has the


    57The estimates were computed on both the total sample (for the
unconditional P) and the sample of contraceptors (for the conditional
P). The results were quite similar in the two cases so only the former
are reported here.
     58We have no explanation for the consistently negative    effect of
age at marriage. }Iolding wife's age and current parity constant, a
higher age at marriage implies a shorter duration of time front marriage
to current parity. Thus we think age at marriage in these estimates
may be positively related to relatively high fecundity, relatively high
rates of coital frequency, or relatively low demand for children, but
each of these factors implies a positive effect of age at marriage on
the probability of pill adoption, ceteris paribus.



                                                                           .
                                         -. 74   —




S
    stronger effect. The introduction of the interaction effect does
    strengthen the effect of the wife's education in the first and third
                  59
    intervals.         In general • the signs and magnitudes of the effects of
    these three variables tend to support the hypothesis that these
    variables affect fertility demand and h2ve an effect of opposite sign
    on the probability of using the pill, given the wife's age, parity and
    the time sequence of the pregnancy interval.
           Turning to Table V-3, the effect of prior use of contraception
    is added to the estimating equations. The table includes the results
    for the total sample and for the subsample of contraceptors. The
    effects of the fertility demand variables, the information cost variable,
    and the age of the wife and age at marriage variables are only slightly
    affected by the introduction of the set of prior—use variables, so they
    will not be discussed again here. The effect of failure in the
    preceding interval is positive as hypothesized. The effects of
    prior use of the diaphragm, condom or other contraception are negative
    as hypothesized in the subsample of contraceptors, but are seldom
    statistically significant; the signs are not as hypothesized in the
    third interval for the total sample. The expected positive effect of
    prior pill use is quite strong in iost cases.

              effect of the wife's education, W, on the probability of
           5rhe
    pill adoption in, say, the third interval, is 5p/tSW = .084 — .013H
    which is positive at lower values of husband's income and negative at
    high values of husband's income.


S
                                — 75 —




     While it is tempting to discuss in detail several of these
                                                                           .
estimated coefficients, we will not do so here. We think the

qualitative results of our study of pill use offer rather strong

support for the hypotheses we developed earlier in this section.

In addition, the model can   help   us interpret the observed trend and,

differential   use of the pill since 1960. In the preceding section we

shoved that the implications about the relationship between

distributions of fertility outcomes and     Oontraception   behavior are

also supported by the observed behavior from    the   1965 National

Fertility Survey.




                                                                           .
        .                                    Appendix Table      1
                              Frequency Distribution       of Number    of,   Live Births
                         by Wife's Age, Wife's Education, for White Non-Catholic Women
                                                       0/
                                                           Ic'

                                                                         Number of Live Births
Wife's Age and   Cell Size
 Education                     0       1      2        3          4           5       6      7     8     9    10    11     ]



Age 35—39

    8               66        10.6     9.1   16.7    18.2        16.7         6.1    7.6    4.5   6.1   1.5    0    3.0
   9—11            104         2.9     8.7   25.0    21.2        17.3     13.5       6.7    2.9   1.9    0     0     0
   12              249         8.4    11.2   28.9.   25.7        14.1         4.8    4.0    2.4   0.4    0     0     0
    13             112         8.0    10.7   28.6    22.3        18.8         8.9    0.9    0.9   0.9    0     0     0
  Total            531         7.5    10.4   26.6    232         16.0         7.5    43     2.4   1.5   0.2    0    0.4


Age 40—44
                    89        2.2    16.9    25.8    18.0         5.6         9.0    6.7    3.4   6.7   1.1          0    1.

  9—1].            128        5.5    13.3    21.1    27.3        12.5         4.7    3.1    7.8   3.1   1.6    0     0     (

   12              254        5.1    11.8    31.9    25.6        11.8         7.1    5.1    1.6    0     0     0     0     (
    13             118       11.9     8.5    31.4    28.8        13.6         4.2    0.8    0.8    0     0     0     0     (
  Total            589        6.1    12.2    28.5    25.5        11.4         6.3    4.1    3.1   1.7   0.5   0.5    0    0.

qe 45-49
    8               60        8.3    13.3    10.0    15.0        21.7         8.3   11.7    3.3   5.0    0    1.7   1.7
  9—11              53        9.4    22.6    28.3    20.8         7.5         5.7    3.8    1.9    0     0    0      0
   12              126        7.9    19.8    34.9    16.7        13.5         2.4    1.6    1.6   0.8   0.8    0     0
    13              61        8.2    11.5    29.5    31.1        18.0          0     1.6    0     0      0     0     0
  Total            300        8.3    17.3    27.7    20.0        15.0         3.7    4.0    1.7   1.3   0.3   0.3   0.3
                               Frequency Distribution of Number of Live Births
                         by Wife's Age, Wife's Education, for White Non-Catholic Women

                                                          f6


Wife's Age and                                                        Nber of   Live Births
  Education      Cell. Size
                                      2.     2      3           4             6       7       8         9    10       11

Age 50-54

   5    3           61        11.5   14.8    8.2   16.4        16.4   13.].   4.9   8.2       4.9   0       1.6       0
  9—11              46         6.5   17.4   30.4   21.7         6.5    4.3    8.7    0        0     0       2.2       0    2
       12           80        27.5   15.0   32.5   15.0         3.8    5.0    1.3    0        0     0       0     0
  >     13          45        20.0   31.1   22.2    8.9        11.1    4.4    2.2    0        0     0       0     0
  Total            232        17.7




        .                                                                                                         .
                                                    A-)
                         Appendix Table 2 a
         Frequency Distribution of Best Contraceptive Method Ever Used
                    by Education for White Non—Catholic Women



                                        Education of Wife     _____
Method                           9—11            12          ' 13        Total


                               Wife Aged 35—44

Pill              3.2           12.1             10.9       13.0         10.5
IUD               0.6            0.4              0.8        1.7          0.9
Condom           31.0           35.8             37,4       37.4         36.2
Diaphragm         2.6           14.6             18.3       27.8         17.3
Withdrawal        8.4            4.7              4.4        1.7          4.5
Jelly             3.2            0.9              1.8        2.2          1.9
Foam              0.0            0.9              0.4        0.9          0.5
Suppository       1.3            0.4              2.0        0.4          1.2
Rhythm            3.9            3.9              5.6        2.6          4.4
Douche            3.9            7.3              4.0        1.3          4.1
Other             0.0            0.0              0.0        0.0          0.0
None             41.9           19.0             14.5       10.9         18.5

(n)              (155)          (232)            (503)      (230)        (1120)


                               Wife Aged 45—54

Pill              0.0            0.0              2.4        6.6          2.2
iui               0.0            0.0              0.5        0.9          0.4
Condom           24.0           32.3             32.0       35.8         31.0
Diaphragm         5.9           13.1             22.3       24.5         17.3
Withdrawal        9.9            9.1             5.3         5.7          7.1
Jelly             0.8            2.0             4.8         1.9          2.8
Foam              0.0            0.0             0.0         0.0          0.0
Suppository       2.5            2.0            0.5          0.0          1.1
Rhythm            3.3            3.0            3.4          2.8          3.2
Douche            8.3           11.1            1.9          4.7          5.6
Other             0.8            0.0            0.0          0.0          0.2
None             44.6           27.3           26.7         17.0         28.9

(n)              (121)           (99)            (206)      (106)        (532)
                                                      A-4

                           Appendix   Table 2 b

         Frequency Distribution of Best Contraceptive Method Ever Used
                  by Education for Non—White. Non—Catholic Women


                                             Education of Wife
Method                8           9-11              12           >/l3Total
                                Wife Aged 35z4
Pill                2.4           10.9              3.0           9.4     6.1
IUD                 0.0            0.0              0.0           0.0     0.0
Condom             18.5           18.5             25.4          21.9    20.2
Diaphragm           0.8            5.9             13.4          15.6     6.4
Withdrawal          4.0               3.4          6.0            3.1     4.1
Jelly               4.0               4.2          7.5            6.3     5.0
Foam                0.0               1.7          1.5            3.1     1.2
Suppository         1.6               3.4          4.5            0.0     2.6
Rhythm              0.8               0.8          1.5            6.3     1.5
Douche             12.1            8.4             9.0           12.5    10.2
Other               0.0            0.0             0.0            0.0     0.0
None               39.9           42.9            28.4           21.9    42.7

(n)                (124)          (119)             (67)          (32)   (342)


                                Wife Aged    45
P ill               0.0               3.0           0.0           0.0     0.6
IUD                 1.0            0.0              0.0           0.0     0.6
Condom              8.2           15.2             10.0          35.3    12.6
Diaphragm           2.1            3.0             15.0           0.0     3.6
Withdrawal          1.0            0.0              0.0           0.0     0.6
Jelly               3.1            3.0             10.0           0.0     3.6
Foam                0.0            3.0              0.0           0.0     0.6
Suppository         0.0               0.0           5.0           0.0     0.6
Rhythm              0.0            3.0              0.0           0.0     0.6
Douche             19.6           21.2              5.0          11.8    17.4
Other               0.0            0.0              0.0           0.0     0.0
None               64. 9          48.5             55.0          52.9    59.3

(n)                 (97)              (33)          (20)          (17)   (167)




                                                                                 S
                            Appendix Table 2c

         Frequency Distribution of Best Contraceptive Method Ever Used
                     by Education for White Catholic Women



                                    —       Education_of_Wife    ______
Method                              9—11             12           13      Total


                                  Wife Aged 35—44

Pill                6.6            10.4              5.5         5.0       6.7
IUD                 0.0             0.0              0.5         1.7       0.4
Condom              9.8            25.5             17.4        18.3      18.4
Diaphragm           1.6             5.7              8.3         3.3       6.1
Withdrawal         21.3            11.3              6.9         5.0       9.7
Jelly               3.3             1.9              0.0         3.3       1.3
Foam                0.0             0.9              0.0         1.7       0.4
Suppository         0.0             1.9              1.4         0.0       1.1
Rhythm             13.1            16.0             35.8        38.3      28.3
Douche              6.6             0.9              2.3         1.7       2.5
Other               0.0             0.0              0.0         0.0       0.0
None               37.7            25.5             22.0        21.7      24.9

(n)                 (61)            (106)           (218)        (60)     (445)


                                  Wife Aged 45—54

Pill                0.0             0.0              1.6         0.0       0.6
IUD                 0.0             0.0              0.0         0.0       0.0
Condom             14.6            17.9             27.9        26.7      21.5
Diaphragm           6.3             5.1              9.8         0.0       6.7
Withdtawal          6.3            15.4              6.6        13.3       9.2
Jelly               2.1             0.0              0.0         6.7       1.2
Foam                0.0             0.0              0.0         0.0       0.0
Suppository         0.0             0.0              0.0         0.0       0.0
Rhythm             10.4            15.4             19.7        13.3      15.3
Douche             10.4             5.1              3.3         0.0       5.5
Other               O'..O
                                    O.Q              1.6         0.0       0.6
None               50.0            41.0             29.5        40.0      39.3

(n)                 (48)            (39)             (61)        (15)     (163)
                              i.3ihllography




Becker, Gary S., "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal,
                                                                     -
   Vol. 75, September 1965, pp. 493—517.

Becker, Gary S.  "A Theory of Marriage:Part I,' Journal of Political
   Economy, Vol. 81, No. 4, July/August 1973.

Ben—Porath, Yoram, "Economic Analysis of Fertility in Israel: Point and
   Counterpoint," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No.2, Part II,
   March/April 1973, pp. s202—233.

Bumpass, Larry and Charles F. Westoff, "The 'Perfect Contraceptive' Popu—
   lation," Science,   Vol.   169, No. 3951, September 18, 1970, pp. 1177—1182.

Cain, Glen G., "Issues in the Economics of a Population Policy for the
   United States," American Economic Review, 61, (May, 1971), pp.4O8—417.

Heckman, James and Robert J. Willis , "Estimation of a Stochastic Model of
   Reproduction:An Econometric Approach,"NBER Conference on Research in
   Income and Wealth, November 1973, mimeo.

Henry, L., "La Feondite' Natureile, Observation, The"orie, Resultats,"Popu—
   lation 16 , 1961, pp. 27—48 and 261—282.

Jam, A,K., "Predicting Duration—Specific Averages and Variances of Live
   Births: Application of a Stochastic Model of Human Reproduction," 1968
   Social Statistics Section, Troceedings of the American Statistical
   sociation, pp. 248—255.

Keeley, Michael C., "A Model of Marital Formation: The Determinants of the
   Optimal Age at First Marriage," mimeo, University of Chicago, August 27,
   1973.

Kelly, Allen C., "Demographic Changes and American Economic Development:
   Past, Present and Future," U.S. Commission on Population Growth and the
   American Future, Economic_Aspects of Population Growth, (ed,) Morss and
   Reed, Vol. II, 1972, Government Printing Office, pp. 9—43.

Keyfitz, Nathan, "How Birth Control Affects Births," Social Biology,    June   1971.

Kramer, Marcia, Ph.D. thesis in progress on the demand for legal abortion
   in New York City, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1973.

Kuznets, Simon, "Population Change and Aggregate Output," Demographic and
   Economic Change in Developed Countries, National Bureau of Economic
   Research, Princeton University Press, 1960, pp. 324—351.

Lancaster, Kelvin J,, "A New Approach to Consumer Theory," Journal    of_Political
   Economy, Vol. 74, April 1966, pp. 132—157.

Lindert, Peter H., "The Relative Cost of American Children," Discussion
   Paper Series Economic History, The University of Wisconsin, Madison, FH
   73—18, March 1973.
    Michael, Robert T., "Education and the Derived Demand for Children",
S       Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 2, Part II, March/April
             1973,   pp. 128—164.

    Michael, Robert T. and Edward P. Lazear, "On the Shadow Price of Children",
         presented at the 1971 meetings of the Econometric Society, New
         Orleans,       Louisiana, December 1971.
    Michael, Robert T. and Gary S. Becker, "On the New Theory of Consumer
        Behavior", Swedish Journal of Economics, No. 4, 1973 (forthcoming).
    Mincer, Jacob, "Market Prices, Opportunity Costs, and Income Effects",
        in Measurement in Economics: Studies in Mathematical Economics and
        Econometrics in Memory of Yehuda Cnfe1d, Stanford, 1963.
    Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek, "Family Investments in Human Capital:
        Earnings of Women", Journal of Political Economy, 1974 (forthcoming).
    Perrin, Edward and Mmdcl C. Sheps, "Human Reproduction: A Stochastic
         Process", Biometrics, Vol. 20, March 1964, pp. 28—45.
    Potter, R. G., "Births Averted by Contraception: An Approach Through
         Renewal Theory", Theoretical Population Biology, Vol. 1, 1970,
         pp. 251—272.

    Potter, R. G., "Births Averted by Induced Abortion: An Applkcation of
         Renewal Theory", Theoretical Population Biology, Vol. 3, 1972,
         pp. 69-86.

    Potter,a. G. and J. M. Sakoda, "Family Planning and Fecundity",
         Population Studies, Vol. XX, No. 3, 1967, pp. 311-328.
    Reed, Ritchie H. and Susan McIntosh, "Cost of Children", U. S. Commission
         on Population Growth and the American Future, Economic Aspects of
         Population Growth,         Vol. II, U. S. Government Printing   Office, 1972,
         pp. 333 — 350.

    Ryder, Norman B. and Charles F. Westoff, Reproduction in the United
         States, 1965, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971.

    Ryder, Norman B., "Time Series of Pill and IUD Use: United States,
         1961-1970", Studies in Family Planning, Vol. 3, No. 10, October 1972,
         The Population Council.

    Ryder, Norman B. and Charles F. Westoff, "Wanted and Unwanted Fertility
         in the United States: 1965 and 1970", U. S. Commission on Population
         Growth and the American Future, Demographic and Social Aspects of
         Population Growth, Vol. I, U. S. Government Printing Office, 1972.

    Ryder, Norman B.,  "Contraceptive Failure in the United States", Family
         Planning Perspectives, Vol. 5, No. 3, Summer 1973, pp. 133—144.
                                     — il_i   —




Sanderson, Warren and Robert J. Willis, "Eoonomic Models of Fertility:
     Some Examples and Implications", in New Directions in Economic
     Research, National Bureau of Economic Research 51st Annual Report,
     NBER Inc., September 1971.

Schultz, Theodore W. (ed.), New Economic Approaches to Fertility, NBER,
     Conference Volume OC #6, 1973 (printed as Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol. 81, No. 2, Part II, March/April 1973).
Schultz,    Theodore W. (ed.), Marriage, Family Human Capital and Fertility,
     NBER, Conference Volume OC #7,   1974, forthcoming (printed as Journal
     of Political     Economy, Vol. 82, No. 2, Part II, March/April 1974,
     forthcoming).

Sheps, Minde]. C., "On the Time Required      for Conception", Population Studies,
     Vol.   18, 1964, pp. 85-97.
Sheps, Mindel C. and Edward B. Perrin, "Further Results from a Human
    Fertility Model with a Variety of Pregnancy Outcomes", Human Biology,
    Vol. 38, No. 3, September 1966, pp. 180—193.

Taeuber, Irene    B., "Growth of the Population of the United States in the
    Twentieth     Century", U. S. Commission on Population Growth and the
     American Future, Demographic and Social Aspects of Population Growth,
     Vol. I, U. S. Government Printing Office, 1972, pp. 17-84.
Tietze, Christopher, "The Clinical Effectiveness of Contraceptive Methods",
     American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vol. 78, September 1959,
     pp. 650—656.

Tietze, Christopher, "Probability of Pregnancy Resulting from a Single
     Unprotected Coitus", Fertility and Sterility, Vol. 11, No. 5, September/
     October 1960, pp. 485—488.
Tietze, christopher, "The Use-Effectiveness of Contraceptive Methods", in
     Research in Family Planning, edited by Clyde V. Kiser, Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 1962.
Westoff, Charles F. and Robert Parke, Jr. (eds.), U. S. Commission on
     Population Growth and the American Future, Demographic and Social
     Aspects of Population Growth, Volume I       of Commission Research
     Reports, Washington, D.C., U. S. Government Printing Office, 1972.

Willis, Robert J., "A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility
     Behavior", Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 2, Part II,
     March/April 1973, pp. sl4 - s64.

Willis, Robert    J., "The Economic Determinants Of Fertility Behavior",


                                                                                     .
     Ph.   D.   dissertation, University of Washington,   1971.
