                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            MIGRATION FLOWS AND THEIR DETERMINANTS:
           A COI€AflTIVE STUDY OF INTERNAL MIGRATION
                     IN ITALY AND THE U.S.A.

                      Swarnjit   S. Arora*




                 Working Paper No.       26




 COMPUTER RESEARCH CENTER FOR ECONOMICS AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
           National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                     575 Technology Square
                 Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139



                          January 1974



                 Preliminary: not for    quotation
 NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
 numbers for coucuents only. They should not be quoted without
 written permission.

 This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
 publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for
 approval by the Board of Directors.


* NEER Computer Research Center and University of Wisconsin,
  Milwaukee. Research supported in part by National Science
  Foundation Grant GJ—1154X2 to the National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.
                              Abstract


This paper has two goals: first, to describe a theoretical model
which derives relationships among migration decisions explicitly
from utility maximization under uncertainty; and second, to examine
why nations vary in their internal migration. To explain variation
in internal migration, we hypothesize that the degree of monetization
and industrialization of an economy is inversely related to the family
cohesiveness; hence, a given percentage increase in relative income
will have higher migratory effect in a relatively more monetized
economy. The availability of higher initial information and better
transportation systems in these economies strongly complement this
effect. These typotheses are confirmed by estimates based on the
U.S. and Italian data.




                           Acknowledgments


A major portion of this research was done during the author's stay,
as a Research Fellow, at the NBER Computer Research Center for
Economics and Management Science. Special thanks are due to
Professors Murray Brown, Edwin Kuh, and Richard Penman for their
valuable comments and suggestions. The estimation for this paper
was done at the NBER Computer Research Center using the TROLL system.
An earlier version of this paper was presented at Econometric Society
meetings, December 1972.
                            Contents


Section One: Introduction                                   .   .. 1
Section Two: Migration Under Uncertainty                        ..    2

Section Three: Aggregation Procedure and Estimation Results .   . 10
Section Four: Interpretation of the Results                     .    15

Section Five: Conclusion                                        .    16

References                                                      .    17
Section One: Introduction

     Henry Shryock in his monumental work, Population Mobility Within the

United States stated that:

 -
     "One frequently reads statements in popular publications or
     even in the literature of Social Science, that Americans are
     the most mobile people in the world and that they are more
     mobile now than ever before in their history. Actually sta-
     tistics do not exist to prove or disprove these statements."
     (23, p. 116).

     In the last few years, however, statistics that can be used to answer

these questions have become available. Long (13) using the rate of resi-

dential mobility i.e., the probability of changing house or usual address

during an interval of one year, concludes that the expected number of moves

for an American during his expected life time are 13.64. Similarly, a

resident of England and Wales could anticipate 8.35 moves over his expected

life time and a resident of Japan could anticipate 4.90 moves over his life

time. Since Professor Long was mainly concerned with the problem of measuring

volume of geographical mobility that would permit comparison between countries,

he does not provide any answer to a question, "Why nations vary in the amount

of geographic mobility within their borders?" In this paper we will attempt

to answer this question.

     This paper has two main goals. First, to describe a theoretical model

which derives relationships involving migration decisions explicitly from

utility maximization under uncertainty, and second, to examine why nations

vary in their internal migration) Section two of this paper deals with the


    an explanation of migratory behavior, hypotheses of economic incentives
arising from disequilibra across the spatially separated labor markets, imply
some theoretical concern, but are not derived explicitly from any body of
organized theory. See Lowry (14), Sjaastad (24), Ravenstein (19) and Bowles (5).
                                                                            2


first goal. Section three deals with the proper specification of this

model in an estimable form and its estimate using the data on inter—regional

migration for the U.S. and Italy. To explain variation in the internal

migration (our second goal) we hypothesize that the degree of monetization

and industrialization of an economy is inversely related to the family

cohesiveness; hence, a given percentage increase in relative income will

have higher migratory effect in relatively more monetized economy. The

availability of higher initial information and better transportation system

in these economies strongly complement this effect. These hypotheses are

confined by the estimates based on the U.S. and Italian data and are dis-

cussed in section four. Concluding remarks are presented in section five.


                  Section Two: Migration Under Uncertainty2

        Let us begin with a potential migrant who is located in region i and

who plans to move to some other region, say, j.        If he remains in region 1,

the present value of the expected real income V', over the planning period

of P years is:

                   *
(2.1)             V. 0 (y./Ci.)e             dt



where        is the expected value of his earnings in region i at time t,

is   the cost of living index for region i and        is   the discount rate associ-

ated with region i.5

        If he were to move to region j, the present value of the expected real

income V., over the planning period P is:


(2.2)             V; =   ?               -        e        dt

                             [(Y./cl.)

2For a thorough discussion of migration under uncertainty, see Arora (1)
and Arora and Brown (2).
                                                                                    3


where, as before, y is the expected value of his earnings in region j                       at
time t,          is   the cost of living index for region j,            is the discount

rate associated with region j        and      is       the fixed cost of moving from

region i to j plus the cost of relocation.3 Clearly, C2 is non zero

but will only be realized if he actually moves to region                    Relationships

(2.1) and (2.2) assume that a) each migrant has full information concerning

the employment situation in the initial and the terminal location and b) there

is no uncertainty involved with respect to job availability and migrant is

sure to be gainfully employed at the prevailing real wage rate in the initial

and the terminal location. To take these uncertainty factors into account,
                                              *
we can write the corresponding equations for V. under uncertainty as follows:



(2.3)                  =   ?    P(X) [Y.ICi.)
                                                   —

                                                        C2ijt]e_djt
                                                                       dt

where P(A) is the probability  of having a job in region j at period t.5
It is a function of an information variable, X, which depends upon initial
information obtained from friends and relatives and the               information, which is

a   function of time, obtained after migrating to the terminal location.6


3Our underlying behavior model is formulated with reference to permanent
income theory rather than to the theory of wage differentials. See also
Raimon    (18)

tFollowing Larry Sjaastad, we assume that cost of relocation in region j
includes direct monetary outlays incurred in the course of relocation for
such items as food, shelter and transportation as non—monetary aspects to
the cost of resettling such as psychic cost, which reflects the individual's
reluctance to leave familiar surroundings, friends and relatives. See                   -

Sjaastad,    Larry 22.     cit. pp. 84—85

5We   assume that there is no uncertainty involved with income earned at
home.     This assumption can be easily relaxed. See Todaro (28).
61n Todaro's model information gained after locating in region j plays no
part. In his model selection procedure is random, but in our model selection
procedure    is non—random and probability of being         selected is a function of
his   stay. Todaro .22• cit., p. 148, fn.     8.
                                                                          4



p(A) has the following properties:


(2.4)            p(X0) = p(A0)>O

(2.5)            p(X,) =          1

                                      3p(X )
                 axt                                                -
(2.6)                     Oand                  >   0     .

                   t
                 —b-—>                 ax
                                            t
We can easily conceive of a situation under which the income differentials

(V —         in the certainty case is positive, while the expected differentials
        V)
(V — V1), in the uncertainty case is negative.7

        Let P be the time he plans to spend in region i and P. the time he

plans to spend in region j such that


(2.7)                        =P

The present value of the expected real income in region i over the time

period P1 is


(2.8)             V1 =   ?i   (Y./Cii)e6it              dt.


Similarly, the present value of the expected real income in region j      over

the time period P is


(2.9)             V. =   f    P(x)(Yt/C1jt —              c21)e   j dt.


Clearly V and V. are the maximum values of V. and V, respectively.

        The problem for the potential migrant is to derive demand equations for

   and P (if he moves). From another point of view, one could regard the




7For the proof of this preposition see Arora, Swarnjit S. and Murray Brown,
22  cit. pp. 9—11.
                                                                                          5


problem as the derivation of offer curves for tine spent in i and j. We

assume that the potential migrant maximizes his utility


(2.10)           U =
                        U(Av., AJV)

Subject to constraint        +     = F; A. and A are the factors of augmentation.

For example, these factors could reflect degree or urbanization, the quality

of life at location i and j respectively.8

     Because of the probability term involved in the integral in (2.9), the

expression for      and P. are very complicated. To illustrate our point, we

will consider a simple example, in which we assume that the real income

(net of relocation cost in region j) is expected to grow at constant rates

   and S. in the location i and j, respectively, and that the probability
                                                       —A
function has a special form p(A) = (l—e                     t); At as before, is the sum   of
information available from friends and relatives etc., say a0, plus the

information procurred by staying at the new location, say a1; i.e.,

   + a1. Let us further assume that 0< ao' (11< 1. At time t =                       0,         =

l_ea0    and at time T =    , p(X)    =   1.
     If y be the real value of expected income in the initial period and

   be the rate of growth of this income, we can write (2.8) as


(2.11)           V.=f
                         pi —
                             y.   e            e
                                                   6it        dt.


Integrating (2.11) over the range 0 to P. we have:


(2.12)              =             (ei     -
                                               6.)P.—        1)




Applying exponential expansions we get:

                        —
                                  —2
                                  y0P(S            —
                                                                  —
                                                                      3
                                                                           — 6.) 2
(2.13)           V1 =   y0P1 +            2!                 + y0         3!




8See Somermeyer (25) and Burmeister and Dobell (7).
                                                                                                          6



Now both S, the rate of growth of real income, and ó, the discount rate,

lie between zero and one. If S 6] then:


(2.14)                =



         =        the                                  —       6.)   and its powers are of the
But if                    terms containing

second order of smalls. Hence, for all practical purposes, we shall assume

that (2.14) holds.

     Using the expressions for the probability function and for the rate of

growth of real income, the present value of the expected income (net of the

relocation cost) in the terminal location over the period P. is:

                 —         1                 —(a0+u1t) —                  6   t—ó.t
(2.15)           V. =          (1   —    e                 )          e                    dt



where     is the real value of the expected income in the period zero.

On simplifying we get:



(2.16)                =
                          jo            e    (s -6)t   dt -               e
                                                                              -a0
                                                                                     4•         e
                                                                                                    (5.-a1-6.)t
                                                                                                                  dt


Integrating (2.16) over the range P. to P we have:



(2.17)           v. =
                               io
                               —                                      e
                                                                                    -S.)
                  j
                          (6                 [e                                             P.J




             -        jO e0
                 (Si_al_Si)
                                             {e'_                               e    (8_al_6J)P
                                                                                             7



Applying exponential expansions we get:


                                                           —
                   —                                   1
(2.18)             V. =          P   +                                +
                    J                             2!



                                             y0P?(8. —6W)
                           0                      2!


                                     r                 2         3

                        -y.0 l-a0+—9--+—---
                                    2!  3!




           r       2        -
                                 a1
                                         -   6)                       P2 (        - a1   -
                                                  +            —P.1          .1




           L               2!                                                     2



      Following the same arguments as for V1 in (2.14), we can say that the

terms containing (. — 6.) and its powers, (B. —6 —a1) and its powers,

and   the term a2 and      its higher powers are of the second order of smalls.

An   approximate   expression for                 is:



(2.19)                                        (1 — "O
                          37j0 j —                    j0 j

or


(2.20)             V =a         37j0 j

The first term on the right hand side of (2.19) represents real income

under certainty (to a first order approximation) and the second term (again

to the first order approximation) represents real income lost due to un-

certainty.
                                                                                                              8



       In equations (2.14) and (2.20) 31i0 and                          are independent of                    and

     respectively. If we first assume that the utility function is of a

CES type we can     write
                                                                                                            11
                                                  —                                —a     -a
(2.21)              U                                  +                                               -aja
                         [k
                              Ai       io i                 (l-k)A3 a0


where k is the intensity parameter —— that                     is, the larger is k relative to

(1—k), ceteris paribus, the more utility is yielded by A1V1 relative to

A.V.. It is defined in the interval 0 C                 k      <   land       a =             is   the

elasticity of substitution of V1 for V. It is important to note that to

allow either P or P. to be zero and still allow for positive utility (i.e.,

U(A±Vi 0)       0 and U(0, AV) 0) we must assume that a >                                           In   short,

if   the potential migrant chooses to spend all of the planning period.in one

location, then the      elasticity of substitution must exceed unity.
       Maximizing (2.2.) subject to P =                    +   P.,   we get:
                            a          a—l      a—l —          a—l
                        (1—k) A.          a4.
(222) P=
       i                                 a—l          a—i +                  a—i
                                                                                              P
                    (lk)a Aa a0                                    kaA

and

                                a a—l            a—i
                               kA.
(2.23)       Pi =       a
                    (1—k) A. a—i
                                  1   lu
                                          a—l         ri + kaA.              a—i        a—i



Assuming    as before that a       >   1, we can show

             aP.         P               SI'.          aP               a".               ar'.

(2.24)              > 0, —i- > 0,               > 0, —i        >   0,              c 0,            >   0.
                         aA4                                            .'
                           -             3Qfl




9
    See Brown and Helen (6).
                                                                                   9



Similarly



(2.25)          >   0,
                         ap
                              >
                                     i.
                                  0, —i > 0,   —ap.
                                                      c   0, _    c 0, —i <   0.
                                                            3jo

The relations in (2.24) indicate that the amount of time an individual plans

to stay in region j varies directly with:


(i)      the initial value of the expected real income in region j,

(ii)     the factors of augmentation in region j,

(iii) the total planning period

(iv)     the initial information, a0. This indicates that the initial

         information is important at the time of decision making to migrate.

         The information obtained after migrating, a1, will help in getting

         a job, but it is of secondary importance in the decision to move.

         Note, a1 does not appear in the final expression for V. in (2.19).

         Also term for initial information, a0 (to the first order approxima-

         tion) is independent of the form of the probability function assumed.

       His planned period of stay in region j varies inversely with:

(i)      the real value of the present income in region i,

(ii)     the factors of augmentation in region i.

       Similar interpretations can be give to the relation (2.25).

       It is a simple matter to generalize the model to many regions by

specifying an S Branch utility function (cf. Brown—Heien, op. cit.). In

that case, the estimating form is identical to the one we have specified.

However, this assumes that the elasticity of substitution between any pair

of regions is identical to that of any other pair. Clearly, this is not as

general as one would like. Thus, we have experimented with more general

utility functions (S1 and            ——   namely, we have assumed that the original
region is in one branch, while all other regions are in a second branch.
                                                                                            10


There is no difficulty in deriving demand equations from that specification,

but they are very difficult to estimate. It is our feeling, however, that

the generalization of the present model should proceed in a different

direction, i.e., toward a dynamic specification, so that decisions to move

at time t are not independent of economic conditions occurring at t—l, etc.


          Section Three: Aggregation Procedure and Estimation Results


          From Equation (2.22) and (2.23) the nth potential migrant's demand

equation for his planned stay in region j under uncertainty is:

                                     o—l               a—i             ol
(3 1) P          [l—kt 'njO1                   1aJ_i          a
             nj LkJL            H              LAnj_
                                                               njO
                              mO

                              (n =    1,       2, .. . ,   N).10


where, to repeat                           -




            is the time that the nth potential migrant in region i plans to
1'nj
            spend in region j

            is the value of the real income expected by the nth migrant in

            region j in the initial period

            are the factors of attractiveness for the nth migrant in region
Ani

nj0 is the amount of initial information possessed by nth migrant about

            region j

           Distance between region i and region j
Di.

P           is the total planning period of nth migrant such that P = P    + P
 n                                                                n     ni     nj



10                        —
     In   order to make         (which is net of relocation cost in equation (2.2)
conceptually comparable to                      we add the relocation COSt   to           and treat
                                                                                  3'njO
Dii. the distance variable, as a proxy for the relocation costs.
                                                                            11



1'ni' >'niO and A1 are the corresponding variables for region i and the sub-

script n refers to the value of nth micro unit in region i and n = 1, 2,



     Clearly equation (3.1) is linear in logarithms. Due to the specific

form of the utility function, the coefficients of 'njO "'niü' Ani/Ani and

     are identical, but in a more general model these coefficients may

differ. To obtain a regional demand equation we aggregate (3.1) over all

n, n =   1, 2, ..., N.    The aggregation procedure for various variables and

their proxies are described below.


     Variables P . and P
                  flJ        n].

     Let us assume that nth individual has a planning period of P years;

                                        ni years
of this period he plans to spend P .             in region I and P   years in
                                                                  nj

region J such that P + "nj =       P.     The total planned stay in region j of all N

                   N
individuals is     Z nj and the number equivalent of people migrating to
                  nl                         N
region j for the planning period P is L P./F. We take M.4, the number
                                            n1
of people actually migrating from region i to region j, as a proxy variable

for it. Similarly, the equivalent number of people from region i planning to
                         N
stay in region i is E P i/P. We take M., the actual population after

migration as a proxy for this variable.

     Real Income Variables y    and y
                            njO       niO

     In the individual case, each potential migrant evaluates the earning

differentials he expects between regions. The level of his nominal earn-

ings at each site is related to his education level and his skills. In the

aggregate, however, the total reaction of the group is sum of all the

individual reactions to their respective earning differentials between the

regions. The average earning differentials at the regional level are used
                                                                         12



as a proxy for these variables." The bias resulting from average rather

than geometric means is assumed to be of a random nature.


    Augmentation Variables A . and A
                            ni.     nj

    These variables reflect the psychic returns associated with region i

and region j. This clearly is a positive attraction of "city lights" and

(possibly) climate but also the economic attractiveness of more developed

regions offering better job opportunities. These psychical reasons to

move and returns from move vary from person to person. In the aggregate,

per capita local government expenditures on health, highways, welfare,

police, etc. are taken as proxy for these factorsJ2


     Initial Information Variable a
                                   njO

     Migration from region i to region j is a function of the initial infor-

mation that potential migrants may obtain from friends, relatives and other

media. Due to the non—availability of data on these items, we use information

about the labor market, i.e., percentage of labor force employed, as a proxy

variable.


     Distance Variable D.

     Distance is used as a proxy for the money cost o moving and relocation.

At the aggregate level, the relevant measure of it should ideally take into

account the spatial distribution of the population in both the origin and the

terminal location. Therefore, it is necessary to choose a point in a region



11Note that even if the region j has a higher average income than region i,
the variation around these average incomes may imply that for some people
region i offers better income opportunities than region j. Thus it is
possible to have bidirectional flows. See also Vanderkamp (34).

12Use of per capita local government expenditure as a proxy for the factors of
augmentation may be questionable. It may reflect a poor level of living rather
than high level. In absence of any better index, we will use this but we cannot
put much faith in this proxy. This may be one of the reasons for the coefficient
                                                                                      13


which approximates the geographic centre of a region. In the case of the

U.S. •   due to the physical compactness of the Standard Metropolitan Statis-

tical Areas (SMSA's), the distance between main cities of the SMSA           is   taken

as a proxy for it and in the case of Italy the distance between main cities

of the region is taken as a proxy for it.

         To summarize the discussion of this section, the aggregate model can

•be written as:


                                        y        A
(3.2)        log M. =        + 6 log    -+ 6 log 1+ i5 log
                                                  1



            64 log ID.. +
                            65 log M.                 (i, j   1, 2,   ...,   N,   i        j)



where,

Mi.
             is the number of people migrating from region i to region j


             is the average real earnings in region i
yj
             is the per capita local government expenditure on health, welfare,
             police, etc., in region j

             is   the percentage of labor force employed in region j

             is   the distance between region i and region j

             is the population of region i
Mi

      and Ai are the corresponding variables for region i and

                  2' ..., 65 are the coefficients to be estimated.


Estimation Results for U.S.

       Using the data on interregional gross migration flows for the 19 SMSA's

(19 x 18 observations), the ordinary least square estimate of (3.2) is:
                                                                              14


                        y/c            A
        log M = 2.83 log , + 0.154 log                       0.80   log a
                      (0.70)                 (0.103)   i (0.17)
(3.3)
                  -   0.505 log D. + 0.94 log M.              R2 = 0.9810
                                    ].j
                      (0.062)              (0.081)


Figures in the parentheses are the standard errors.13


Estimation Results for Italy

        Using the data on interregional gross migration flows for the 19 regions

(19 xiS observations), the ordinary least square estimates of (3.2) is:


                                   y4/c.               A4
        log M.
             13
                  =   0.72    log , + 0.084 log             + 0.11 log a.
                                                                         Oj
                      (0.123)    'i i (0.163)           i (0.068)

(3.4)
                  — 1.24        log Di + 0.89 log M.          R2 = .9711
                      (0.088)              (0.070)


Figures in parentheses are standard errorsJ4



13Data on cost of living limits our sample to 19 SMSA. Data on M.

were called from the U.S. Census of Population, 1960, Final Report PC(2)—C,
Mobility for Metropolitan Areas, pp. 16—31. Data on nominal earnings were
taken from the U.S. Census of Population, 1960, United States Summary,
Vol. 1, Part 1, pp. 796—797. Data on cost of living for 19 large cities,
for the year 1959 were taken from the Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
and Statistics and published in the Monthly Labor Review, August 1960. Data
on unemployment rate (i00—E) for the year 1958 were taken from Manpower Report
of the President, 1963, Table D—6, pp. 174—176. Data on distance D, highway
milage were taken from Sun's World Almanac and Book of Facts. Data on the
proxy for factors of augmentation, i.e., local government expenditure, were
taken from the U.S. Bureau of the Census Report, Compendium of City Government
Finances, An Annual Report.


4Data for the Italian Model were collected from Un Modello Econometrico
Di Sviluppo Nazionale—Regionale Per L'Italia, Volume 2, La Quantificazione
Dei Dati Di Base Del Modello Econometrico, published by Centro di studi
e piani economici, Rome, Italy.
                                                                           15


       Section Four: Interpretation of the Results

       ill   independent   variables (except factors of augmentation) in the

estimated model for the U.S. and Italy are significant at 0.01 level of

confidence. Also, all of them are of the signs consistent with those expected

from   a priorz reasoning. Migration from region I to region j is encouraged
by relatively high earnings in j, higher initial information about region j
and the size of the population in region i, and it is discouraged by greater
distance between i and j.

       The elasticity of migration from region I to region j with respect to

relative real income in region j and i represents a potential migrant's

reaction to interregional earnings differentials; as such it can be regarded

as an indicator of development of a country. Developed countries are cus-

tomarily associated with higher industrialization and monetization, and less

family cohesiveness than the developing countries; therefore, there would

be relatively larger movement in response to regional income differentials

in developed countries as compared to the less developed countries. This

hypothesis is    confirmed by the estimate of income elasticity of migration
for   the U.S. (2.83) and for Italy (0.72).

       In this model, the probability of getting a job is a function of the

initial information and the information gained by staying in the terminal

location. But as shown in section two above, only the initial information

available at the time of decision making is of primary concern to the poten-

tial migrant, information obtained after moving will help in procuring a job,

but it is of secondary importance in the decision to move. Comparison of

statistics on the number of employment exchanges and advertisement expendi-

ture on "Help Wanted" in the U.S. and Italy reveals that the flow of infor-

mation is much higher in the U.S. as compared to Italy. Our estimation of

the information elasticity of migration for the U.S. (0.80) and for Italy

(0.11) confirms this hypothesis.
                                                                  16

     The partial elasticity of migration with respect to base population Is

0.94 for the U.S. and 0.89 for Italy. These coefficients do not differ

significantly from each other and, moreover, they are close to one. In the

overpopulated countries one would expect this coefficient to exceed unity.

Clearly, the United States and Italy are not overpopulated in this sense.

     Finally, the partial elasticity of migration with respect to distance

is —0.505 for the U.S. and —1.237 in Italy. Distance exerts a frictional

force and tends to reduce migration. The sign of this coefficient is nega-

tive for both countries but the magnitude is quite different. It seems that

the distance creates a relatively greater hindrance to migration in Italy

•than that to the migration in the U.S. This may be due to better highways and

the transportation system in the U.S.


     Section Five: Conclusion

     To summarize our findings, we see that due to the combined effect of better

transportation system, availability of higher initial information and perhaps

weaker family ties, Americans, on the average, tend to be more mobile than

the Italians. Also, due to relatively smaller resistance due to distance,

Americans have a much wider horizon to choose from and they migrate to distant

places. On the other hand, Italians seem to migrate over relatively short

distances. Before we conclude, one word of caution is in order. Due to

availability of very scanty data, these results are more of an indicative

rather than a definitive nature. But the reasonableness of the estimates is

encouraging for further development along these lines.
                                                                                 17

                                      REFERENCES


 [1]   Arora, Swarnjit S. (1971): "Error Components and Multipolar Human Flow
            Models", an unpublished Ph.D. thesis submitted to tne Department of
            Economics, State University of New York at Buffalo.

 [2]   _________________ and Murray Brown (1971): "A Utility Maximization
            Approach to Multipolar Migration Under Uncertainty", Discussion Paper
            No. 209, Department of Economics, State University of New York at Buffalo.

 [31   Becker, A. (1963): "Investment in Human   Capital",   Journal of Political
            Economy, LXX, pp. 9—49.

 [4] Blanco, Cecely (1963): "The Determinants of Interstate Population Movements",
          The Journal of Regional Science, V, pp. 77—84.

 [5] Bowles, Samuel (1970): "Migration as Investment: Empirical Tests of Human
           Investment Approach to Geographical Mobility", The Review of Economics
          and Statistics, Lll, pp. 356—62.

 [6] Brown, Murray and Dale M. Heien (1972): "The S Branch Utility Tree, A
          Generalization of the Linear Expenditure System", Econometrica, Vol. 40,
            No. 3.

 [7] Burmeister, E. and R. A. Dobell: Mathematical Theories of Economic Growth,
           The Macmillan Company/Collier Macmillan Limited, London.

 [8] Fabricant, Ruth (1970): "An Expectational Model of Migration", Journal of
           Regional Science, 10, pp. 13—24.

 [9] Gallaway, Lowell (1969): Geographic Labor Mobility in the United States
           1957 to 1960, Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Office.

[10] Greenwood, Michael J. (1969): "An Analysis of the Determinants of
          Geographic Labor Mobility in the United States", The Review of Economics
          and Statistics, Li, pp. 189—94.

[11] Isard, Walter (1960): Methods of Regional Analysis: An       Introduction   to -
           Regional Science, Chapter 11, M.I.T. Press, Boston..
[12] Lansing, John B. and Eva Mueller (1967): The Geographic Mobility of Labor,
          Ann Arbour, Survey Research Centre, Institute for Social Research.

[13] Long, Larry H. (1970): "On Measuring Geographic Mobility", Journal of
          American Statistical Association, Vol. 65, pp. 1195—1203.

[14] Lowry, I. 5. (1966): Migration and Metropolitan Growth: Two       Analytical
          Models, Chandler Publishing House, New York.

[15] Manglam, J. J. (1962): A Guide to Migration Literature in Englishl955—
          1962, Lexington, University of Kentucky Press.

[16] Nelson, P. (1959): "Migration, Real Income and Information", Journal of
           Regional Science, 1, pp. 43—74.
                                                                             18

[17] Rabinski, J. S. (1970): Real Earnings and the Present Value of Future
           Earnings in a Model of Human Migration, An Unpublished Thesis,
           Department of Economics, University of Illinois, Urbana.

[18] Raimon, R. L. (1962): "Interstate Migration and Wage Theory", The
           Review of Economic and Statistics, 44, pp. 428—38.

[19] Ravenstein, E. C. (1885): "The Laws of Migration", The Journal of
           Royal Statistical Society, XLV111, pp. 167—227 and Lii, pp. 241—301.

[20] Renshaw, V. (1970): The Role of Migration in Labor Market Adjustment,
           An Unpublished, Ph.D. Thesis, M.I.T., Boston

[21] Rottenberg, Simon (1956): "On Choice in Labor Markets", Industrial and
           Labor Relation Review, 1X, pp. 183—199.

[22] Schultz, T. W. (1962): "Reflections on Investment in Man", Journal of
          Political Economy, LXX, pp. 1—8.

[23] Shryock, Henry S. Jr. (1964): Population Mobility Within the United States,
           Chicago, University of Chicago Coinunity and Family Study Center,
           p. 116.

[24] Sjaastad, Larry A. (1962): "The Costs and Return of Human Migration",
          Journal of Political Economy, LXX, pp. 80—93.

[25] Someriueyer, W. H. (1970): "Muitipolar Human FlowModels", Regional Science
          Association, Vol. Xxvi, pp. 131—144.

[26] Stouffer, Samuel A. (1960): "Interviewing Opportunities and Competing
          Migrants", Journal of Regional Science, 2, pp. 1—26.

[27] Ter Heide, H. (1963): "Migration Models and Their Significance for
           Population Forecasts", Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, January 1963,
           pp. 56—73.

[28] Todaro, H. P. (1969): "Labor Migration and Unemployment", The American
          Economic Review, Lix, pp. 139—48.

[291 U. S. Department of Commerce, U. S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Population
           1960, Vol. 1. Characteristics of the Population, Part 1, United States
           Summary, U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1964.

[301 U. S. Department of Commerce, U. S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Population
           1960, Subject Reports Mobility for Metropolitan Areas, Final Report
           PC(2)—2C, U. S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1963.

[31] U. S. Department of Commerce, U. S. Bureau of the Census, An Annual Report on
           Compendium of City Government Finances, U. S. Government Printing Office,
           Washington, D.C., 1957—62.

[32] U. S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Monthly Labor Review,
           August, 1960.

[33] U. S. Department of Labor, Manpower Report of the President and a Report on
           Manpower Requirements, Resources, Utilization and Training, U. S.
           Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1963.
                                                                            19


[34] Un Modello Econometrico Di Sviluppo Nazionale — Regionale Per L'Italia,
           Vol. 2, La Quantificazione Dei Data Di Base Del Modello Econometrico,
           published by Centro di studi e piani econoniici, Rome, Italy.

[35] Vanderkamp, John (1969): "Migration Flows and Their Determinants and the
          Effect of Return Migration", Discussion Paper #22, Department of
          Economics, University of British Columbia.

[36] Zucker, A. (1967): "A Note on the Declining Tendency With Age for Investment
           in Human Capital", Journal of Human Resources, 1967.
