                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE TIMING AND SPACING OF BIRTHS AND WOMEN'S
              LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION:
                                         AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

                                Sue Goetz Ross




                       Working Paper No.       30



CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research. Inc.
                 261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                              January   1974

                    Preliminary; Not for Quotation

     NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

     This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.
                                  Tiusl,E OF ((.TENTS


 ListvfTab1es .
 List of Figu:s                                         ,
                                                                     jj
                                                                     iv
 Acknowledgements                                                    v
 I      Introduction                                                 1
          A. The Topic
            B. Suriey of the Literature
II     Theoretical Analysis                                          20
            .     General Framework
            B. SubstItution Effects
             Income Effects
            C.

III    Data and Variables                                        .   40
            A. 1965 National Fertility Study
            B. 1967 National longitudinal Survey
IV     Empirical Findings: Timing                                    52
            A. Primary Samples
            B, Other Samples
V      En;pirical Findings: Spacing.                                 74
            A. Total Interval
            .   Avercvp Intrva1: Nuther of BIrths
            C. Age at Last Birth
VI     Labor Force Participation and the Timing and Spacing
       ofBlrtljs                                                     90
            A.   Introduction
            B. LP Before     B1
            C.   LFP After
VII                                                                  118




      A.         F!FLe LaUor I'orce Participatlc)fl Rate
      B.         Est.iration of 1.rn1ngs Iun.tion
      C.         Two Sta'e Least Siuares Procedure
      D.         Sipp.!emrit. to T.ble 3
      E.         Suppieznt 1o Thbh' Ii
      F.         Supplrr'cnt t' Tah1a; i, 20, and 21
      C.         Sup.1 :iic tc' T2.1lc 3
      If,        (cp.-r:., ,n    ..  Cv.hcj.j cs rcn—Ctic] ICS
      I.         5?Je;nt to T:!.. le i6
}iiogp!ty                                                            166




                                         i
                              LIST OF TABLES
 Table                                                                     Page
 1        Definition of variable names                                      47
 2       Regressions on wife's age in months at first
         birth                                                             53
 3       Regressions on        the nuther of months from leaving
         school      to first birth                                        55
4        Comparison of regressions on               wife's and husband's
         age at first birth                                                60
5        Comparison of regressions on W Age B1, with and
         without husband's age held constant                               61
6        Regressions on interval in months from marriage
         to first birth                                                    63
7        Comparison of regression results using                different
         sub—sets of the primary sample                                    66
8        Comparison of regressions on W Age B1, for
         couples who did and did not receive linancial
         help                                                              70
9        Comparison of regressions for women married only
         once and women married more than once                             72
10       Regressions on the          total    number of months from
         P.
          .1.
                toB it                                                     75
11       Regressions on estimated total interval                           76
12       Regressions on Total mt for other sub—sets                        79
13       Regressions on average interval between successive
         births                                                            83
14       Moan values of several variables by 1/C, with
         t—vaiues for testing significance of difference
         betwen means                                                      85
15       Regressions on the wife's age in months at B                      87
16       Comparison of regressions on Total Int, with and
         dthout W Ag' Mar held constant                                    88
17       Labor force participation rates and transition
         probabilities                                                     92
18       Mein values of se'ieral variables by wife's labor
         force participation                                               94
19       Resiori on th nuriber of years worked between
         cbt.c1 and iarriage                                               98
20       Regressions or th number of years worked between
         narrLag am.! B]                                                   99
21       R.gro;!t.ns or th. nui'l'er of years orked between
         school and B.                                                     100

                                        ii
                     LIST OF TM3LS
                         (cont'd)

                                                          Page
22    Mean values of certain variables for sub—samples     101

23    Regressions on labor force participation after B1    105

24    Regressions on labor force participation between
      B1 andBn                                             108

24a   Mean values of variables, by the woman's labor force
      status between B1 and B                              klO

25    Regressions on the number of   months from B1 to
      labor force entry                                    112
26    Regressions on the number of months from last
      birth to labor force entry                           115
27    Comparison of regressions on Total mt for
                                                           126
      aggregated   and micro—data
28    Total mt for mothers of two to four children,
      by wife's education                                  127




                             u_i.
                     LIST OF FIGURES


No.                                                        Page
1     Average hourly earnings in 1959 for all
      non—farm, white, employed females, by age,
      education,   and   marital status. ......      .     . 26

2     Average hourly earnings in 1959 for all non—farm,
      white, employed malcs, by age, education, and
      marital status .    ....                                 27


3     Predicted timing and spacing of births for couples
      with diffcrent levels of income                      .   33


4     Predicted timing end spacing of births for couples
      with different timing of income receipts                 35



4a    Predicted timing and spacing with different timing
      of income receipts when the point of overtaking
      p recedes B1                                             36
                              ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS



     I. wish to thank my sponsor, Professor Jacob Mincer, for intro—
ducing me to the study of the economics of labor and human resources
and for making useful suggestions throughout my preparation of this
dissertation. The Ford Foundation (through a grant to the National
Bureau of Economic Research for the study of the economics of population),
the National Science Foundation, and the Manpower Administration of
the United States Department of Labor provided financial support
during my graduate program; while I was working on my dissertation,
the   National Bureau made available to me its research facilities,
which were especially helpful.




                                    V
                                                                            1.

                                    CHAPTER I•
                               INTRODUCTION


        A.     The Topic
        This dissertation analyzes the timing and spacing of child-
births within an economic framework. I have attempted to explain
when women in the United States begin child bearing ——        i.e.,   the
"timing" (of the first birth) — and      the   length of the interval they
spend in child bearing ——   i.e.,   the "spacing" of births.
        The timing and spacing decisions have both demographic and
economic significance. In the first instance, they help determine the
size and growth rate of the population; for not only is a postponed
birth less likely to occur but, even if it does occur, its postponement
results in a lower birth rate and a lower population growth rate. For
e:cample, if   each couple achieves the same completed fertility as under
early   timing but experiences these births at a later age, then the length
of a generation ——    the average age of mothers at the births of all
children regardless of birth order ——      increases;   birth rates drop; and

the population grows more slowly.
        The levels of birth rates have obvious direct effects on the
supply of workers when these babies reach the age of entering the labor
force. The age—composition of the labor force at any point'iri time and
the proportion of the population of working age depends on the pattern
of birth rates in the past. A more subtle effect of the pattern of birth
rates on the supply of labor may work through forces in the marriage
market: Since "marriageable age" differs for men and for women, changes
in the number of birtis per year will result later in surpluses of men
or   of •ocn of marriageable age. This causes a change in the proportion
of young persons who are married and alters the average age at marriage;
these affect particularly women's labor force participation.
        The moèt important effect of these fertility decIsions on labor
force participation by ween orera:es directly. In recent years, in
theU.S., mast wcLen have worked ufltil the birth of their fIrst child was
imminent. ?ariy of the weren have rettrned to work after their youngest
child wa of .chooi z or even sooner; thIs is especially true of women
                                                                              2.

with   high levels of education. But, few women work while they still
have small children at home, regardless of their educational attainment.1
Therefore, women's labor force participation depends importantly on when
a woman has her children. This, in turn, depends in part on how many
chIldren she has, since there are physiological limits on how close
together births can occur. Family size or "completed fertility" is already
being studied intensively by economists;2 my research focuses on the timing
and spacing of those births.
         B.     Survey of the Literature
         Most fertility research has focused on completed fertility ——             i.e.,
the number of children born —— rather than on the timing of these births.
The published work in child spacing is dominated by sociologists and
demographers. In general, the work of the former is descriptive in
nature while that of the demographers is directed toward developing
mathematical models with little related empirical te'ting or explaining
purely physiological phenomena.
         Fonald Freedman and Lolacene Coomhs, sociologists who have pro-
duced a series of articles based on the Detroit Area Scudy, describe
the relationships observed between the tempo of farnly growth and income,
asset accumulation, age at iarrIage, religion, employment history, and
other socio—economic variables, although       no testable   hypotheses are
presented and no unifying theory or model is suggested to link together
the   observed phenomena.
       In an article on the effect of current, expected, and relrttive
income on fertility behavior, they reported that current income was not
related to the expected or preferred nuaber of children, but was strongly
rtlated to the timing of events —— to the age at marriage, to the inci-
dence of prentarital pregnar.eIe (PMP), azid to the length of the interval



                AppenJi:   A for supporting evidence for these statements based
on   data from the l9G J.S. Census of Popuizitlon.

         2ee,    for   :rile, •T;rt of     'o1ltc1 Ecnrw: "New Economic
Approaches t Fcrtt -," 'E. W. Schultz_ cd. , vcd       i, no 2 pare Ii (trch/
April 1c73);      h. Roar:.ag, "Th' Lr1c .               rninn of F2rtiiit
in tho Ariculiurl sector e the L!nt,d :es," (unpuaiishad Ph.D. dis—
sertattn, Colu:bti Urversit, 1)73.)
                                                                          3.



from marriage to a birth of a given order.' Women who expected large
increases in family income expected to have more additional children
than other women. At all income levels over $3,000/year, wives who
viewed their family's income as adequate expected more children and
planned to have.them sooner. However, those who felt that their incomes
were higher than the incomes of other families they knew expected or
preferred more children than other women only if the women already had
four or more children.
       A high aspiration to provide material things for ones children
was not a function of income but was associated with •xp.cting fever
additional. children; it was not related to birth intervals. However,
those mothers who expected their children to attend college and who
were saving for it had fewer children and had wider intervals between
births. Freedman and Cooinbs also found that women in the labor force
expected to have fewer children. Long labor force participation was
correlated with an expectation of fewer additional children and with
longer intervals from marriage to the parity birth. There was no
informto aboit labor force particiration and the ftttervals between
successive births; the observed relationship may result primarily from
work experience before child bearing was begun.
       In another article published in the same year as that described
above, the authors reported that a family's economic position was better
the longer the interval from marriage to first (or later) birth but
ascribed this at least in part to marriage duration and to the husband's
education.2 They noted that the sooner after marriage births occur the
less asset accumulation ano the greater economic pressures the couple
faces at the time of the birth. In particular, woren    with   PMP have
subsequent children sooner and have the strongest relationship between
chiidspacing and economic position.



       1Frcednan   and Coornbs, "Economic Considerations in Family Growth
Decisioas," Popul.ion Studies (hereinafter, p.      Stud.) XX (November 1966),
197—222.


       2Freedinan and Ccoibs, 'Child S,aing at Fanily Economic Position,"
Aerican_Socic'.1.ocial Rvie', XNXI (tccober iIô), &s1—648.
                                                                        4.

         In   a more recent article Coouibs and Freedman described the effect
of the first interval (from marriage to first birth) on the family's
later economic status.' They coEpered •con;ic characteristIcs of
couples with PM?, with short first intervals that were not P, and
with   long first intervals and asserted that the fertility and    economic.
patterns of the PNP     were   markedly different from other couples with short
first intervals. Over time the income disadvantage of a PNP       couple
decreases, but the relative gain in assets is not so good; this was
ascribed mostly to their lower education and lower age at marriage.
Those few PM? couples who had few children or a long second or third
Interval were able to improve their economic situation.
       Comparing (non—PM?) short spacers with those couples who had a
longer first interval, they found that the income and asset disadvantage
did disappear with time. Couples with a short first interval had not
been married as long at the birth of the i—th child o their disadvan—
tage was due to the husband's lower age and the shorter marriage duration.
The authors expect that the two groups would have similar incomes and
assets at the same a. The short spacers had similar education but a
somewhat higher occupation status than long spacers, and they wanted more
children and wanted ther sooner than the others. By contrast, most PM?
couples were dissatisfied with their fertility situation.
        In his doctoral dissertation,2 Donald W.     Hastings studied black/
white differentials in child spacing. This study also was only descriptive.
There are a number of conceptual and computational errors in the data
analysis; moreover, data from the U.S. Census are ill—suited for studies

        'Coor.bs
               and F:eethnan, "Premarital Pregnancy, Child Spacing, and
Later Economic Achievement," Pop. Stud. XXIV (November, 1970), 389—412.


        2"Parity   Tinc Interval Patterns and Slected Characteristics for
Once arricd     Cou1es According to 1.11000 Sample of United.States Popu—
i.tu    in l96O" (unpublished
197u.) Also, fl. W. Hastings,
                              Ph.D. dissertation, University of Nassachusetts,
                                             Differentials for White and
                                   Child—spacing
Non—white Ccurdes According t Edcaticna1 Level of Attainment for the
1/1000 Sample of the United States PopulatIon in 1960," Pop. Stud. XXIV
(arch 1971), 105-16.
                                                                                5.

of   timing and spacing of births. The quarter and year of birth can be
determined only for those children still residing with the mother, but
most women who have passed the normal age of child bearing already have
had one or more children leave the household.1 Furthermore, in the
Hastings study, observations were eliminated unless all birth intervals
were 0 to 18 months long or all were 18 to 48 months long or all were
longer than 48 months. Since most first birth intervals — from marriage
to first birth ——    are   short (0 to 18 months) and most intervals ietween
successive births are longer than 18 months, this selection criterion
eliminates most families with two         or   more children. For example, among
white couples who had at least a high school education 100 percent of
one—child families were included; for two child families the incluslen
rate was 37.5 percent for mothers under thirty, 28.2 percent for mothers
aged 30 to 44, and 28.7 percent for women over 44. In three—child
families the percent included in Hastings' sample was          18.0   for the
youngest women, 98 for those aged 30—44, and 2 • 5 percent for those 45 and
ov.      In fami1i  with four or morc children, the inclusIon rates were
10.5 percent, 3.4 percent, and 0, respectively. No non—white COUple.s with
four or more children were included in the sample studied, and only four
percent of the three—child families were included.2 Hastings claims only
to have replicated the findings of previous research, namely: that the
interval between marriage and first birth and between successive births
increases until the third birth and thereafter decreases; that the inter-
vals   between successive events decrease as        the number of children increases;
that   the i—th interval is longer if the i—th birth is terminal than if it



        11n the 1960 U.S. Census, 11.3 percent of the white women aged
30—34 had "missing' children and 20.7 percent of those aged 35—39 had
one or more thi1dre not present in the homes; for blacks the respective
percents are 30..2 and 43.8; these certainly are hIgher for women in their
forties. U.S. Department of Commerce, Census Bureau. 1960 Census of Popu—
latin Stbject cucrr PC    (2)—3 "childspacing," p. Xi.

         2Hastings, Prp. ¶tud.,    109.
                                                                            6.

is   not; that, the more recent the marriage the shorter the interval from

marriage to first birth;1 and that the more education a couple has the
                                                 2
longer the interval from marriage to first birth. The selectivity bias
of the sample severely reduces the importance of the support from this
study; but the five findings stand on their own and can all be observed
in Table 25 of the U.S.     Census Subject Report on "Childspacing."3
         Hastings also found that non—whites have shorter intervals
between events than     whites   ——   as.vtd.ncedby the higher   proportion of
those accepted into the sample who had all intervals of 0 to 18 months
——
     except among couples who have both completed high school or more educa-
tion; in this highest education category no differential was observed.
           Princeton University's Office of Population Research has pub—
         The
llshed several volumes based on their National Fertility Studies.4 The
focus was not on birth intervals, and the only quantitative material on
spacing consists of a few tables of simple correlat:is between the length
of   birth intervals and selected variables.5 However, these data contain


       'The more recent the marriage, the larger the proportion of couples
not yet having children; thus longer first birth intervals have not yet
been   cotrpleted and cannot be included in computations.

        2Hastngs, Pop. Stud., 107 and 112.

         3Childspaeing, p. 73.
       4For exairple, Larry L. Bumpass and Charles F. Westoff, The Later
YearF of Childbearing, (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1970);
Norman B. Ryder and Westoff, Reoroduction in the United States: 1965, (PUP,
1971); and Westoff, Robert G. l'otter, Jr., and Fhilip C. Sagi, The Third
Child, (PUP, 1963). Also, Bunpass, "Age at Marriage as a Variable in
Socic—Economic Uifferentials in Fertility," I)emographv, Vt (February 1969),
45—54; Ryder and Westoff, "Family Planning Status: United States, 1965,"
              VI (Nove:nber 1969), 435—44; Bumpass and Westoff, "The Prediction
of Cc::,leted Fertility," Dcmorarhv, VI (November 1969), 445—54; Bumpass
and ctoff, "The 'Perfect Contraceotiva' Population," Science, CLXIX
(Spter*r       1970); J'ascal K. Wheiptori, Arthur A. Campbell, John F. Patterscn,
Ferziiitv   ivd Fa'ti1y PJanning in the United States, (PUP, 1966).

        5The Later   Years of Chil.d Bearin, pp 34-38,
                                                                               7.

much usable information           on the timing of births; much of the research
reported in this dissertation was based on data from the 1965 National
Fertility Study.
          Their data show that the lengths of birth intervals of each order
are correlated negatively with the number of children desired and with
the number achjevd. For the entire sample education, age at marriage,
and religion (Catholic-non—Catholic) are not correlated with the length
of birth intervals, but comparisons within parities yield some weak
correlations. The negative relation betwe'u age at marriage and the span
of fertility is stronger for women with more children, although this is
not biologically necessary; Bumpass and Westoff point out that "late"
marriages are at young enough ages for most s'omen to have as many as five
children at longer than average intervals.
          Noting the negative relation between a woman's education and the
fertility span, they suggest that this may result in part from more
educated women marrying later. But since, for women with only two
children, education is :tegatively related to the inter—birth interval
and age at marriage           is not, they theorize "a   desire to minimize the span
of fertility in order to be freed for education—related female roles."1
          They   also   suggest "that spacing preferences are oriented more
towards the desired duration of child care than towards specific lenghts
for given intervals."2 There is evidence that women who have a short
birth interval because of accidental pregnancy have a subsequent interval
of at least average length. However, women with a longer than average
i interval (successful planners) do not have a shorter than avarage i+l
interval.
          Frank L. Moct, using retrospective data on child births and work
histories for        a sample of Rhode sland women,3 found much conflicting

                     p. 36.


          21b i d.



        3"Fertllit'i, Life Cycle Stage and Feinic          Labor Force Participation
in Rhode Is1.rnd:     Retosçective Qvrview,"                oach! IX (February 1972),
173—85.
                                                                         8.



evidence about the relationships among labor force participation, birth
intervals, and education, concluding only that once a woman left the
labor force in any interval she was very unlikely to re—enter it in a
later interval. However, he did very little analysis of the open
interval    (from most recent birth to the date of the intervie.z).   His
other    findings are "... that there baa been a recent convergence of
labor force rates between better and less educated women, in some
instnces reversing thetraditional pattern of higher labor force rates
for less educated women." He also noted "... a greater tendency for more
recent cohorts of women to re—enter the labor force after chi1dbearing..."
       It appears that much more could be done with these data than
Mott's   simple cross—classifications and calculations of contigent pro-
babilities of labor fotce participation, which might yield some conclusive
results. However, the residents of that state are not representative of
the U.S., being less well—educated, having ler inc-"'s, having higher
labor force participation for women, and consisting of a very large
percentage of Roman Catholics.
         The   demographic works may be divided into mathematical models of
population growth, birth rates, and the like with little or no       empirical

testing or application and studies of the purely physiological       aspects of
fertility. Examples of the former include models of the time required
for conception: Sheps derived a model of the expected distribution of
intervals to conception assuming that     conception is a random event, that
the   fecundability of each   couple in the population is stable over time, and
that fecundabilitv varies across couples.2 Other examples are an examination of the
theoretlial effect of truncation on the length of birth intervals3 and a dis-
cussion of the effect on birth rates of contraceptive techniques with
various levels of efficiency.4


                   p. 173.


         1inde1 C. Sheps, "On      the Tine Required for Conception," Pop. Stud.,
XVIII (July 1964), b5—97.

         3Shcps,    "Truncation Effect in Closed and Cpen J3irth Interval Data,"
Jo'irnl cf     t;e Am7ican Jtct!sticni._Asc'c1io LXV (June 1970), 673—93.

         4N.tthan tyf1t,     k?o   rtrth Contr1 Affects Dirths," SciI BIo1o,
XVIII (June 1971), 109—21.
                                                                               9.

          There   have been empirical studies of the physiological factors
affecting the length of time       required    for conception, Such   as   the length

of the period of post—partum sterility. In a biological study Potter and
Parker used a waiting—time model to estimate the expected time to con—
ception) They found that as the period of infertility lengthened the
likelihood    of sterility    increased rapidly, and that if the couple is not

sterile the number of expected additional months to conception increases
at about one—half month for each additional month of previous conception
delay. The authors also attempted to relate the time to conceive the
second child to the time to conceive the first, and they report that past
abcrtions have little effect on the time to conception.
       Potter analyzed the components of the birth interval into gestation,
post—partum amenorrhoea, anovulatory cycles, time to conceive after
resulTip'ion of ovulation, and pregnancy wastage.2 Among his findings was
that the average birth interval increases somewhat with age probably
because of fetal loss and secondarily due to a decline in fecundability.
lu   ciatias with littIc' contraception, according to Potter, the mean birth
interval varies frozi to to somewhat less than three years, due to differences
in the duration of post—partum amenorrhcea. Finally, he concludes that the
average length o ovulatory exposure (frctn resumption of ovulation to con-
ception) probably varies between four ad seven months for women in their 20's.
        Using data for Chilean women, Perez found that the timing of the first
pot—partum ovulation and menstruation depends closely on the lengths of
Cull and partial breast—feeding.3 The average interval to ovulation for

          1Robert C. ?otter, Jr., and N. P. Parker, "Predicting Time Required
to Conceive," p.        Stud.,   XVIII (July   1964), 99—116.


          2R. C.   Potter,   Jr., "Birth   Intervals: Structure   and Change,"
Stud..    XVII (Nove'ber 1963), 155—66.

          3Alfredn   rcroz, et. al., "Timing and Sequenc of Resuming Ovulation
and      tstruatic'n after Childbirth." Pop. Stud., XXV (Noveither 1971).. 491—503;
Perzz, c... ,l., irst Ovulation after Childbirth: The Eft.ct o Breast
F'!i," A:ri                                           CXIV (15 December
1972) ,
                                                                             10.

 women whose breast feeding was artificially suspended was only 49 days;
 for those who stopped spontaneously within fifteen days after childbirth,
 60 days; and for all others, 117 days. Among women who breast fed ex-
 clusively only 36 percent had ovulated within 18 weeks. Thirty—four
 percent ovulated within nine weeks of beginning supplemental feedings             for
 their infants. Fifty percent ovulated within three and one—half weeks
of ceasing breast—feeding. The authors also found that most women ovulated
before the first post—partum menstruation: 51 percent of those whose
cycle was 30 to 59 days in length and 83 percent of those over 60 days.
       Of more relevance to my research were such studies as those of
the French demographer,      Louis Henry, who   estimated fertility rates,
age—specific fertility rates, and age—specific sterility rates for such
diverse non—contracepting populations as        the Hutterites, eighteenth—
century Canadians, and the seventeenth—century bourgeoisie of Geneva.1
The Hutterjte data were studied more intensively by iieps and by Eaton
and Mayer.2 The former calculated the proportion of Hutterite women
not having a birth of any given order at stated intervals after the
preceding event; Eaton and Mayer estimated the birth probabilities for
women by age in this non—contracepting population. In both studies,
it appears that average fecundability changes little for wonen between
the ages of 18 and 29 and therafter declines gradually; however, this
decline may be due in part to the high parIty of Hutterite women in their
thirties. I decided, based on these studies, that in my empirical work



       "Some Data on Natural Ferti1iy,' Eugenics Quarterly,         VIII
(June 1962), 81—91.

       2Mindel C.   Sheps,   "An Analysis of Reproductive Patterns in   an
American Isolate," Pop._Stui., XIX (July 1965), 65—SO; Joseph W. Eaton
and A'ert J. Mayer, Man's Ca civtacroduce: The Demograity of
                       (Clencoc,   Ulirkois: The Free Press, 195+),
reprinted from riuman Eiology, XXV (no. 3, 1953),206—64.
                                                                        11.



I could safely assume that the length of time required for conception
to occur is not related     a woman's age.1
         In a demographic study that is atypical of that field, Natnboodiri

used   data from the 1955 Growth of American Families study to show that,
not surprisingly, the longer a woman has been married when she gives
birth to a child of a given order (up to the third) the more years she
has worked between marriage and that birth.2 From the data as presented
in the article it is impossible to examine relationships among the
lengths of successive intervals, the length of the total interval from
first to last birth, the work experience after the first child was born,

the    work experience since the birth of the last child, and other rele-
vant    variables such as the wife's education or the husband's income.
          A third type of study, that of the effect of the length of birth
                                                              of the
intervals on the physical health and intellectual development
child, is particularly relevant to the discussion of income effects
and child quality in Chapter II, Section C. In a survey of the effects
of family sire and child spacing on the child and on the mother1 Wry
wrote that numerous studies have linked fetal loss, and neonataland
infant mortality to short birth intervals.3 For all age groups —— early



        1This, of course, assumes that other things are equal. One
 important exceçtion to this assumption may be that the frequency of
 coition within marriage declines with age. (Kinsey, A.C., W. B. Porneroy
                                                                      W.3.
 & C. E. Martin, Sexial ehavior in the Human Male, (PhIladelPhia
  Saunders Co., 198) p. 252 and Kinsey, Pomeroy,    Martin & P.H. Gehhard
                                                                   ThIS is
 Sexual Behavior ir. the {uman Ferale, (Sgnnders,1953) , 348—54).
         a function of tanily si and duration     of marriage and there  is
 largely
 no evidence that the reiationshir holds for couples who are trying to
 conceive. See J. iarrert, "Fecundability and Coital Frequency," .
 Stud., XXV (July 1971), 309—13.
                Nmnboodiri, "The Wife's Work Experience and Child Spacing,"
 Milbank Memorial Fu'd_Qurer1v, XLiI      (July   1964), 65—77.

                                                                  Size    and
           3Joe D. Wrav, "Population Pressure on Families: Family
 chi1c    Spacing,' in ap1d_fltrth  ConscutnceS                   and Polçy
 11ications publisr.d   cr the atiom1 Acadeny of Sciences            (a1timore
 The Johus Hopkins Press, 1971), p. 403—61, especially 434—45.
                                                                      12.


 fetal, late fetal, neonatal, infant, and childhood (through four years
 of age) —— death rates are highest in the shortest intervals. Fetal and

 neonatal deaths, which are due primarily to biological factors, are at
 their lowest rate when the interval from the preceding birth to the

 current conception is around two years (child spacing of about two
 years   and nine months). The mortality rate rises sharply as shorter
 intervals are considered; it rises, but to much lover levels, as the
 interval increases from the opt1nui. Postneonatal (one Month to one year)
 and early childhood mortality, affected primarily by environmental
 factors,declines monotoulcally with the length of the interval between
births. The longer a child is born after his immediately preceding sib,
the higher are the chances of his surviving to age five.1
        One study, using British data, reported higher mortality for all
maternal ages aad social classes if the first birth occurred within one
year of marriage. It was suggested that this was pr ably because many
of these births were either premature or premaritally conceived. In the
lnttcr instance th mother may have vceived 1.es pre—na'l medical care.
       Wray found little evidence f rota developed countries on the rela-
tionship, if any, between the lengths of birth intervals and child
morbidity. In poorer countries, a short birth interval is detrimental
to   the health of the eriier child. In these countries physical
developmert during childhood was related to birth intervals in a manner
similar to morbidity. 2
       The lowest incidence of prematurity was observed when the Interval
between conceptions was from three to six years in length. Women with
ioicr intervals ncy have had phyica1 disabilities associated with sub—
fecundity wh!ch also increased the risk of a premature birth.3
         The effect of child spacing on the mother's health is not at all
clear.    Wray notes that, although many writers assume that there is a

          Ibid., pp. 435-40.
         2IbId., pp. 440—41. 443.

         3lhid., pp. 641-43.
                                                                               13


                                                        cios spacing, there is
"maternal depletion syndrovne associated with
little evidence supporting or refuting this assumption.            A Johns

Hopkins study did find the lowest rates of anemia in pregnancy with birth
intervals of forty-eight months or longer. However, the incidence of
hemorrhage, infection, and maternal mortality were not affected by the
interval's length; and hypertensive toxemia was more common in pregnancies
                                                      have resulted, at least in
as the birth interval was longer. This may
part, because the mother was older on average the longer the interval

since her preceding pregnancy.1
       In another review of the medical literature on the effects on
                                                  interval most favorable
children of child spacing,2 Day reported that the
to early fetal survival was one year, as measured from the end of the
preceding pregiuincy to the beginning of the pregnancy under consideration.
A pregnancy interval (from preceding birth to current conception) of
three or more years was most favorable for survival through childhood.
Late fetal and neonatal deaths were described as being in an intermediate

position bctwecm        early fcc.    and potneonatal deathc, with biological

 factors influencing early pregnancy and environmental pressures playing
 an increasing role as time passes.3
        Day reported a study that found prematurity less frequent if
 pregnancies were spaced tio or more years apart but suggested that women
 who were careless about family planning (his description) might be
 careless also 3bout all aspects of health. Another study found an
 association bet.ieen low        birth   weight and intervals of less thar.   two years
 and,   to   a lesser e:<tent, of more than six years.4



           1lbid.,     pp.   444-5.


         2Richard L. Day, M.D., "F3ctors Influencing Offspring: Number              of
 Children, Int2rval ietwecn Pregn:incies, and Age of Parents," 179—185.
                                                                American
 Journal     of the I)iease,ofiidrefl, CXIII (February 1967),
             3lbid.,   pp. 179—80.


                       p. i.
                                                                             14,


         He concluded: "An interval of approximately two years between
  the end of one pregnancy and the beginning of another is associated with
  the lowest incidence of late fetal and neonatal
                                                 mortality and prematurity.
 Survival through childhood is more likely if pregnancy intervals are
 three years or more."1 (Such a pregnancy interval implies a birth interval
 of forty—five months or more.)
          Links also have been found between child spacing and various
 aspects of the child's intelligence. A study of middle—class British
 families found thatwithin each family sizevocabulary test scores of
 children were relatively high when births were widely spaced and relatively
 low when births were close together. A study of general attainment by
 children in two—child families, standardized by sex, birth order, and
 sex- of sib, found the highest scores at each age occurred with intervals
 of medium length (two to four-years) as compared to intervals of less than
 two and of more than four years. (Only these three r
                                                      tegories of intervals
were  used.) It was concluded that contact with adults was correlated with
 intelligence scores; th effect. of the interval, on scores increased as the
children grew older.2
       Twins represent the ultimate in close spacing of births. It is
generally agreed that twins score about five points lower on IQ tests than
singletons, a difference not accounted for by differences in e;periences
before and during birth but rather due to post—natal environment.3 Twins
who are raised alone, generally because of the co—twin's'death, have IQ
or verbal reasoning scores much higher than twins raised together; their
scores are almost equal to those of singletons despite the fact that such
twins have a     lo'cr birth     weight than twins   where both survive. The twin—


          ___     p.   184.


         2!ry,   op._cit.,      pp. 443-44,   453.

         3R. G. Record,       Thorns McKeown, and J. H. Edwards, "An Investigation
of thc   Di.fferc2nct in eur          Intelligence Between Twins and Single Births,"
Annals   of   HumnGenctic, £'V (July 1970), 11—20.
                                                                    15.



singleton differences were not explained by differences in maternal age,
birth order, biith weight, length of the gestation period or ,nonozygosity
("identical" twins). The authors view their findings as supporting the
theory that twin—co—twin contact reduces verbal communications with older
sibs and with adults, concluding that the "handicapping of twins,
reflectedin their low verbal reasoning scores, is due to postnatal rather
than prenatal influences."
        Vandenberg also noted that single born children are consistently
faster than twins in language development, IQ's, and reading scores.2
However, he found that when twins were carefully matched with single
born   children who had one sibling near to them in age, the differences
were smaller: twins still performed somewhat more poorly on verbal and
quantitative parts of the tests, but they did about the same as singletons
on spatial tests and scored better on perceptual tests.3 It appears that
children who are not born after a short birth interval are both healthier
and more intelligent, as measured by standard tests.
        Althougn knctvledge about contraception has been 'iceprad ero'th
to make fertility decisions possible for many decades, economists have
entered this field of research only recently. In 1960 Becker reported
that a positive relation exists between family income and number of
children when contraceptive knowledge is held constant.4 Mincer docu—



         1lbid., p. 20.

       2Steven C. Vandenberg, "The Nature and Nurture of Intelligence,"
in Genetics, David C. Glass, ed., (New York: Rockefeller University
Press, 1968), pp. 3—58.


         ____    pp. 28—31.

       4Gary S. Becker, 'i\n Economic .na1ysis of Fertility," in Universities—
Natiotl Bureau             ior Ecoeoiic Research, Conference SerIes 11,
Demographic and Ecenom1cChn,e in Developed Countries, (New York: Columbia
University Press, 191,0), 209—30.
                                                                         16.


 niented income and substitution effects In completed fertility among
 working women and, using area averages, for all women.1
           Deborah Freedman reported that women with an extensive work
 history (occurring primarily pre—maternafly) tend to have almost as
 many children as those with little or no labor force experience but
 have the births later. This relationship may not hold, true today when
 many more women work also after having children. She suggests that in
 this    society family size is converging toward a conmionly held norm and
 that the important fertility differential is the timing of that common
 number of births.2 "This suggests that differential child spacing may
 replace differential fertility as a central interest in fertility
 research."3     ,    .

        Silver found that birth rates were sensitive to    cyclical economic
conditions;4 this apparently is one of the earliest studies aibeit an
indirect one, of economic forces affecting the iming of births. Most
of the work of the past five years has consisted of refinements and
cxtcnIa of the apprcach introduced by Becker end Mincer. Although
in some cases extremely complex models have been devised to explain
fertility behavior,5 none of these has explicitly confronted the question
of whether economic factors affect the timing and spacing of births.


          'Jacob Mincer, "Market Prices, Opportunity Costs, and Income
Effects," n urent In Econorics: Studies in Mathematical Ecenomics
and Econ ,retrjcs n Vror'r of Iehua Grunfeld, Carl Christ, ed., (Stanford:
Stanford University k'rss, 1963).
       2Deborah Freedtan, "The Relation of Economic Status to Fertility,"
CommunIcation in Arcrican Economic Review, LIII (June 1963),, 414—26.

          3Ibid., p. 421.


         4Morris Si1vr, "Births, Marriages and Business Cycles in the
United   States," Journal of Political Economy, LXXIII (June 1965), 237—55.

         5See especial)y Robert J. Willis in Shultz, ed., op. cit.
                                                                            17.



         Ben—Porath and Welch used the interval of time between births as
a dependent variable in their analysis of East Pakistani fertility.1
They were not, however, studying the timing and spacing of births                 se
but rather suggested "that the interval of time between births be taken
as an indication of the weakness of the desire to have more children."
This may be an acceptable approach for such a population that does little

family   planning. They found that the     average birth interval, for young

women of 30.1 months, if       the family had an equal number   of boys and

girls,   was reduced by 0.6 months per each       boy in excess of the number
of girls and by 1.0 months per each "excess"         girl.2
         In a study of 717 households in the Western Area of        Sierre Leone,
Snyder   regressed the average spacing between children and        other variables
on the logarithm of the number of surviving children.3 He found that the

regression   coefficient of "spacing" was positive       and highly significant:.

This runs counter to U.S. experience; for examp1, in          tha 1960 U.S. Census,
at every   education level,women with more                had shorter average intervals.4


        LYor;, Ben-Porath end Finis Welch, Chance. Child Traits and Choice
of   FaDIliSizo, RAND Report, R-1117.NIH/RF, (teceraber 1912), pp.17-18.

          ____    p.   21.


          3Donald J.   Snyder, The Economic Theory of Fertility in a West
African    Context,"   paper presented at thc Annual Meeting of the Western
Economic Association, Claremont, California, August 1973.

       4vcrPge Interval in Months Between Births by Nurher of Children
Ever_Born (CEB) and Education of Wife.
                                     Education
                        Sjs       MS 1-3    HS 4i' 1_3Joii 4+
 2        54.3
                   I

                        55.3       56.0        47.5
                                             51.8           42.5
 3     46.6             Ii,5       47.7      45.0
                                               42.0         38.2
_L        3JL._J__.___ 38.5                    36.2         33.3
Calculated trom Table 25 "Average (mean) Number of Months hetween Birth
DiLes o Sucssive (bidrn -— White Women Ever Macned 35 to 39 Years Old
by Years of c'oo.i C&- Jcd by Wot'ter       and   Nurher of Children Ever Born, For
the Unitd States: 1U,' C,iidspacin. 19O U.S. Cea::s Sibject Report,
PC(2)—3B.
           For ever 20 p'rc:.'t oc these berv,tions, one or more birth dates
'as imputed rat:her than determined directly from        ansuers   to Census questions.
                                                                          18.


 Because   incomes are much lower in Sierra Leone than in the U.S., couples
 may be unable to finance large families in a short period of time. These
 differences may also be attributable to the fact that probably not more
 that   thirty percent of the households in Snyder's sample practice contra-
 ception;1 also, the data used in most of the studies cited above and
 those used in the research for this dissertation are for U.S. whites only.
        Snyder also finds that the relation between income and number of
 children is    negative     for younger households and positive for olderones.2
 He suggests that this may be because higher—income families delay child
 births while they accumulate human and other capital and then make up
                                                                       for
 it in later years. This same phenomenon will be discussed later in this
 dissertation   with respect to white families in the U.S.
          Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Work Experience
 for women aged 30 to 44 in   1967, Mincer and Polachek note peripherally in
 their report on human capital investment by femai that, as observed wage
 rates and the marginal price of time increase with education, highly
 cduc.ted mothers respond by spacIng their children more closely (and by
 having fcwer children.)3 Thus total expenditures on children do not
 rise nearly as fast as the price of time, when education increases.
         Until the past year there seems to have been no research at all
by other econor'fsts in timing and spacing, and still none has attacked
the problem xplicit1y. Therefore, in this dissertation, I have attempted
to determine i'hethcr and how economic and other forces affect the decisioa
by white non—farm couples in the United States with respect to when they
begin child bcarirg and how long they spend in the child—caring life—stage.
        In Chapter 11 an economic model is developed which predicts that
women with a rising price of time over the lifetime will start having

         1Etyder,   p. 11.


         21.bid., p. 29.


        Jacob Mincer and Solomon Polachek, "Family Invstt,ient in Human
Capitdl: Earaings of Women," paper presented at Fcpulation Conference,
I],   Chftago, Illinois,     June 3973;   pp. 3')—40.
                                                                     19



their children soonerafter finishing school. Those with a high price
of time throughout their lifetimes will have their children closer
together. The model also predicts that families whose income receipts
rise sharply, at least in the early years after the husband enters the
labor force, will postpone their first birth and that families with a
high lifetime income will have their children farther apart.
         The data and variables used to test the model's hypotheses are
described in Chapter III. Chapters IV and V describe, respectively, the
empirical tests of the titnir.g and the spacing hypotheses. The results of
an investigation of some relationships between the timing of the various
demographic events and labor force participation are reported in Chapter
VI.    Chapter VII sumvarizes the theoretical analysis and the empirical
results,   which generally support the timing and spacing hypotheses.
                                                                              20.



                                      CHAPTER II
                                THEORETICAL ANALYSIS

          A.      General Framework
          This model assumes that couples receive utility from household
production and consumption activities that may be divided into those that
are child—related and all others. These activities require as inputs
the   time of one or both persons, purchased market goods and services,
and ——    for    child—related activities —— own children.
                                                             1.
                                                                  Parents desire
children because of the "child services" they can produce, and couples
marry    in    order to have children.2
          I assume that each couple attempts to maximize the utility it
receives from these various activities and that the utility received by
each partner to a marriage while he or she is still single is considered
none—the—less as part of the life—time utility to be maximized. The
only difference is that there can be no utilit rom child—related
activities before marriage. Thus, the couple's total life—time utility
is a function of the levels of each member's non—child—related activities
before marriage and of both their child—related and their other activities
after marriage. This utility maximization is constrained by the amount
of time and goods the couple can put into their household activities,
and this depends in turn on the amount of non—labor income available



        1This approach was derived from Cary S. Becker, "A Theory of the
Allocation of Time," Economic Journal, LXXV (September 1965), 493—517;
Kelvin J. Lancaster, "A New Approach to Consumer Theory," Journal of
Political_Fcoiioay, LXXIV (April 1966), 132—57; and Jacob Mincer, "Labor
Force Participation of Married Wor.en: A Study of Labor Supply," in
National Bureau of Economic Research Special Conference Series, Vol. 14,
pcts_of Lz'hor Economics, (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
l92), 63—105.

         Cary S. Becker, "A Theory of arriage: Part I," Journal of
Political Economy,      LXXXI   (July/August 1973), 813—46, suggests that
tc primary explaxation for the existence of marriages is for the
production and raising of children: p. 818.
                                                                         21.


to the couple and on their market wage rates and their productivity in
household activities.1
       The amount of time that is available to a husband and a wife in
each time period is fixed; the length of the life—time is taken to be
exogenous. The wife allocates her time between household activities
and labor market activities;2 the husband's time Is used only in market
activities. (See footnote 4, page 24 ).       Time spent in the market either
yields an itnn'ediate   pay—off in terms of current money Income which
enables   the household to purchase market goods to be combined with the
hone time of the wife in child—related and other activities or It may be
used to invest in the worker's own stock of human capital.3 Acquisition
of human capital leads to higher money wage rates in the future.
       The model also assumes that money, like time, cannot be shifted
to an earlier period. That is, a couple's cumulative consumption cannot
exceed cumulative income at any given point in time, for they cannot
borrow against future earnings to finance the goods inputs for current
household activities. Apparently private ir iduals usually are able to
brrc only to fnanc thc purchase f dur'1e gods,4 (in which case the

          1Many of the assumptions made here were used by Willis in a more
mathematical model of completed fertility. See Robert .3. Willis, "The
Econcnic Determinants of Fertility Behavior," (unpublished Ph.D. disser-
tation, University of Washington, 1971). I found that expressing this
model in mathcrnatical notation added little to the analysis.
          2She   may allocate all of her tire to household activities, but not
all to market activities.
            adult who is still ir school may be considered as devoting all
of his or her market time to investment.
       4F. Thomas Juster of the University of Michigan Survey Research
Center, former)y with the National Bureau oE Economic Research, advised
  in a nrivit? tcrvic tt            ':v 1973, that, based on his Consumer
Expendituve Surveys and other studies, it is his impression that the
ability of young reople to borrow to finance consumption in excess of
current income is very unusual; he noted the only exceptions as occurring
occasietaily      among young doctors.
                                                                                       22.

 good,   rather than   potential     earnings,   serves   as collateral.) But,         the
 acquisition of a durable raises the household's consumption level not by
 the value of the dureble b.t rather by the value of the flow of services
 in that period from the asset. I am assuming that the value of the flow
 of services from durables in each period approximately equals the marginal
 Costs of the asset in that period. Thus, consumption in any period ——
 especially in the early adult years when little savings probably would
have been accumulated ——        is   limited to the income received in that
 period. (Some young      couples    do   receive   financial help, from      their
parents, usually without an explicit repayment obligation;                   this is
equivalent to non—labor income received in the period of the transfer.)
          Fertility   control   costs and    inefficiencies    are   not included
 formally   in the model; this is probably the modification that             should
be introduced next as I pursue         this topic in the      future.    Since there
is    probably a   negative correlation between education and the cost of
contraception ——      at least of that part of cos' ttributabl to the
searth for information ——       thIs may     alter slightly   the interpretation of
the e'ir!ca1 effect of differences in education. The importance of this
possible shortcoming in the model should not he over—estimated: in
recent decades in the U.S.       probably     nearly all married women knew of the
eis:ence of methods of contraception; observed differences in the
effectiveness of contraceptive         use
                                    by education of the wife may reflect
in large part. differing levels of motivation —— e.g., women with low
levels of    education nay   view "accidental" children as less costly than
do more educated women.1
         Within    this household    production/consumption framework, I have
analyzed    the price or subst.itutjon       effects   of variations    in   the relative
price    of child—related activities nd the income effects on the timing
cud   spacing of child births. The substitution effects may be sub—divided


        'Work by economists In the theory of fertility control is still
in .ts very early stages. For examples of attempts to broach the problem,
see Robert T. iiche1      d Rohert J. iliis, "The 'Imperfect Contracepti.ve'
FopuLition: An Eccnomic Analy:"ir,' paper resented at the Annual Meeting
of thc' Population Asociatien of Aerica,i, New Orleans, April 1973; and
Pohert T. !ichael, "Education and the Derived             Demand   for Children," in
T. W. Schultz, ed.,     ocit.
                                                                   23.



into the effects of the average level and of the pattern over time of
                                        consist of the effect of the
the price of inputs; the income effect
lifetime level of income or the permanent income effect and the effect
of the timing of income receipts —— i.e.,the pattern of (annual) income

over the life cycle. Discussion of and predictions about the substitution
effects are presented in Section B; the income effects are discussed in
Section C of this chptQr Although I have presented the general framework
in   terms ofthe usual utility maximization approach, the reader may well
bear in tr.ind while reading the rest of this chapter
                                                      that this approach
has a dual: cost minimization. Often it will be more convenient to
think of the timing and spacing decisions as responses to the problem
of achieving a chosen level of activities at a minimum cost or of
trading of f some part of child—related activities through revising
the  timirg and spacing of births from what they would be In a costless,
unconstrained world.
         B.    Substitution Effects
         The price or substifl.tion effect refer o the influence on the

tir'ir.g an' 'pacing decisonc of differences across couples and, for a
couple, across time in the relative prices or costs of child—related
and of other activities. These differences arise because the two
types of activities utilize different input mixes of time and of
purchased goods and services and because the price of time varies
across individuals and may vary for an individual over the lifetime.
         My analysis of the substitution effect on the timing and spacing
of births follows as much as possible the approaches used in economic
 analyses of completed fertility (i.e., nurber of children born).1 We
 assurc that child-rel.ated activities are more time—intensive than
 other activities. That is, for any household at any point in time,
 the ratio of the value of time inputs to the value of goods inputs is


        'For a iiost cop1cte expoitioti of the current state of the
 economic :odl of fertility and it underlying assumptions, see
 Willis' d:sertation, 197]..
                                                                             24.

  higher       in child—related activities than   in
                                             other activities.1 Therefore,
  the opportunity cost of child—related activities in terms
                                                            of other
  activities foregone (or the ratio of the shadow prices of child—related
  to other activities) is an increasing function of
         We also assume that c'nly the price of time varies across households
  or over time and that the prices of the
                                           purchased market goods and services
  used in all types of household
                                 production/consumption activities are the
 same to all households. Comparisons of
                                         completed fertility for different
 cohorts apparently also have assumed implicitly that these prices do not
 change over time.3 In an analysis, such as this, of fertility over a
 span of time it seems worthwhile to acknowledge this
                                                      assumption explicitly.
        The price of time of household members that enters
                                                                 household
 activities, does vary across households and, within households, over time.
 In this model (following Willis, 1971) I
                                          make the simplifying assumption
 that all of the time inputs in household activities 're
                                                         provided by the
 wife.4 Then variations in. the price of the wife's time
                                                                    result in
           1The time—goods   mix fcr each type of activity will vary with the
 price of      time;   as
                    rises, more goods—intensive methods of household
 Production/consumption will be used. The assumption here is that, at
 each level of P, child—related activities will        be more time—jnteusjve
 than   other activities.
           2
              See Becker, Allocation of Time.

          3                 .
              This problem might       .    .    .
                                 be avoided if income data from difierent years
were    adjusted for current prices levels.
        4Leibowltz' data show that fathers proviced less thatn ten persent of
the tire devoted to phys:ical care of ch±hrer :.d le3s than twenty persent of
the time inputs to all types of child care activities; their time contributions
amount to about one—eighth of the total time spent in child care, meal prepar-
ation, and laundry  work. (Calculated from Arleen Leibowitz, "Women's Allocated
Time to •:erket and Non—Market Activities: Differences by Education," (unpublished
cbvjc '
FL.I). c            Co1nia University, New York, 1972), p. 116. &lthough husbcnc
                          tine at icbo1 activitj to receive utility
           tJs aumptjon is not too unrealistic. fquivalently, one might
      that three—way iivisjon of women's time and two—1ay divjsjo of
men's tin' utilized b Ninctr in tsrects. Then, if husbands spend the same
amount of tiro in "1eit.re" 3ctivitic at each sta'o of their lives regard-
less of the tir. of births —— a reasonable assumption given their
generally fu1itjr. labor force participatin and the fact that nost males
work an approxjmat.el:,. :anrd ork week    then this leads to the same
                                                                              25.



differences in the relative costs of child—related and other activities
across households and, perhaps, over time.
       If the vif.i works the value of her time in household activities
     must equal her market wage rate (plus the value of on—the—job
investments.)' If a working woman's wage rate is not known, it is
assumed that wage rates are a posiUve function of education.2
       If    the wife does not work,          ——    theprice of her time in household
production/consumption activities —— must            exceed her potential market
wage rate. P depends on the quantity               of goods she has as inputs to
these activities and on her efficiency in household production.3 The
former effect means that the price of her time will be an increasing
function of her husband's (and non—labor) income. The latter effect
probably implies a rising P with education.4 The expectation of a
positive relation between P and education for non—working wives is


conclusions as the assumption that wives supply all of the time inputs.
It is the wife who adjusts her hours of work    La children are born,
probabjy leaving the ].ahor force entirely, at least for five or ten
years. James P. SiuiLh, "The Life Cycle Allocatioi of Time in a Faitily
Context," (unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1972),
found that increasing the number of young children in the household in-
creased the husband's hours of work and greatly reduced the wife's; the
effect of the presence of older children on time allocation was less
clear.



       1Accordin to economic         theory, if
                                            a person is allocating his time
optimally       i.e., in a mariner    that will
                                            maximize his utility, the rnarginal
value of his  time in all   activities —— including labor market activities ——
must  be the same.  If a person is in the labor force, the return to his
tir spent in labor market •ctiviries, his wage rite plus the present
value of the incres In future earnJ.ns resulting fron any human capital
iflvLStmnt heinc uuth'rtikcn, mu.st equal the value of the marginal unit cf
time spent in each kind of household activity (Pt).
       2Thj is k'ic:n t he true         for verae values of aggrcgatcd data;
e2 J • hincer .'nrI S. l.;c1iek, op. cit. ThLy found th diff nces by
education to he even greater for the 'capacity wage.' Sec also Figure 1.

       3Lnd, on    the endogenous variable, the activity mix in the household.

       4Robcrt T. Michaci., h_Ec                     .th:cationficiercy in Con—
sunt.inri,   (New Yorc: National     Bureau   of cnomic Research Occasional Paper
116, 1972), finds. ce support         fer this.
                                                                                26.




            Average hourly earnings in 1959 for all non—farm, white
            employed females, by age, education, and marital status

    3 o                                                  1
                 Al].
                                                              Married

                                        _____-. 16+
    2.90
                                                                                -—-. I#


    2.3)
                                               13.15

    2.00

   1.70

                                                  9.11          ——.—. ——-.        -
   1.40                                       5-S        -                       —



       14-24 25-34 35.44 45-54             55-64      14-26
                                                             -___
                                                               25-34
                                                                        ____ Jt
                                                                        45..4   554
                kvcr
                Marjed
                              7/7
                                   //                        o . her
                                                             MarrIed




                                                                         '—
                 /7                           L




                                                                         _____ O-1
           24    25.J.   3';..44   4554   55—6k      14-24 25-34 35—44 45—54    55—64


• )rc;n 1ron data prov dcd by Victor Fucls, caicuL3t.d from 1960 .1: 1000        U.S.
  Censu. mp1.e; data polr:tls e.Uminated If ten or fe.ier ohservation.
                                                                               27.



                                   ure 2
         Average hourly earnings in 1959 for all non—farm, white
          employed males, by age, education and marital status



                                                  Harr led
  S



                                                                                       I3'i'
  4.
                                                                                       (2-




        :.:4 25..34 35—64 4:4                 1.2.4 25-34     35—44 45—54 55—,
  5.00 -

             Nover
             MarrIed
                                                  Other
                                                  Hrred                   /
                                                                      /

  4 •   00                                                        /

                        /          I
                       //



  3, CO
                  I/                                          7—
                                                  /7/                                _(

                                                '1
         I 24 2.-4          5—4 4-:4                 2—3'     35-44 45—54 5I4



        e:cc:          i'5gur 1;       prZ c iii ndted . fewer tiun
                                                          C                   twenty
obsc,rvatior.s.
                                                                                       28.


  reinforced by the fact that, on average, women with more education have a
  higher potential wage (W) than women with less education (W). Becate
  they are not in the labor force the educated women's P > W > W ; for
                                                       t    e   n
  the non—labor force woman who is not educated, P >W, but in many
 instances Pt <      We may conclude that child—related activities,
                            We
 being time—intensive, are more costly to more educated women and, to the
 extent that non—working women's    is affected by their husband's earnings,
 are somewhat more costly to women with
                                        a high family income.
              Not    only is the general level of waga rates, earnings, and income
 positively          correlated with educatIonal attainment, but also the slope of
 the age— or experience—earnings profile is                greater for more educated
 persons,1                         more post—school investing. Human
                    suggesting that vhey do
 capital theory also predicts that a person will invest more the more
 years of labor force participation remaining before him.2 Given the
 greater labor force participation of women with more education,3 one
 expects       to find more investment by these women and
                                                      teeper earnings
 path (rising Pt) than for the less educated women. Over her life time,
 a 'c'.ar.    with    a re1'tivejy high level      of               wli 1
                                                                have a high and
                                                        educqtion
 rising             this is likely to be true even if she is not In the labor
force, for highly educated women marry highly educated men, and P for
wor'n    not    in the labor force is related posjtjv1c t her husband's
inc6ric.




           1See charts 2a and 2b in J. iucer, Schooling, Experience and
Earnings, (NBER, in press, 1973), for males; for females, see Victor
Fuchs,     Di1ferntiair in ilour.Lv Frningshv Region_and City SIze,_1959,
(Ncw   York:  NBi           ccasiona]. pcr 101, li1). SeTo Fies I and 2,
Lii                   LeIbojtz regressed ti.me since school (=Age—Educaton—6)
and other variabics on log wages for females and feund larger coefficIents
moving from education 1—8 to 9—12 to 13—18 years. This would                result in
even greater slape differences if wages rather than the log of wages
were ccnsldcred. Libowjtz' dIssertation, Chapter III.
              ary S. eLker, ftian Capital (cw cLk: NhER, 1964) ; and Becker,
              itai and the Persna1 Distribution of Iricie, Wpytinsky Lecture,
1aivcrsitv of Niehign,             196;.
          3
              The    tact   af their higuer                                         I
                                              level c.t cducaticu may in itselt- iad—
cate greater labor force comrwi tmcnt.
                                                                          29.



         The pattern of investments in human capital by women is probably
not as straightforward as the monotonically declining path of invest-
ments usually posited for males. Women may invest in on—the—job
training before and/or after the childbearing and rearing period.1
However, given Mincer and Polachek's findings that human capital

depreciates during the child caring period and tha' depreciation rates
are greater the larger the stock of capital,2 there are strong economic
incentives to postpone some human capital formation from the pre—maternal
period   to the period after the last    birth.3 Moreover, human capital

theory   predicts that an employer will bear a    greater share of the costs

of capital acquisition the greater the probability that the employee
will  remain with his firm and the greater the proportion of the capital
that is firrt—specific. Since greater job continuity can be expected
after the period of child caring than before, the employer should be
more willing to help finance human capital investment then; this should
reinforce the tendency for women who will ir substantially in them-
selves to do so after the period of child caring. Also, the highly
educated woman is more likely than the less—educated woman to postpone
investment until after she has her children in order to shift more of
the cost of the investment to the employer, if persons with more skills
in total also have more specific skills (as suggested by Becker, 1964,

op.    cit.).   Since depreciation is greater the longer the skills are not
used and greater the higher a woman's skill level, this reinforces the
assertion above that woman with more education face higher costs for time—
intensiveaat.vites, not only because of earnings or opportunities fore-
gone but beca'c they have a greater amount of market skills which de-
preciate witri    nonuse.




w.c                   t
          1Mincer and Polachek, op. cit., found that labor force participation
       interiittet.       hect until the youn'est child   was several years old.
Laor force participation was more continuous after the last birth.
Probably    little investment occurs during the child caring period.

                   pp. 19—20.

          3Ibid., p. 18 presents evidence tending to support this hypothesis.
                                                                             30.

         From this exposition of the various forms the price or substitution
 effect can take, it should be clear that for each couple the various
 timing and spacing patterns have different costs of child—related activities
 associated with them. Spacing a given number of births closer together
 will reduce the cost of children (as would reducing the number of births);
 the reduction in Costs of closer spacing would be greater the higher is
      Having children early in the life cycle, when Pt is usually lower,
 would reduce the cost of child—related activities; the reduction would
 be more pronounced the steeper the rise in P over time. Therefore,
 this model hypothesizes a substitution effect that produces a stronger
 incentive to have children close together if P is high and to have
 children earlier after completing school1 if P is rising. The higher a
 woman's educational level ar4 to a lesser extent, the higher her husband's
 income if she is not a labor force participant, the sooner and closer
 together she is expected to have children. Also, if labor force parti—
 ciption is positively correlated with investment Ir  unan capital,
 women   -7ith greater participation will have a rising P and should have
 thc1    firat chldrcn   sccne:   after school.2
       These hypotheses are reinforced by considerations of depreciation:
Women with more education are more likely to plan to re—enter the labor
 fcrce   after having children so that considerations of depreciations are of
more concern to them. These women are also subject to the highest rates
of depreciation. If the highly educated woman postpones investment in
her market skills until after the period of child caring, she suffers

less depreciation during that period and is more likely to get her
employer, post—chIldren, to bear some of the investment costs. This
postpMLement   of investment is also economIcally rational because women
do not know   with certainty whether they will eventually re—enter the labor
force. The    more of her post—school    investment   a woman postpones until

             level of schcoling completed is asu:vd to be exogenous to
thi inadel. Having children whIle still in school would be  very undesirable,
         ig to this iodel, if one assumes that schooling,       like child—related
activities,   is ti—intensive.
         2This is confounded by the    fact   that, at least among women still of
chi].dberin age, a large nurber of years iii he        1:hor   force may indicate
lengthy pork experIence pre— erna!1y r.c1 a postponed first birth, for
many of th':a women. have not begun working post—maternally or have       begun
only recnlly.
                                                                           31.



after the child caring stage, the less time she is likely to work pre—
maternally; for her earnings in that early period, relative to later,
will be much lower than for women who do little post—school investing
throughout their working years. Thus the predicted substitution effect,
that   women with more education (higher         will space births closer
together) is strengthened by the   desire to reduce depreciation, which

occurs   at a higher rate as education is greater. And the substitution
effect providing an incentive for more educated (steeper Pt) women to
have children sooner after leaving school is strengthened by their
presumed greater career commitment and concomitant greater acquisition
of market skills; for it is rational not to acquire these skills until
the skills will be used (to avoid depreciation and to induce employer—
investment). This should result in less work experience before having
children; a more continuous labor force participation over the life-
time can occur if the woman postponas her career until after having and

raising   her   children.
         C.     Inccune Fffects
         Almost certainly the income elasticity for child—related
activities and for children is positive; couples with higher incomes
will demand more child—related activities than those with lower incomes.
They also will demind greater child—inputs to these activities, but child—
inputs are not synonymous with number of children. The 'tnount of child—
inputs available to a couple depends both on the number of children, or
quantity, and on the quality of the        children.1   Although probably no one
definition of child quality would satisfy everyone, perhaps the two most
1rportcnt aspects of quality are the child's health, including at the
extrerc   whether   or not he survives at all, and his intelligence or
attainments     and accomplishments. The literature reviewed in Chapter I

          1:;early all recent studies of    fertility by econoiist acknowledge
 the   two dimensions of the quantity of children produced and consumed.
In T.W. Schultz, ed., p.cit., Willis defines C=NQ, p..21; DeTray states
that CCN,Q), p. :72: Michael defines C(N) with Q(h(), p. S130;
icn—Ir.h equates C with ON, p. S2C7; au Becker and Lewis specify a
utility    fuctcn '41(r.,q,y) oe      a.rgu nts are     number o   children,
 their quality, and the raie of cousurpton of all other commodities,
p. S230.
                                                                             32.


  indicates that the timing of the first birth has little or no effect
  on child quality, (except perhaps that a very late first birth might
 preclude wide enough intervals between later births.) It was also
 quite clear, however, that longer intervals between births, at least
 up to a maximum of about six years, enhance child
                                                   survival, health,
 intelligence, and verbal ability.' Thus child quality would be
 maximized by havirg moderately long intervals between births, with the
 timing of the first birth of only minor consequence. 2
        The quantity (N) of children obviously can be increased       by
 having more children, but quantity also has a time dimension: During
 how much of their lifetime does a couple have children? It is
                                                                not
 clear what spacing of a given number of births maximizes the quantity
 of child—iput5. Two obvious and extreme solutions would be to have
 all children as soon as possible, maximizing the child—years
 experienced    during the parents' lifetimes, or to have the first child
 as early as possible and then space widely, to minir,i the number of
 years without children in the home —— i.e., to minimize the "empty
 nest" neriod. Whether one of these schemes or some intermediate course
were    chosen, it appears   that maximizing N   requires an early first
birth   but that the   ideal   subsequent spacing is not clear. Considering

          Supra, pp.
         2Thjs is not inconsistcnt with Becker's definition of quality as
being   the tijseand goods devoted to a child: Gary S. Becker, "An
Economic Analysis of Fertility," in Demogphjc and Economic Change in
Developed Countries Universities—National Bureau Conference Series II,
     York: Columbia University Press, 1960), pp. 209—30. Of course,
clorr spacin dces not necessarily inply that less tirrc is devoted to
each child, for the mother ray spend a larger proportion of her time in
child rearing to offset the close spacing. This tIme may, however, be of
a lower culity. For a discussion of the amount of tima devoted to child
  by vorn of various education levels, see Arleen Leibowitz, "Women's
care
A]lj       to Thri:ct ind Non—arket Activities: Differences by
Educjtjç-', (upth1ished Ph.D. dissertation, Colurbia Ihiversity, New
      '97'); for a discussIon ot the effects ci tine spent with children,
 e Liboitz, "dome    Investments in Children," paper presented at NBER—
Population    Council Conference on "Ma'riage, Family Human Capital,   and
Fertility,"    Chicago, June 1973.
                                                                                   33.

hti th          qiutt ty   and th qua I It y ;'-pect;   of chUdrcn, I ''ue that child—
Inputs   andchild—relited activities are maximized by having the first birth
soon after leaving school and having subsequent births at moderately wide
intervals, thus maxiriizing the utility received from a given number of
children. 1
       As was emphasized in the discussion of the substitution effects, in
Section B, couples nay differ not only with respect to the average level
of income during the lifetime (permanent income) but also with respect to
the timing of those income receipts. The level and pattern of income
receipts  determine the earliest point in time that a couple can afford to
have a birth of a given order —— when their current money income is ade-
quate to purchase the market goods and services necessary to support that
child, preceding children, and a minimal standard of living.
         To determine the effect of the level of income, apart from the
timing of income receipts, consider two families with different levels of
life—time (or average annual) incomes but similar patterns of income
receIpts (Figure 3)2 B and B refer to the I—th birth to the high and

                                           Figure   3
                  Predicted timing and spacing of births for couple
                                 ':lth Jiffrn le" of income

                                                                     high
                                                                     •low



          0
          '-I



                                                                            TIRe



          1Wide spacing ireans          that echi stage of childhood is experienced
scarateiy         with ea.h       child, o that parents can enjoy each type of child—
related     ti±ty over a longer period of time as each successive child
p.          urot inf,c: riy c1ildhocd, etc.
             income profIles arc drawn as straight lines for simplicity;
the cooclusions app.1v er1uall'i          to concave prfilcs.
                                                      It Ic irrelevant
whether tue vrtica1       a 5    •?.rihmatic or geoitric (log i r1cote) .           If
the Couihs cnter the   i.(r ur' at thC S3(! ae the proIiics may be
eitheraj— or oxperice—cene nrofi1. LC they do             not, then these are
c<perienc pr' ile !i ane 1;; prd!.:tin thc IenLh of tine from conpieting
cicol v riru: •itr. nd ae profi!e If one s pre:LtctInc age at
various iens (. . e . b.i rth)
                             •
                                                                              34.


    to   the low income families rcspective!y. The higti income family will be
                                                                                    )
 able- to afford the first birth sooner, hut no difCerences in
                                                               spacing arc
 predicted.1

        Lower income couples, on average, demand less of other jctivities,
 but it takes them longer to reach any given level of consumption of other
 activities. It is not clear whether these two          offsetting   forces would
 result in B1 occurring sooner for low       than   high income familes; this
 probably depends on the relative income elasticities of the two          types
 of      activities.2 But in a discussion only of the basic level of other
 activities     that is required by families of all income levels before
 they     can afford children, the prediction is that families with higher
 income can (and will) have their first children sooner.
            The diagram suggests that the level of income does rtot affect
 the     spacing of births subsequent to B1. It does not, however, take
 account of the possibility that higher income coupie may he able to
save more or have eas±er access to capital markets Luan lower income
couples; if, for example, higher Income facilitates saving for colLege
                during   chi1d' early years, high inco:;2   couplec cn have
children        closer together than can low income couples. On the other
hand, low income couples may see no need to save for college expenses.
Thus, in terms of paying for market goods and services, it would
                                                                 appear
that  couples with higher levels of income can afford to have their
first child sooner and may be better able to finance short birth
Inttrva1s
        The discussion based on Figure 3 does not, however, take account
of the total cost of children. In fact, short birth intervals probably

                assume that couples do not save, at least in the early years
of marriage.
            7
        Li ttle is !mc;n aot the re1aciv income elast:icitics, but very
.       ry estimates of the money expenditures on children have been
    t k an by Thomas J. Espenshade, "Estimating the Cost of Children and
Some Results from Urban Jnited States," ninco, International Population
and Urbzin Research, University of Ca] iforia, erke1.cv, 1972. If the
work is successful, the rnsult; could be cHincd with estimates of the
opportunity cones of children at dfferut incone levels to gain evIdence
as to whether the irco.e !nsticity of chJ.d_re1ated activities, narrowly
defin'd, s rcatcr or less than t'o.
                                                                                 35.



reduce the total cost of a given number of chil4ren, aside from concerns
for the adequacy of current income. Having births closer together will,
most   importantly, reduce the cost of the total time inputs to child care.
But, it will also loer the costs of purchased goods and              services,   as

one baby—sitter can care for several children, nursery schools often
charge less for a second child from the same family, it is easier to
make use of hand—me—downs, the mother can chauffeur two children to
the same activity as easily as she can one, and so on. The income effect
probably works to enable wives in high income families to space births
as far apart as desired, with no concern for             the higher costs, while
low income families employ closer spacing of births in order to reduce
direct    costs of children and     to enable the wife to return to work sooner
to   supplement family income. More women in families with otherwise low
incomes work than in families with high husband's and other income.1
         To determine the     effect   of income slope, or the timing of income
receipts, on the timing and spacing of hirth at is financially
feasible, separately from the effect of the level of the lifetime income,
con.i.der Figure 4
                                       Figure   4
                 Predicted tim5.ng and spacing of births for couples
                    with   different timing of income receipts
                                                     S   tP
                                                                       flat

            •1
            0
            U




                                                                        TI e

              Mincer, "Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in
AQpccts    of LorEcononic, Universities—National iureau Conference
Series 14 (Princeton, N.J.: i'rinceon           University    Precs, l%2), pp.
63—97.
                                                                                36.


          The two       income paths are intended to represent the same level of
 lifetime income. The couple with the flatter income path can            afford   the
 first birth         (B) sooner but they must space subsequent births farther
 apart,   as it takes them longer to reach the required higher level of
 income to be         able to afford the next child. The total interval can be
 shorter for the couple with a steeply rising income path, no matter what
 the requisite income level for B1 or for subsequent births. However, if
 the couples cannot afford    until after the point of over—taking,"
 when the two current incomes are equal (Figure4a), although the              total
                                        Figure   4a
                Predicted timing and spacing with different timing
         of    income receipts when the point of overtaking precedes
                                                                         B1




                                                                      f1t
              I
              (1
              C)
              U




                                                                         TI a


interval from the first (B1) to last () birth still can be shorter
for couples with steeply—rising income paths, in this case the first
birth can be afforded sooner by the couple with a steep income profile.
Since the point of over—taking is about seven to nine
                                                      years after
entering the labor force1 and since most first births occur before that
tine (but just barely),2 the timing effect of the slope of income prcbably

                   Mincer, Schooling, E:cperie.ncc, ane Earnings, on._cit., Table 1.
                   average age at B of Whita ProLstant father of two or more
children (l95 Natlcnai iertflity Sti.',        see beJc) was 25.56 yecra; the
average education leie1, 11.57 years. TIn,follojng Nincer, ibid (and
C. Ilanoch), the average ge at labor fcre enti would be 19..7, indicating
that B1 occurz on the aierage seven y€ira.. after a nan enters the labor
force.
                                                                                                37.

will be to enable earlier first births the flatter the slope and definitely
to permit closer spacing the steeper the slope.
       The fact that couples with rising incomes, given permanent income,
can finance closer spacing of births does not nean that they will choose
to    do so. Tne diagran and exposition have considered only when a couple
can afford to have          each   birth. As stated earlier, the total cost of a
given nunber of children is higher the longer the interval between the
first    and last births but wider intervals probably increase child—quality
and    the utility parents receive from child—related activities. Since I
am considering here couples with identical levels of permanent income,

they are expected to demand identical levels of child—related activities.
Therefore, although the restriction on how soon they                            can   begin having
children is a real constraint, the constraint on how close together the
births can be spared will be irrelevant if couples do not indeed want
clcely spaced          births. rhus couples with the same permanent incomes
might       even all   choose the same total interv. irrespective of the
steepness       of each couple's income profile; or, only those couples with
thc    flcttast rrofks rtiht be                 forced to have a            totri birth interval
that       was longer than the ideal. However, couples with steeply rising
incomes might have somewhat shorter birth intervals than they would
choose if incc.e le'cl and slope placed no constraints on their behavior
because       they have Lad to postpone                and may wish to "catch up." The
constraint of the slope of the income profile acts to delay the first
birth if th 'fj1e ric steeply over tire and perhaps to produce a
shorter       total interval.
                 in the case of similar slope but different level of
            Althou'h
incor the result- of ccateriplatin the effects of the cumulative life—
tit. incor. up to ny point in tii: are ambiguous because of the
different levels of other activities desired, in the case of equal
income hut: d fftrnt slopes it may seen reasonable' to modify conclusions
      -•        iL.      .Hc T gures 4               !:. S;ci !i:.lly, o;e might argue
Lhat -in the case (Figure 4a) where it appears that B1 occurs earlier for
families with a steep profile than for flat profile families, the delay
by the fmili     th flat profii.L'. iiy bu less than Li13.t di ra.nsied if
cmulativa cns'inption to     is re.evanc er if saving can occur. Since
                                                                                38.

the flat orofile is above the steep profile throughout most of the pre—B1
period, by the time B occurs the couple with the flat profile may easily
have a higher cumulative income and savings and may not need to wait until
the time when their current income             equals that of the other couple at the
time of B. Thus evenf    B1
                            occurs after the point of over—taking, the
couple with the flat profile may still be able to have B1 sooner, or
vcry little, later; while if               occurs before the point of over—taking the
flat—profile family definitely can have B1 sooner.
         -Incidentally, this observation that the income effect of a steep

profile    of incoma is to postpone the first           birth may help explain why
highly    educated women, who are expected to           invest heavily in post—school

acquisition    of market skills and who should do this investing after the
pcriod    of child caring to minimize depreciation, do work before having
their first    children. Ignoring the effects of a positive discount rate
on postponing earnings (and expenditures), women can maximize their
earnings if they have their children immediately p , L—school and then
ccnccntrate their entire labor force experience into one continuous,
pL—1renl period. This min1ru ze (lepreciOtien and produ-es the
time—intensive activities when     is lowest Women, especially highly
educated romen, invest less pre—maternally than post—maternally, suggesting
th they have accurately analyzed the situation. Presumably, the reason
tJiar they do woth befon     ía that most women with high education are
married to men with high levels of education, who are likely to have the
 -r" crt pro files, due to their eater i'e rest—school in1fest.ents n
human capital. Since the effect of the slope of the income path leads
to p:stponement of the first birth, the wife may as well work. Her
uothin, also hns- the desirable effect of smoothing the flew of family
incc':r eceipcs (in the period up until she re—enters the labor force
post—:ntcrnaliv)
          In summary, if the income level Is high the couple can afford to
     ,I     :ncr       nni to have     the ta1 I' lcn uhsequnt birth iuterval.:
           probably         viewed by most couples as   maximizing child—quality and
the consumption of d1ilc4—reiated activities. This produces a longer total.
interv.     from   F
                       1
                           to 1'n   given the nuLhL of childrcn. If the slope of
the incorm path is steep, given the level of premanent income, B1 will
                                                                        39,


have to be postponed relative to families with a flatter income path over
tire; once childbearing begins, the couple with a steeply rising income

can   have subsequent   children closer together but will not want to unless

either (a) most couples, with all but the steepest profiles, are foreclosed
from choosing the birth interval lengths which maximize child—quality or
(b) the postponement of 81 produces in them a desire to compress birth
intervals lest B occur when the mother is "too old." That is, couples
¶%'ith steeply rising incomes probably do have somewhat shorter birth
intervals   to the extent that the income slope constraint actually   does
impinga on the spacing desires of couples with the same level of income
but a flatter slope and to the     extent that they have a target age fo

ending childbearing whIch might     not be met because they had    later than
the   couples whose incomes change little as they grow older.
                                                                              40.

                                   CHAPTE1 III
                               DATA AND VAR1thLES


          A. 1965 National Fertility Study
          Two sources
                   of data were used to test empirically the hypotheses
 about the timirg and spacing of births. The 1965 National Fertility
 Study conducted by the Office of Population Research at Princeton
 University, which is described below, has the most complete fertility
 information of a national survey that I could find, but the economic
 data are nct extensive and are of questionable accuracy. The 1967
 National Longitudinal Survey of Work Experience of Women 30—44 under
 the direction of Professor Herbert Parties of Ohio State University,
 which is described in Section B of this thapter, does not include as
 much   information   on the timing, spacing, and number of births, but its
 information cn income and labor force activity is more detailed and appears
 to   be more accurate.
         The National Fertility Study (NFS) was a nat      ii   probability
sample of 5617 women who were currently married and living .th their
husbands at the tina of the interview late ir. 1965; the
                                                         women were aged
eighteen to fifty—four, living in the United States, and able to partici-
pate in an English—language interview.1 Women over forty—four were half—
sampled; Negroes were doubled—sampled but arc excluded from my empirical

analyses. I focused on white, non—Catholic2 mothers from this sample who


       1Tnis data set s described in detail in i!orrnan Ryder and Charles
Westoff, Reproduction in the United States: 1965, (Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton Un.versity Press, 1971).
         The relicion distinction was made because I found statistically
sinifjcant differences be-ueen Catholics and non—Catholics in the way
certain independent variables —— in perticular, education —— affected
timing and spacinr and because I assume basic differences between the          two
groups with respect to thlr taste for child—related activities and the
         -H:.) rc'nt ot contraception. Relevant to the former point, Ryder and
              mi that unlike Protestants, Catholic woier in this sample who
had :tt hd college had fertility behavior more like that of Catholics
iit.i i:.; education than like those with moderate amounts of education.
(Sec tab1e hciow). They attribute this to a very high level of reli—
giosit   a:oni the college level Catholic women, most of whom attended
                                                                                        41.



had   been married only once, whose husbands had been married only once,
who did not live on a farm at the time of the interview, and who were
old enough to have almost certainly completed childbearing —— namely
those aged forty to fifty—four.1 Occasionally comparisons were made
between this primary subset of the NFS and other subsets, such as
Catholics, mothers of two            or   more children, women who had been married

one or more times,         or    the like; but unless otherwise specified all
results from the NFS refer to the 585 observations in the primary
subset.
          The following timing and spacing variables were measured in
months: wife's and husband's ages at the first birth (N Age B1 and

H Age B1, respectively), their ages at the last birth (N                        Age B and
H   Age B), their ages when they married (W Age Mar and U Age Mar), the
dIfference it'. their ages (Age Diff), and the lengths of the various
birth intervals —— the total interval from B
                                           1
                                             t                       Bn (Total Int), the
interval       from marriage to B1 (1st Int), and the average interval between
successive births if there were two                or   more births (Ave Int). Age Diff


colleges with a religious affiliation.

                       r          'n r:'et'd — ft' ftf1 3—3
                  (.       rCh
                                        v.icns in rcn...s)
        Eticatir
          U.S
          9.11
          12
                       Pr'strt
                       4.u (OZ)
                           3.4
                           2.9
                                Cth51
                                 (186)
                                 (455)
                                            4.'(.c3)
                                            3.8
                                            3.9
                                                  (83)
                                                  (215)
                                                                Excess
                                                                          .
                                                                         Catholic
                                                                ever Prr'stnt

                                                                          .42
                                                                         1.04
          13.15            2.8   (110)      3.6   (49)                    .80
          16               2.7   (88)       5.0   (24)                   2.32
         All               3.1 (941)        4.0 (424)                     .98

From Ryder and Westoff, R2roduction in the United States: 1965,
(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1971), pp. 74—76.



          also eliminated observations if the woman had a multiple
birth,    if the first birth wa pre—marttal, it the family received
welfare, and the. one observation not  renrting the husband's  education.
The income of families receiving welfare could not be determined; the
amount of welfare received was not rerorted, and one cannot tell
whether the rei'orted income figurt! i:1ud:; or excltdes that amount.
Its inclusion, or exclusion, inky TO even                  Dt    cou:;i;tent CtWCefl
records.
                                                                              42.

 is positive if the husband is older than the wife and negative if she is
 the older of the two. Total mt and Ave mt are set equal to zero for
one—child families.
     W Ed and H Ed represent the highest year of school completed by
the wife and by the husband, respectively; if the educational attainment
exceeded sixteen years, this variable was set equal to eighteen. The
number of live births to each woman was represented by fC; I/C2 is the
square of that        nwber,   Included in regressions on dependent variables
which are related non—linearly to the number         of    children born.
          There were    three   different types of income measure: the first,
Y1965, was the incote, expressed in thousands of dollars, of the husband
frc all sources in 1965. The income data In the NFS consisted oF only
two pieces of information, the incone brackets of the husband and of
the wife for 1965) The information is of doubtful reliability,
becaise most of the interviews occurred in October f that year and
because incoa was not defined. Respondents were not reminded to
consider non—labor sources of income; the         form of the question made   it
difficult      to report joint income; there was no inscruccion on      wheiher to
Include      transfer payments; and apparently, there was no probing by
interviewers tc determine if the couple had received (or expected to
receive)     non—c.ape and niary Income.     It is not possible to determine
wage    rates either, for the necessary questions about weeks and hours
of work were not asked.
         A   SeCund   type of income measure w; aa estirate of tc annual
Income   that the COu!)le might     have predicted, in the early years of
their marria-c, that the husband would earn at given voints in their
life cycle, baad on iris occupation, education, anu gcographic location.
Y40 is the predicted earnings, in thousands of dollars , of the husband



      I    c--rj11 work, the
               !
                                          idpoInts   of the incoc classes were
UL to rcpY-at ti ncome level              c::cept in the   c.:;e
                                                             of the lowest and
hy:c.t income categories.          The $0 — $2,000 bracket was represented by
liO0; the ouon ended class, $15,000 nd over, was assigned a value of
S20,000. (A3umIn; a Pareto distributioi for these data yields a mean
ircoe for t1i class of 2i,53; the nilan is certainly lower.)
                                                                              43.

at   age forty. The va!ue o 140 was determiiwd by first running an earnin-gs
function on all husbands of white non—farm mothers aged twenty—five to
fifty—four. (See Appendix B.) The rcsuiting equation was            used   to predict
annual income at age forty for each husband in the smaller sample (of
women forty to fifty—four) on the basis of his own individual characteris-
tics. This predicted—income measure was expected possibly to be more rele-
vant than the, perhaps poorly measured, 1965 income in early fertility
decision. Additionally, Y40 has the advantage of representing income at
a given point on the life cycle income profile, providing a more comparable
measure of income than 11965 for men whose current ages differed over two
or   three decades. Y EXP         20 is the predicted income for the husband twenty
years   after entering the labor force: Y W Ed + 20 is his predicted income
twenty years after tna wife leaves school, sssuiing her age at
leaving   school equals six plus the nurber of years of school completed.
         Three cohort measures were used to supplement or substitute for
the incone variables, in  recognition of the fact that general economic
conditions changed gre:tiy during the child       ing years of these women.
The oldest wom.n in th, sub—snaple reached thrir twentieth birthdays
in July i3c,; he younrest, in June i9'5. The measures used were (the
last two digits of) the year of the wife's birth (W Yr B), the husband's
year of birth (H Yr B), and the year the couple married (Yr Mar).
         B.        1965 National Lonritudinal_Survey
      Although the data of the ational Fertility Study have numerous
advantages over all other data sets I have tried to use —— especially,
idntification of the ;'o:n's religious preference and ti1 only             corpiete
information        on the   dates of birth of all children ever born to the woman
——   the economic content is deficient. Tha National Longitudinal Survey,
on   the other hand, his little infor:natien on fertility,1 but has more

                  does   report the month and year that the first child was acquired
by any rcans —— childbirth, adontion, ntarriag2 to a maa Iio has children
—— so         h;' e1uJf.r c:cn ':1.0 nec ui r;d nn' children ov reans other
              ,


tL: cii ;irth, I .:ss .;lc to detnrin&! the date of i for my subsanpie o
the NLS. i\ges of all children present in the house.ho1 at the time of the
  irvey are reported in years; but one cannot determine whether all o these
children act'.1ly w'r horn to the respondent or whether some children born
to her nrc nc. itc] ude n the. roport Tcdatn do not include direct
information en tc nu:bnr of childrcn €.ver born, but a reasonably accurate
estlmete can be constructed from the an:ers to several questions.
                                                                                 44.


 detailed, and probably more reliable, information on labor force partici-
 pation, the earnings of the various family members, and non—labor income.
        The NLS is a national probability sample of American women aged
 thirty to forty—four.1 The subsample used in this research consisted of
 706 mothers who were aged forty to forty—four, white, married once—
 spouse present, and not living on a farm. As explained in footnote 1
 on page 43, women who had acquired children other than by giving birth
 to them were excluded.2 There is a high incidence of missing information
 for the observations in this survey; therefore several different subsets
 of observations were used, depending on which variables were needed.
        The timing variable (Sch—31) is an estimate of the number of months
 from the time the woman left school3 until she had her first birth. Un-

fortunately, the design of the interview questionnaire was such that women
who had never entered the labor force were not to be asked the year they
 left schcol (Grad). Of the 706 women, ninety—eight reported no labor
 force    participation; however, all but    forty—one of t          do report the
year     of   leaving school. In addition to those forty—one, five of the
wor who did work outside the home lack information on Grad.
       The spacing variable, Total Int, is conceptually Identical to that
used with the NFS data. With the NLS data, however, the date of the last

birth is not given. In constructing Total mt I have assumed that the
yo:;ast child in the household at the tina of the interview was the last
child born to the mother. His age as of April 1, 1967 is reported; by
urv October athe "avera'e" month of birth I estimated the month and
year of B and, from that, Total mt. This will, of course, result in a


       'For a more detailed descripticn of th NLS Surveys of Work Ex—
pcrincc see J. R. Shca, R. S. Spitz, and F. A. Zeilner, Dual Careers,
Center for Human Resource Research, Ohio State University, Coluthus, May 1970.


                  excluded were observations with    coding errors on variables
                   i; study;        ;iLt inc,      t. It rcl     uses to questions
needed    to reconstruct the (estimated) nunber of children born, such as
           aiy children born to the wcsan are not living with her and how
rany; and (sometimes) those with missing information in important income
Cate'ores.

          3Only the year of leaving school      was known;   I   used June of that
ycrr as the mnth      of   leavThg school.
                                                                           45.



a significant underestimation of Total mt  if the youngest child has already
left his parents' household.1 Ave mt equals the estthated Total mt
divided by one less than the computed number of children.
       Some of the other variables also differ from those described in
Section A of this chapter: W Ed and H Ed here tre reported by year
through seventeen years; anything in excess of seventeen years was coded
as nineteen years.2 The income measure, Yl966, is actual 1966 annual
income,   in thousands of dollars, of the husband and non—labor income.
The wife's income was not included in Y1966 (or in Y1965 from the NLS)
because her decision as to whether to work outside the home is comple-
mentary to the timing and spacing decisions; because women's earnings
generally are a small part of total family incorre (for husband—wife
families); because this results in overstated income differences between
families with working and non—working wives by not taking account of
the added expenses incurred by the former or the greater household pro-
ductivity of the latter; and because most w i do not work anyway during
the child caring years.
          The year thc. woman left school (Grad) aid h°r age in    years s   of

April   1, 1967, (Ate) were sometimes used as cohort variables. Since
the NLS women reached age twenty between April 1942 and March 1947,
their ages are not correlated with economic conditions in the way that
the   cohort variablc in the      NFS  data are; the cohort variable may
actually reflect     in part the    effects of World War II on fertility
decisions.
          The-variables ic afld #C2 have the same     definition as in Section

A, but, s noted on page 43, their values are estimated.



       1Most of the intervais look reasonable although there is no wy
to be sure that the tote] interval is approximately correct if there are
three or more chu1dren because of the existence of such observations as
    'othcr of  f cj1rn hcsc uirt                birth ':'
                                                  in Septerher 1942 and
whose youngeL cii.Li 'as      twenty—four as of April 191)7, it is obvious
that Total mt is      rieasured   with error.
          2The NLS   reported 'iiighest rade Attended" md "Whether Completed;"
when the latter inforeatin was missth (a large minority of the obser-
vations) I aume1 the grade had be'n completed.
                                                                                                   46.


               Several variables relating to labor force participation were used
 with     observations       from the NLS, both in the examination of fertility
 behavior and in the study of the timing of labor force activities reported
 in Chapter VI. The number of years during which a woman worked at least
 six months (Yrs LF) consists of three components: years worked before
 marriage (LF S—I), years worked between marriage and the first birth
  (LF 1—B), and the nunber of years worked after the first birth. The first
 two of these combine to give the number of years of labor force activity
 between leaving school and having the first birth (LF S—B1). The lengths,
 in months, of the intervals from school to marriage (Sch — M), from marriage
 to first birth (M —
                      B1), and from school to first birth (Sch —B1)
                                                                    are
 used as independent variables in some regressions on years worked. LFPR
 designates the          ratio
                      of the total number of years worked to the total
 number of years since leaving school. The number of months after the
                             last
                                                                    l
 first or after the     birth until the woman entered or re—entered the
 labor force, if indeed she did, B1 — LF and B —     :ecpectively, are
still other measures of the extent of labor force attachment.
           Two dum variablas :cre used and are identIfied In the approprIate
tables     of regression results. One dummy is               assigned the
the woman worked at any time after having had one or more children and
                                                                                   value   onett   f
!tzeroU    if    she was ne'icr in the labor force after she began childbearing.
The second ¼ariable applies only to those women who                      did   work after having
children;        it   takes the value "one" if she worked after                    and before B
                                                                               1                    n
——
       i.e.,    betecn bir-s        ——   arid   the valte zore" If      she   urked after having
her     last child but not between births. When the first of these two
durmjes        Is used as a measure of commitment to market activities the age in
yeLrs of the youngest child (Age YC) is sonatiras introduced to standardize
for the fact that the labor force participation of the                        mother   of a pre-
school child and of a mother whose youngest child is, say, twelve years
old do not :cpresent the same degree of labor force commitment. The
           I \;c      IC is set e'-ual to eigh teen      if tite   yo,; t child is over
           a or if       no children were living in the household at the time of
the.   interview.
          ieforc examining the empirical results it                 m:y be helpful to explain
why these       particular variables were used ——           how    they are assumed to relate
                                                                            47.

                                          Table 1
                               Definition of variable namos

    Name                                 Definition                         Sample
    Age               Age in years of the wife at interview date             NLS
    Age Diff          Excess of husband's over wife's age, in months         NFS
    Age YC            Age in years of youngest child present in household    NLS
    Ave mt            Average Interval in months between successive births both
    B1 — LF           Number of months from first birth to labor force       NLS
                        entry
    B       — LF
        n             Number of months from last birth to labor force        NLS
                        entry
    1st      Irtt     Number of months from marriage to first birth          NFS
    Grad              Year the woman left school                             NLS
    H Age B1          Husband's age in months at first birth                 NFS
 H Age B              Husband's age in months at last birth                  NFS
    1-I Age Mar       Husband's age in months at marri                       NFS
    H Ed              Highest year of school completed by husband            both
 H Yr B               Husband's year of birth                                NFS
 LF S—M               Nubr of years in labor force from leaving school       NLS
                        to marriage
LF M—B1              Number of years in labor force from marriage to         NLS
                       first birth
LF S—B1              Nur1,rr of ycars in labor force from leaving school    NLS
                       to  first birth
LFPR                 Ratio of total years worked to years from leaving      NLS
                       school to interview

N—B1
                     Same as 1st mt                                         NLS
                     Number of children born                                both
.2
                     Sciuare of nuther of cnildren both                     both
Sch         —
                B1   Nur±erof tiontlis from leaving school to first birth   NLS
Sh          —   N    Number of months from leaving school to marriage       NLS
Total mt             Number of mouths from first to last birth
     \;              Jfc'g ne in   months   at first birth
                                                                            both
                                                                            NFS
     Age B           Wife's age in months at last birth                     NFS
W Age Mar            Wife's age in months at marriage                       NFS
W Ed                 lljc radc of school conpl2ted by wife                  both
W    Yr B            Wtf's ycar of birth                                    NFS
                                                                          48.
                                      Table 1
                                     (cant 'd)


Name                                Definition                        —   Sample
Y1965           Husband's (expected) income in 1965, in thousands          NFS
                  of dollars
Y1966           Husband's and other 1966 income, in $l,000's               NLS
Y40            Predicted income of husband at age forty, in $l,000's NFS
Y EXP 20       Predicted income of husband twenty years after his          NFS
                 leaving school, in $1,000's
Y W Ed + 20    Predicted income of husband twenty years after the          NFS
                 wife is estimated to have left school, in $1,000's
Yr Mar         Year of marriage                                            NFS
Yrs LF         Total number of years worked by the wife                    NLS


In   addition, there are two dummy variab1e; for the    one,   1   worked after
U =   did not. For the other,   1     first worked after B1 before B;
o     worked after B but not between B and B
                   Ii                      1     n
                                                                         49,


  to the    theoretically
                        relevant variables. Considering first the independent
  variables, ideally the study would use information on the path of the wife's
  price of time, on the path of the family's full
                                                  income, and on their
  ecpectatjons for these values throughout the remainder
                                                             of their lifetimes
  (e.g., in order to    determine   the "permanent income.") This information is
  not   available, sc I have used the wife's education
                                                         as a proxy for the
  level and slope of
                        P Figure 1 depicts positive relationships between
  the
    slope of the wage profile and education and between the level of
 wages and education, for married women. Moreover, even if a woman is
 not    in the labor force a high level of
                                        education may be associated with
 greater efficiency in household productioc (high Pt) and with more
 learning and improvement in household productivity through time (rising


           The level of the husband s income and non—labor       I
                                                           income may not
 affect    for purposes of the timing decision, because most woir.en   work
 until the first birth is near; but it may be
                                                 Levant for spacing
 decisions, as sortie wives never re—enter the labor force after
                                                                   bearing
 children. Variables relating to labor force participation ware included
 in soe regressions in the hope that they might reflect some of the
 effects of differences in the slope of the lifetime path of
                                                             P, under
an assumption that women with greater labor force experience are investing
nr in human capitd and therefore having more sharply rising
                                                                 P profiles.
        Because the predicted income effects of income level and income
slo',e on the timing of B1 differ, tests of the
                                                 model require variables
that reasure each or these effects separately. The
                                                    relevant known data
are the current (1965 or 1966) reported annual incorte and the level of
the husband's education. Figure 2 suggests that H Ed Is correiated, on
avcrT'2,   with bcth   the level and the   slipe
                                            of the income path; of course,
there is variaLiorl of individuals around the
                                              average. I have assumed
that th anaui income fiurc reflects the average level of family income,
*'        cati. ¶ii;en hot'i If Ed nd c'nc of tho
                                                    incr
                                                    viriblc; are


         1Thc variable reported in   the
                                     NFS data probably represeitt the
sun of the,e two elerents; I     able to construct the appropriate
measure j the hLS, which prescntcd more detailed
                                                  income information.
                                                                        50.



included in a regression equation, I assume that the coefficient of U Ed ——
the effect of the husband's education, given his level of income ——
represents the income slope effect and that the càefficient of Y1965, Y1966,
or whatever income, variable has been used, reflects the effect of income
level, given slope. Since the income of one year may not accurately
represent a couple's general economic situation, the size of positive or
negative transitory components being unknown, and since the income
variable in the NFS is not measured well, I have used cohort variables as
proxies for the level of Income. Especially for the National Fertility
Study, a positive and monotonic relation exists between the value of
cohort variable and the general economic condition prevailing when the
couple was in its prime childbearing years. This variable may even have
an added advantage over the more direct income measures, Y1965 and Y1966,
being ex—ante rather than ex—post. That is, the cohort variable is
related to the   economic    situation existing when the couple had to make
their   fertility decisions; current income is relev-'t only to the extent
that the couple correctly foresaw what their income would be in middle—
aie and to the extent that it contains small or no transitory components.
        •The variable 1/C, number of children born,   is introduced into most
of  the equations in order to standardize for the fact that timing and
spacing decisions cannot, for physiological reasons, be iade independently
of the decision as to fa:aily size. I will return briefly to the subject
of completed fertility in Chapter V.
        The dependent variables used in studying the spacing decision,
the lengths of the total interval from first to last births and of the
average interval between 'births, are straightforward and the reasons for
t'oir use are self—evident.1 Most previous studies of timing have used,
as tile dependent variable, the length of the interval from marriage to B1.

The inconclusive results are often attributed to inaccuracies in the data,


        1Ideally,   if   one admits the possibility of contraception failure
to the model, the dependent variables would be the desired lengths of
these various intervals. This information is not available, so I will
not present here the riry problems, especially definitional, of even
this "ideal" measure.
                                                                          51.

  as couples with pre—marital. conceptions report their wedding dates
   falsely.1 My model suggests a second explanation: that the most
  relevant measure of timing is not the "First
                                               Interval" but rather the
  couple's age at B1 or the length of time between leaving school, and
  entering the labor force, and B1. I do not suggest that the independent
  variables have no effect on the length of the first interval but that,
  because the wedding is an action taken by pairs of adults in
                                                               part
  because   they desire to have thildren, the first interval is a weak,
  partial   measure of timing
                             variations. The model suggests that the
 important considerations for timing are the price of time and income
 levels and paths, which are related to the levels of education and labor
 force experience. Hence, the more appropriate measure of variations in
 timing decisions is the age at
                                 B1 (given education) or, in the NLS data
 where it can be determined, the
                                  length of time from leaving school to
                                                                           B1.




             !,ro1d T. CIritcnQfl, "Child Spncing nl'sjs via record
Linkage,"   zrri    and Fai1Livp, XXV (August 1963), 2 72—80; Christen—
en and Olive P. Bowden, "Studies in Child—Spacing: II — The
                                                               Time Interval
Between Marrjac'e of Parents and Birth of their First Child," Social
)CXI (r' 1J3), 346—51; arid Eljzbcth Murphy Whelan, "The Temporal Forces,
             of arriacc, Ccitccption, and Birth in Massachusetts,"
Deirophv, IX (.tIgust 1972), 394—414.
                                                                          52.


                                    CHAPTER IV
                           IRICAL FINDINGS: TIMING

        A.     Primary   Samnies
        The tables in this chapter present the results of regression
analyses designed to test the hypothesized effects of economic variables
on the timing of the first birth ——        i.e.,
                                          the beginning of the child—

caring stage of the life cycle) Various combinations of the wife's
education, the husband's educatIon, several income variables, and the
number of children born      were   regressed on W Age B1 for observations
from the National Fertility Study. The results are shown in Table 2.
In all regressions containing either the husband's education or a measure
of his income, the regression coefficient of W Ed is between 4.5 and 6.5;
it is significantly different from zero (positive) but, of more relevance,
it is significantly less than twelve (months). That is, each additionai
year of education for the wife         raises her age at B1 by somewhat less than
one—half year. As hypothesized in the discussion r' the substitution
effect above, women with more education have B1 sooner after leaving
chcel —— a little        over a half   year sooner per each year of education.
Although the coefficient is larger when H Ed and income measures are not
included, as W Ed picks up some of the effect of those correlated
variables, it is still significantly less than twelve (months).
        The regressions in Table 3 test directly the effects of education
and income on the interval from school to first birth; the sample differs
from   that   used in Table 2 in that it includes Catholics a-'d it excludes
nearly half of the women who have never worked. The coefficients of W Ed
in the regressions which exclude Grad range from —6.10 to —6.82 if the




least
impli€
          es
       1A11 regression results presented in this chapter are ordinary
             estimates. If #C is included in such OLS regressions, this
           licitly that the decision on family size precedes and is
ind2pendt of the timing and spacing. I believe this to be fairly
rc i. :ic. c..c'vcr, in an attcr:pt to l1c; for the po'sibility of simul—
tancity I performed also two—stage least—squares regressions, first with
#C as the dependent variable. Then, in the second step, I substituted the
estimated for the actual numher of children as an independent variable
in regressions on the timing and spacitg variables. The results,
presented in Appendix C did not seem to justify pursuing further the
2SLS approach.
                                                                                    53.


                                        Table 2

Regrcsiens en wife's age, In         at first birth; 1963 National Fertility
Study: non-Rcan Catholic mothers aged 40-54, white,. non-farm, .arried once-
spouse present; h585.
Reressjon coefficients with t-valu.s in parentheses.

   W Ed     H Ed Y 1965                                    I/C     I/C2    W Yr B
   8.39                                                                    —2.08
  (9.96)                                                                   (4.02)         .16
   5.52     3.29                                                           —2.15
  (4.83)   (3.68)                                                          (4.22)         .18
   7.09                                                  —9.41             —1.83
  (8.59)                                                 (1.23)            (3.70)         .23
   4.50     2.99                                         —9.20             —1.91
  (4.08)   (3.49)                                        (7.23)            (3.89k         .25
   6.49               .84                                —9.43             —1.86
  (7.22)            (1.68)                               (7.36)            (3.76)         .24
   4.48     2.87      .17                                —9.21             —1.91
  (4.05)   (3.06) (.32)                                  (7.23)            (3.89)         .25
   7.33                                                   1.02      .89    —1.70
  (8.84)                                                 (4.67)   (2.23)   (3.42)         .24
   4.68     3.09                                        —17.41      .96    —1.77
  (4.24)   (3.62)                                        (4.82) (2.43)     (3.59)         .26


   7.81               .81                                                  —2.10
  (8.48)            (1.56)                                                 (4.07)         .17
   6.42                          3.43                                      —2.07
  (6.09)                                          Y40
                               (3.06)                                      (4.05)         .18
   6.32                                                                    —2.08
                                3   3          EX? 2o
  (5.95)
                               (3:15)                                      (4.05)         .18
   6.34                                                                    —2.05
  (6.58)                                 )Y W Ed+20                        (4.03)         .19
   6.49               .84                               —9.43              —1.86
  (7.22)            (1.68)                              (7.36)             (3.75)
   5.33                       3 10                      —9.25              —1.83
  (5.22)                                      Y40
                             (2:89)                     (7.25)             (3.73)         .24
   5.21                       3 05                      —'?.27             —1.83
  (5.06)                     (3:03) Y         EXP 20    (7.27)             (3.73)
   5.24
  (5.60)
                             3 77
                             (4:01)       '   U
                                                        —9.16
                                                        (7.22)
                                                                           —1.82
                                                                           (3.71)         .25
                                                                     54.

                               Table 2
                              (cont'd)
W Ed     H Ed Y 1965    Y40      Y EXP 20   Y W Ed+20    #C      W Yr B    R2

 5.51    3.24    .06                                             —2.16
(4.81)   (3.32) (.11)                                            (4.21)    .18
 5.46    2.75            .91                                     —2.14
(4.76)   (2.09)         (.56)                                    (4.18)    .18
 5.46    2.69                        .93                         —2.14
(4.76)   (1.96)                     (.58)                        (4.18)    .18
 5.82     1.12                               3.18                —2.08
(5.07)    (.83)                             (2.15)               (4.08)    .19
 4.48     2.87    .17                                   —9.21    —1.91
(4.05)   (3.06) (.32)                                   (7.23)   (3.89)    .25
 4.46     2.53           .78                            —9.19    —1.90
(4.02)   (2.01)         (.50)                           (7.22)   (3.86)    .25
 4.45     2.39                       .94                —9.20    —1.89
(4.01)   (1.82)                     (.61)               (7.23)   (3.85)    .25
 4•79      .97                               2.97       —9.15    —1.84
(4.32)    (.75)                             (2.10)      (7.21)   (3.76)    .26
 •
Rscn3                                                           Ttb1n 3
                                                             leaving choo1 to first birth; 1967
r.Cr .n th nu-br of renths fri
           'rs id                 40-44, whIte, married onco-?;usa                                       tnttcnl L,ngttudtnal Strvey;
                                                                                 pre-nt,     no "acquired" chIldren, Grad knowr; N —
           W   ['1     II   Ed                               42                    1=LF
                                  Y1966                     It
                                                             C           Grad                 Yrs LF        Age           YC        LFPR
                                                                                 After B1                            Ag                         R2
       —6.10           2.27           —.65     —13.02    .65                      —18.46
       (6.71)         (3.42)      (1 * 83)      (5.33) (2.86)                      (5.05)             :
                       2.46           —.61                                                                                                  .16
                                               —13.02            .62    —5.67    —19.49
      (2.08) (3.83) (1.78)                      (5.51)     (2.84)       (6.82)     (5.51)
      —6.19            2.3            — .67    —13.06
                                                                                                                                            .22
                                                                 .63             —19.09                     4.50
      (6.?)           (3.54)      (1.91)        (5. 39)    (2. 80)                IC  •I
                                                                                  I.J.I_oJ                 (3.55)
                       1.40        —.56                                                                                                     .
                                               —29.22       1.38                  —367
      (9.05)                      (1.92)                                                                             —6.44
                      (2.54)                   (13.10)       .
                                                          (7 14)                  (1.17)                            (17.33)                 .42
       1.148           1.57       —.50        —30.84       1,41        —7 .82     —3.61
      (1 .82)                                                                                                       —7.09
                     (3.15)      (1.88)       (15.24)     (8.08)       (11.99)
       —
                                                                                  (1.27)                            (20.79)                 .53
                      2.80        —.48        —12.72        .68
      (7.04)         (4.20)      (1.33)         (5.11)    (2.92)                                                                           .13
     —2.73            3.01        —.43        —12.70        .65        —5.47
     (2.56)          (4.65)      (1.23)        (5.26) (2.90)           (6.45)                                                              .18
     —6.40            2.91        —    3'     —11.38        .64                               1.23
     (7.02)          (4.43)      (1.05)        (4.60)     (2.79)                             (4.40)                                        .15
     -2.90            3.09        —.34        —11.57        .62        —5.10                  1.03
     (2.74) (4.82)               (1.00)        (4.80)     (2.78)       (6.03)                (3.78)                                        .20
     —6.62            2089        —.37        —11.54        .64
     (7.24) (4.37)                                                                                                                26.82
                                 (1.05)       (4.64)      (2.78)
                                                                                                                                  (3.82)   .15
     —2.91            3.09        —.33        —11.57        .62        —5.38
     (2.74)          (4.82)                                                                                                       25.61
                                  (.96)        (4.80)     (2.76)       (6.41)
                                                                                                                                  (3.76)   .20
     —6.59    2.87                —.49        —12.75        .66
     (7. 19) (4.34)                                                                                        4.18               -
                                 (1. 39)      (5.16)      (2.86)                                          (3.23)                           .14
     —6.72                        —
              2.96                            —11.55        .62
     (7.40)                                                                                                4.26                   27.22
                     (4.51)      (1.10)       (4.69)      (2.72)                                          (3.33)                  (3.90)   .16
                                                   Table   3

                                                    (cont' d)

                                                                l=LF
      W Ed     ii
                                              2
                    Ed    Y1966    #C   tIC        Grad After            Yrs LF     Age    Age YC   LFPR
     —5.95     2.84       —.63
     (6.28)   (4.12)     (1.70)                                                                               .07
     —5.56     2.38       —.78                                 —15.94
     (5.91)   (3.46)     (2.14)                                 (4.23)                                        .09
     —5.94     2.97       —.47                                            1.57
     (6.41)   (4.41)     (1.29)                                          (563)                                .11
    —6.22      2.94       —.46
     (6.67)                                                                                         35.53
              (4.34)     (1.27)                                                                     (5.06)    .10
    —5.55      2.08       —.83                              —7.87
•                                                                                          —2.84
    (6.15)    (3.14)     (2.35)                             (2.09)                         (7.71)             .17
    —2.27   3.05                                  —5.31
    (2.05) (4.54)        (1.62)                   (6.04)                                                      .11
    —1.76      2.58      —.75                     —5.46    —16.83
    (1.60)    (3. 85)    (2.10)                   (6.31)    (4.59)                                            .14
    —2.59      3.14      —   .44                  —4.84                   1.40
    (2.38)    (4.77)     (1.25)                   (5.57)                 (5.12)                               .15
    —1.17      2.26      —.79                     —6.28     —8.02                          —3.15
    (1,13)    (3.57)     (2.35)                   (7.62)    (2.22)                         (6.84)             .23


                                                                                                                    L1
                                                                                                                    0'
    Similar regressions on other sub—sets of the 1967 NLS
                                                                   observatio     are presented in Appendix   D.
                                                                     57.

number of chIldren is held constant (and from —5.55 to —6.22   if C is     not

included among the independent variables.) This agrees extraordinarily
well with the results from the NFS: Each additional year of education
reduces the Interval to B1 by just over one—half year. If Grad is
included in the regres3ion, the coefficients, while still significantly
negative, are much smaller. It is likely that the chort      variable, Grad,
in this instance,   where the women range in age only from forty to forty—
four,   is measuring education more than cohort. The simple correlation
between W Ed and Grad for this sample is .65. (As the age range is
reduced to, say, one year, the correlation of W Ed   and Yr Grad would
approach 1.) This seems a plausible explanation also because the other
regression coefficients are not affected by the inclusion of the year
the   wife left school.
          The labor force participation variables, Yrs LF and LFPR, have
poitiva  coefficients, ir.dicating that otren with the most extensive labor
force experience delayed their first births      longest. The ezperience
                                                 -


variables had been posited as proxies for the steepness of the P path
avar time; the mere a em'n works, the more her rises. The steeper
a woman's P profile the earlier she will have B1, according to the
model's    hypotheses. However, for the women in this sample most of the
work experience occurred before B1; 84 percent of them worked before B1,
less    than 45 percent worked after B1, and, being still ielativoly young,
many of them have not yet worked very long after having children) In
   ittc't to or1: cround ,rohiom of the corre1tior be.t.reen Yrs LF
and labor force experience pre—B1 and therefore with Sch—B1, I used a
dummy variable whose value is one if the woman has worked after having
children and zero if she has not, as a tasure of labor force attachment.

       'A variable measuring the total labor force experience over the
entire 1ifetie miçht yield the. hypothesIzed- results. To clarify the
':''-,   con;     t-, 'rc-   ';o h-'v     the rodel predtcts ; one, with
  LLl2, works frm.i age eigilLeLn to ge it:enty—fivo and never ;orks
again; the other, with W Ed16 has her cht]dren before working and then
enters the labor force, pernanently, at ae 35. Over their lifetimes
the iattr woi will work more hut an of the a;erage interview age,
forty—to>    the wc;ien will :'o. the s:i;c. 1 hor force experience.
                                                                                58.


 The very signifIcantly negative coefficient that was found was expected
 both according to my theory and because women who are working after

 having children are likely to be women whose children are older because
 they had the children at an early age. Standardizing for the age of
 the youngest child      greatly reduces the significance of the dummy variables,
        they are still negative. On balance, the results from including
 although
work experience variables are inconclusive. Moreover, their inclusion has
 very   little effect on the coefficients of W Ed, which was itself intended
 to reflect in part different rates of increase in the value of time of
 different women.
         Additionaleducation for the husband raises the wife's age at B1
(Table 2) and the interval from her leaving school to the first birth
 (Table 3), ceteris paribus. Since families in which the husband has a
high level of education generally have steeper lifetime income profIles,
the income effect predicted this postponement a the childbearing period
as H Ed is larger.
       In Table 2, the income variables, other than the cohort measures,
are insignificant except wIth H Ed is excluded from the equation and
except for Y W Ed + 20. In the former case the Y variables almost cer-
tainly are reflecting the H Ed effect. In the latter instance, inclusion
of this variable reduces H Ed to Insignificance; this is partly because
men with more education usually marry women with more education, and the
more education the wife has, the later in the           life cycle are incomes
estimated, and in this age range incomes are rising with age.1 The
various subscripted—Y variables are included mainly to show that this



         1Althotigh   the earning's   function based on   the questionable income
information   from the IF 1oos fairly reasonable, it does predict that the peak
income will   he received 24.42       years   after entering the labor force:
         Income  . . . + .24605 Experience — .0050416 Experience2 +
        Income N-ximum: .24605 — .0100832 Enp — 0; p 24.42 years
This is well after "W Ed + 20" or twenty years after the wIfe left school;
    J t seems much too early in the lifetIme. By comparison, Mincer's
sccnd equation, Table      in Schoc1Inr Ei,erince and Earnins,
yields an earizins :imt-: ': 33.75 years. The rccr must bear in mind
that the inc: .nfoatin :u the NF is 'very               limited   and was not defined
either to the     resrcrdeit   cr to researchers using these data.
                                                                              59.



dati set's income variable is not very useful. The NLS data, with their
more adequate income information, reported in Table 3, have the negative
coefficient on Y that the model predicted. The sign of the coefficient
is statistically significant except when measures of the wife's labor
force experience are included.
          In Table 2 the cohort variable, the year of the         wife's   birth,

was included as a proxy for income level.        It was significantly negative

In all specifications of the regression equations, supporting the hypo-
thesis that the income effect will tend to produce earlier first births
the higher the family's expected lifetime income. With the NLS data,
the wife's age, the complement of the year of birth, was significantly
positive. Since nearly all mothers have their first births before age
forty, these corre]ations are not simply statistical tautologies.1
         The coefficients of #C and ltC suggest that couples planning
larger families have B1 sooner but that the shortening of the interval
is less than proportional to family size. If             .   assumes that contra-

ceptive failures occur, the interpretation might also be that couples
having    B1 sooner may have larger fatilies unintentionally because they
arc at risk of a contraceptive failure,        after having all their desired

chIldren, for a longer period of time.
       Table 6 presents a comparison of some of the same regressions
run cn the husband's and the wife's age at B1; in the former instances
the cohort variable used was the husband's year of birth. The results
arc fairly similar, as expected, except that the cohort measure is much
more significant and (ignoring sign) larger when H Age B1 is the
 depenthnt variable. I have no explanation for this.
          The comparisons presented in Table 5        indicate   that the economic
 forc are robust enough to           statistically significant in explaining
                                    remain

 the wife's age at B1 even if the husband'n age at B1 or at marriage is
 held constant. inilariy, inclusion of a variable (Age Diff) measuring

          1Tbe average W Age B1 f or women under     twenty would be ler than
 for   woien twenty to thirty simply because      the first group could not
 include £'ny   merers   of   that c&-iort who w 11   have   B1 after reaching, age
 twenty.
                                                    Tthle 4
     Comparison of regressions on wife's and husband's ae at first
                                                                   birth; National Fertility Study.                 N   585



                            WAgeB1
                                                                                        HAgeB1
 W Ed     H Ed     Y40                        W Yr B    R2    W Ed     H Ed      Y40        I/C    I/C2    H   Yr   B     K2
 5.52     3.29                                —2.15           5.33     2.01
(4..3j   (3.68)                                                                                            —4.69
                                              (4.22)   .18   (4.77)   (2.14)                              (10.95)        .22
 6.42              3.43                       -2.07           5.63              2.52                       -4.62
(6.09)             (3.06)                              .18
                                              (4.05)         (5.12)            (2.16)                     (10.86)       .22
 5.46     2.75      .91                       —2.14           5.24     1.13     1.49                       —4.67
(4.76)   (2.09)    (.56)                      (4.18)   .18   (4.37)    (.82)    (.87)                                   .22
                                                                                                          (10.87)
 4.50     2.99              —9.20             —1.91           4.49     1.78              —7.61             —4.68
(4.08)   (3.49)             (7.23)            (3.59)   .25   (3.83)   (1.94)             (5.64)           (11.23)
 5.34              3.10     —9.25             —1.83           4.74              2.25     —7.61             —4.62
(5.22)            (2.88) (7.25)               (3.73)   .25   (4.38)            (1.97)    (5.65)           (11.14)       .26
 4.46     2.54      .78     —9.19             —1.90           4.41      .98     1.35     —7.59
(4.02)   (2.01)    (.49)    (7.22)                                                                         —4.66
                                              (3.86)   .25   (,.74)    (.73)    (.81)    (5.63)           (11.13)       .26
 4.68     3.09             —17.41      .96    —1.77           4.57     1.83             —11.66    .48      —4.65
(4.24)   (3.62)             (4.82)   (2.43)            .26
                                              (3.59)         (3.89)   (1.99)             (3.05) (1.13)    (11.12)       .27
                  Y1965
                                                                               Y1965
4.48     2.87       .17 —9.21                 —1.91           4.51   1.92       —.20    —7.59
(4.05)   (3.06)    (.32) (7.23)                                                                           —4.67
                                              (3.89)   .25   (3.84) (1.92)      (.35)    (5.63)           (11.16)       .26




                                                                                                                               0
                                                                              61.


                                       Table 5
                     Comparison of regressions on W Age B1,
                  with and without husband's age held constant


 WEd      REd                          WYrB HAgeMar HAgeB1               R2
 5.52     3.29                         —2.15
(4.83)   (3.68)                        (4.22)                           .18
 4.50     2.99      —9.20              —1.91
(4.08)   (3.49)     (7.23)             (3.89)                           .25
 4.68     3.09    —17.41        .96    —1.77
(4.24)   (3.62)     (4.82) (2.43)      (3.59)                           .26


 3.38     3.33                         —1.70      .46
(3.26)   (4.17)                        (3.70) (12.10)                   .35
 2.84     3.08     —7.79               —1.52      .44
(2.63)   (3.99)    (6.77)              (3.42) (11.79)                   .40
 2.82     3.19    —16.73      1.05     —1.36       .44
(2.82)   (4.16)     (5.1.7)   (2.95)   (3.07)    (1' 2)                 .40

 2.08     2..0                         —1.21                 .64
(2.63)   (4.53)                        (3.45)             (25.69)       .62
 1.71     2.68     —4.63               —1.13                 .61
(2.20)   (4.46)    (5.09)              (3.27)             (24.64)       .63
 1.83     2.74     —9.55     .57       —1.05                 .61
(2.34)   (4.57)    (3.75) (2.07)       (3.03)             (24.56)       .64




W Ed      H Ed        #C      #C2      '1 1965 Age Diff
4.70      2.88    —19.15    1.13
(4.21)   (3.05)    (5.30) (2.84)        (.26)                       .
                                                                        .24
4.71      2.39    —17.89   1.03        —.02       —.24
(4.31)   (2.57)    (5.03) (2.65)        (.04)    (4.96)                 .27
                                                                     62.

 the excess of the husband's over the wife's age (in months) did not change
 the coefficients of the other variables very much. Nor did any of the
 other demographic variables entered in the regr?ssions on the other timing
 and spacing variables produce any changes in the coefficients of economic
 variables worth  noting.
         Most of the other studies of timing have concentrated on trying to
 explain the length of the first interval (from marriage to first birth).
Although the model leads me   to expect this interval to be explained less
well   by economic variables than the timing measures already discussed, I
did regress some of the same variables on 1st mt (Table 6). I expected
that the results would be less significant than those in Tables 2—5,
because the decision to marry rests in part on a desire to start having
children but that they would not necessarily be insignificant, because
the desire to have children is not the only reason for choosing to marry
at a particular time.
       The education variables are much less signf :antin these
regressions on first interval than they are in equivalent regressions on
W Age B1. Th cohort variable also Is lees !ignificant although the
reduction is not so extreme as with the education variables. The large
reduction in explanatory power (R2 changes from .26 to .08 for equations
with education, nunber of children, and cohort and from .18 to .03 for
equations with education and cohort only) supports the contention that an
important reason for marrying is to have children. However, the more
traditicral   economic variables   are still of some importance.
        The small positive sign on W Ed might suggest that women with more
education are a little less likely to marryprimarily in order to begin
to have children or that they simply are more profIcient contraaeptors

(and therefore may choose a wedding date without regard to h long they
wish to postpone B1.) The latter possibility receives a sm11 bit of
support from a comparison of equations 2 and 16 in Table 6. In equation
6.16, iLh             a su1.:: le of mnen whose first birth was a
                   r.::i cn

"iming success' the coefficient of W Ed is even smaller and less

        1Suth a s'ccss occurs because the woman either did not contracept
in the interval solely because she waued a bIrth as soon as possible or
purpo3ely Interrupted contraception in an effort to conceive.
                                                                                 63.


                                        Table 6
        Regressions on interval, in months, from marriage to first birth;
                       1965 National Fertility Study. N585


Eq. No.     W Ed      REd      Y40     Y1965                #c2     Yr   Mar    R2
             1.00      .45     1.01                                  —.83
  6.1       (1.28)    (.51)    (.91)                                (2.88)     .03
              .67      .46      .94             —11.25       .79     —.89
  6.2        (.87)    (.54)    (.87)              (4.59)   (2.94) (3.16)       .09
              .82             1.36              —11.23       .79   —.87
  6.3       (1.16)            (1.85)              (4.58)   (2.93) (3.12)       .09
                       .75    1.02              —11.23       .78     —.86
  6.4                 (.93)    (.96)              (4.58)   (2.90) (3.07)       .08
                              1.84              —11.18       .77 —.81
 6.5                          (3.04)              (4.56) (2.86) (2.96)         .08
            1.04       .90               .20                        —.84
  6.6       (1.34)   (1.36)             (.52)                       (2.91)     .03
              .70      .84                2S    —11.2(       .79 —.90
 6.7         (.91)   (1.30)             (.68)     (4.58) (2.93) (3.19)         .09
            1.26                         .44    —11.18     .78   —.86
 6.6       (2.00                       (1.30)     (4.55) (2.87) (3.07)         .08
                      1.17.              .27    —11.24       .78 —.87
 6.9                 (2.21)             (.73)     (4.58) (2.88) (3.11)         .08
                                         .70    —11.04       .72   —.73
 6.10                                  (2.20)     (4.48)   (2.69) (2.68)       .08
            1.06      1.04                                         — .84
 6.11      (1.37)    (1.71)                                         (2.91)     .03
              73      1.01                      —11.25       • 79   —.90
 6.12       (.95)    (1.72)                       (4.58) (2.93)     (3.19)     .08
            1.57                                —11.12       .77    —   .84
 6.13      (2.68)                                 (4.52)   (2.85)   (3.00)     .08
                     1.37                       —11.22       .78    —.86
 6.14                (3.04)                       (4.57) (2.88)     (3.10)     .08
                                                —10.87       .69    — .64
 6.15                                             (4.40) (2.56)     (2.37)     .07
                                                                                           64.

 .
                                              Table 6
                                              (cont 'd)



Eq. No.       W Ed         H Ed       '140     .           #C2   Yr Mar               R2
               .46        —1.02      1.98    —14.20 .     1.00    —.55
     6.16*    (.52)        (1.02)   (1.55)    (4.36) (2.62)      (1.56)               .11

     *Sub.samp1e:        E1 was a "timing success,"; N387.




Eq. No.       W Ed         HEd       Y40                         Yr Mar W Age Mar           R2
              1 •   19     1.08                                  —.63        — .04
     6.lla   (1.51)       (1.78)                                 (1.81)     (1.02)          .03
                                             —11.38        .72   —.33       —   .06
     6.15a                                    (4.57)    (2.65)    (.95)     (1.50)          .07
              1.88                           —11.94       .82    —  .40     —   .09
 6.l3a       (3.13)                           (4.82)    (3.05)   (1. ].8)   (2.21)          .09
               .93         1.11              —12.13       .85    —   .44    —.09
 6.12a       (.1.28)      (1.88)              (4.90) (3.14) (1.29)          (2.33)          .09
              1.c9                   1.97    —12.11       .85               —.10
 6.3a        (1.52)                 (2.01)    (.90) (3.14) (1.21)           (2.34)         .09
                                                                                65.


significant,    suggesting that part of the education effect observed in
equation 6.2 is due to differences in contraceptive efficiency.             The
difference in the coefficients is small and the definition of "timing

success"may lump together the most and least knowledgeable contra—
cepeors, so too much should not be made of this observation.
         The last five equations in Table 6 include the wife's age at
marriage as an indcpdent variable. The education variables are only
slightly less insigtificant. even though the first interval, given
W Age Mar, is related to W Age B1. Apparently, the proper test of
the timing hypotheses is that suggested by the model: to explain the
wife's age at        or the length of the interval after schooling to

B1.
         B.    Other   samples.
         The same   set of regressions was run      on other subsets of these
older, white, non—Catholic women in the 196 tiona1 Fertility Study

(Table   7). When the     subsets were the 387 women whose first birth was
a "timing success," the 496 women with t'o          or   more thi?dreu (because

one—child     mothers might be sub—fecund),                    or more
                                                 the 322 mothers of two

children whose first birth was a timing success, and the 530 couples
                           1
with no unwanted children, the slope coefficients and t—values were
very similar to those reported above.
         The fact that the regression results were not very different
cn ;an with cily o bir.i :ere removed from th sr::le                   (Table 7 —
equations A and B) fits with a general observation that many couples
in the 1930's chose t.o     remin childless, apparently for economic


           couple h;'s an unwa.ited child if the wife answered affirma-
tively to the questicLl, "4culd you rather have had fewer children?"
5
that
          ''i of t1       c'  li    .h o
      they .;ould lih Lu have had ror chi1c1rcii;
                                                  1n          ..     rcported
                                                           it is at clear
whether they were iimited         by   physiological, economic, or other factors.
                                                                                                    66.

                                                  Table 7
        Comparison of regression results using different sub—sets of
                             sample from the 1965 National               Fertility Survey
                 Dependent
     Sample      Variable               W Ed     H Ed                1/C        W Yr B       R2
                 W Age B1               5.52     3.29                           —2.15
       A                               (4.83)   (3.68)                          (4.22)      .18
                                        5.76     3.23                           —2.24
       B                               (5.33)   (3.84)                          (4.43)      .23
                                        5.39     3.19                           —3.39
       C                               (3.75)   (2.80)                          (5.02)      .19
                                        5.88     3.20                           —3.16
       D                               (4.25)   (2.95)                          (4.60)      .22

                 W Age B1               4.50     2.99              —9.20        —1.91
      A                                (4.08)   (3.49)             (7.23)       (3.89)      .25
                                        4.76     3.09              —6.76       —2.19
      B                                (4.44)   (3.77)             (5.12)       (4;45)      .27
                                        4.32     2.69            —10.88        —2.96
      C                                (2.14)   (2.47)             (6.42)       (4.58)      .27
                                        4.85     2.82             —8.44        —2.92
      D                                (3.57)   (2.67)             (4.67)       (4.39)      .27


                W Age B                4.50     2.99              —9.20         —1.91
                              1
      A                                (4.08)   (3.49)             (7.23)       (3.69)      .25
                                       4.76     3.09              —6.76         —2.19
      13                 .
                                       (4.44)   (3.77)             (5.12)       (4.45)      .27
                                       4.32      2.69            —10.88         —2.96
      C                                (3.14)   (2.47)             (6.42)       (4.58)      .27

                                        4.85     2.82             —8.44        —2.92
      D                                (3.57)   (2.67)             (4.67)       (4.39)      .27




                                                  II /i// i //
A .:        n)n—C.-itiolic iothcrs of               one          c:...      children;        N585
T t.rs of to or more children;                                                               N496
C     B1 a tIming       success    —— one or more children;
                                                                                             N387
I)
              tir:iin   succes     —   two or racre children;                                N322
E All mothers with no unante. children (see text for definition)N=530
                                                                     67.



                              Table 7
                               (cont'd)

         Dependent                                            2
         Variable    W Ed     H Ed         f/C    W Yr B    R
Sample
         W Age       5.52     3.29                —2.15
  A                  (4.83) (3.68)                (4.22)    .18

                     5.76     3.23                —2.24
  B                  (5.33) (3.84)                (4.43)    .23

                     5.39     3.19                —3.39
  C                  (3.75) (2.80)                (5.02)    .19

                     5.88     3.20                —3.16
  D                  (4.25) (2.95)                (4.60)    .22




         Dependent                                              2
         Variable    W Ed     H Ed          f/C   W Yr B     R
Sample
         W Age B1     5.52   3.29                 —2.15
  A                  (4.83) (3.68)                 (4.22)   .18

                      5.22    3.17                —1.96
  E                  (4.13) (3.29)                (3.62)    .16



         W Age B1     4.50   2.99       —9.20 —1.91
  A                  (4.08) (3.49)        (7.23) (3.89)     .25

                      4.82   2.75       —9.82  —1.73
  E                  (3.97) (2.97)      (6.62) (3.30)       .23




         Dependent                                               2
         Variable     W Ed    H Ed          f/C   H Yr I
Sample
         H Age B      4.49    1.78        —7.61 —4.68
                 1                                           .26
  A                  (3.83) (1.94)        (5.64) (11.21)
                      4.'j8   1.71        —6.34   —5.06
  B                  (4.22) (1.91)        (4.45) (11.92)     .30

                      4.67      .84       —8.93  —4.82
  C                  (3.34)    (.75)      (5.22) (8.84)      .26

                      5.28      .97       —7.63  —5.28
  D                  (3.75)    (.87)      (4.08) (9.45)      .30
                                                                                      68.


                                  Table 7
                                  (cant 'd)

                                        .
         Dependent
Sample   Variable     W Ed      H Ed                                      2                     2
                                            Y1965      //C        #C          H Yr     B    R
         H Age B1      5.33      2.01                                         —4.69
  A                   (4.47)   (2.14)                                         (10.95)       .22
                      5.81      1.83                                          —5.07
  B                   (5.01)   (2.01)                                         (11.72)       .27
                      5.55      1.25                                          —4.88
  C                   (3.87)   (1.08)                                          (8.64)       .21
                      6.20      1.34                                          —5.38
  D                  (4.36)    (1.18)                                         (9.40)        .26



         Dependent
Sample   Variable     W Ed      H Ed        Y1965                     2
                                                       #C       1/C            Yr Mar
         Total mt    —1.64      1.09         —.60    54.12     —2.76          —1.26
  A                  (1.82)    (1.43)       (1.36)   (18.60)   (8.61)         (3.79)        .65
                     —1.98      1.41         —.59    46.20     —2.11          —1.70
  B                  (1.87)    (1.60)       (1.16)   (10.99)   (5.05)         (4.02)        .52
                      —.98      1.30        —1.01    53.11     —2.54          —1.45
 C                    (.92)    (1.43)       (1.82)   (13.68)   (5.60)         (3.44)        .66
                     —1.08     1.44         —1.02    44.82     —1.79          —1.76
 D                    (.86)    (1.37)       (1.56)    (7.50) (2.86)           (3.39)        .54
                                                                      69.



reasons.' It is likely that many others chose   to   have only one child rather
than that those womn were sub—fecund. Eighty—nine of 585 women had only
one child; it is unlikely that fIfteen percent of the females who had
children were unable to have more than one. Moreover, comparison of
the mean values of various economic variables for one—child families
and families with two or more children suggests that the two groups
did not come from the same (economic) population, as might be expected
if the reason for small family size were physiological. 2 (Table 14,
Chapter V).
       Ninety—five (of 585) couples reported that their parents gave
them important financial help when they were first married. For this
small subset the coefficients of H Ed in various regressions on W Age B1
were smaller than for the entire sample and even negative, with an
absolute t—value of less than one (Table 8). (The 490 who received no
financial help had larger H Ed coefficients than the entire sample.)
This was   the expected result, for such par' l   help Is equivalent to
additional  income from non—labor sources; those who receive It can better
affoz   children in the early, relatIve to the later, yarz of marriage
than those who do not. This "income" in the early years tends to reduce
the steep slope of the earnings profile that is associated with high H Ed.

       1See 1960 Census of Population Subject Report PC(2)—3A, "Women
by Nurber of Children Ever born." The rates of ch1dlessness for
U.S. hite woren who were married—spouse present were 16.6 percent for
those aged forty—five to forty—nine and 19.4 percent for those between
fifty and fifty—four (Table. 27, p. 181). These high rates were not due
to inadequate medical treatment of Infertility, for the rates
ranged wide]y by the husband's occupation, for example; 27.7 percent
of th 'ives   of   so:al scientists 'ere childless. The other highest
and lo;est rates, by husband's occupation, were arehitects, 27.7 percent;
authors, editors, and reporters, 26.5; medical and dental technicians,
25.7; farm laborers and foremen, 11.2; and coal miners, 9.1 percent.
(Table 33, pp. 167—68).

       2Subfecundity, if it is not correlated with poor general health,
may facilitate econo—ic success, high levels of education, etc. But
the differences are larger than   I
                                  would expect from that reason alone.
                                                                          70


                                    Table 8
          Comparison of regressions on W Age B1 for couples who did and
          did not receive finacial help; 1965.Nationa]. Fertility Study


Sample      N             W Ed    H Ed     f/C      W Yr B
                          5.52    3.29              —2.15
  All      585            (4.83) (3.68)             (4.22)     .18
                          6.45    1.82              —1.53
  Did       95           (2.36)   (.97)                       .18
                                                    (1.26)
                          5.25    3.55              —2.18
Did Not    490           (4.17) (3.52)                        .18
                                                    (3.87)


                          4.50    2.99     —9.20   —1.91
  All                    (4.08) (3.49)     (7.23) (3.89)      .25
                          6.12    1.75     —4.88    —1.29
  Did                    (2.25)   (.95)    (1.57) (1.05)      .20
                          4.12    3.19     —9.82    —1.96
Did Not                  (3.41) (3.31)     (7.04)   (3.65)    .26
                                                                             71.


        The       coefficient   of the wife's year of birth was less negative in
the sample of couples receiving parental help. Since W Yr B was a
proxy   for   general income levels, the reduction in its impact also was
expected. All        other   coefficients were similar to those reported for the
entire sample.
        When women who had been married more than once were added to the
primary sample, raising the total number of observations to 748, most
of the coefficients changed very little (Table 9). However, the slope
and t for     W   Ed were larger, probably because the values of H Ed and
income were for the current husband. In the case of women who were
married more than once, those are not necessarily the relevant values,
although they may be reasonable proxies for information on the previous
husbands. In those cases W Ed picked up more of the variation in the
relevant husband variables.
        To summarize, the empirical evidence supports the hypotheses
that if the wife's P is rising, represent by W Ed, she will have B1
sooner after finishing school; that a couple will postpone B1 more if
they anticIpate a rising family income profile — H Ed Is the proxy; end
that they will have B1 sooner         the higher the anticipated level of   average
income, represented by the cohort variables arid, in NLS data, by Y1966,
the total income of the family other than from earninsof the wife.
                                                                        72.



                                        Table 9
          Comparison of regressions for women married only once and
         women married more than once; 1965 National Fertility Study,
                       mothers of one         or   more children



Dependent Variable W Age B,
          Married one or gore times                 N= 748



W Ed       H Ed           i7C          #C2         W Yr B     R2
                                 .
 6.76      2.17                                    —1.59
(6.53)    (2.68)                                    (3.31)   .15
6.09       1.70        —9.65                       —1.34
(6.16)    (2.13)        (8.08)                      (2.90)   .22
6.24       1.85       —18.96         1.12          —1.22
(6.33)    (2.38)        (5.51)       (2.88)         (2.63)   .23




         Married once only                         N585

5.52       3.29                                    —2.15
(4.83)    (3.68)                                   (4.22)    .18
4.50       2.99        —9.20                  •    —1.91
(4.08)    (3.49)        (7.23)                     (3.89)    .25

4.68       3.09       —17.41           .96         —1.77
(4.24)    (3.62)       (4.82)        (2.43)        (3.59)    .26
                                                            73.



                                   Table 9
                                     (cont'd)




Dependent Variable: H Age B1
         Narried one or more times           N= 748




 WEd       flEd                              HYrB     R2

 5.88      2.06                              —6.04
(5.16)    (2.28)                           (15.42)    .28

 5.30      1.68        —8.21                 —6.00
(4.74)    (1.89)        (6.10)             (15.69)    .31

 5.38      1.76       —13.20       .60       —5.98
(4.81)    (1.98)        (3.40)   (1.37)    (15.63)    .32




          Married once only                  N=585



 W Ed      H Ed                              H Yr B
 5.33      2.01                              —4.69
(4.77)    (2.14)                           (10.95)    .22
 4.49      1.78        —7.61                 —4.68
(3.83)    (1.94)        (5.64)             (11.21)    .26
 4.57      1.83       —11.66       .48       —4.65
(3.69)    (1.99)        (3.05)   (1.13)    (11. 12)   .27
                                                                             74.

                                    CH4\1'TCR V

                       FMPIRICAL FINaINGS: SPACING

       A.   Total   Interval
       The hypothesized substitution effect on the spacing of births
(subsequent to B1) is that a high price of time for the wife ——          i.e.,
high W Ed if she does not leave the labor force permanently at B1,
high W Ed or husband's income if she does ——         will   induce the couple to
plan on closer spacing between births or, given #C, a shorter total
interval between the first (B1) and last (B) births. The income effect
probably is to enable higher income families to space widely, which
apparently facilitates the production of child quality. This positive
effect will be offset to the extent that the husband's inco'e affects
   for non-labor force wives, producing a negative substitution effect.
If the slope of the income profile has any effect on the spacing of
births, it niy cause closer spacing intended to offset the later start
of child—bearing occasioned by the steep income prfile.
       The various specifications of the regression equation in Table
JO yielded the   predicted negative coefficient on W Ed. From the c
efficients it can be seen that three additional years of education for
a woman reduce the total birth interval for a given family size by five
or six months (Equations 10.3 or 10.6). If family size is not held
constant the reduction is btccn thirteen and fifteen months (Equations
10.1 or 10.4). Thus,   as   education and P rise, women have their
children in a shorter span of titre and/or they have fcwer children) As
will be noted in Chapter VI, they may also spend less time at home after
the last birth.2
       The results for data from the National Longitudinal Survey (Table
11) are sImilar but the coefficients and t—values are sr.ialler; much of
the difference in results probably resulted from the errors in the
measurement of Total mt     for   the NLS   data.   The t—values on W Ed are



       1Thble 14 shows that childless women have significantly more
education; the dIfference In mean education is almost one year.


       2See also Mincer and Polachek, op, cit.
                                                                                    75.




                                             Table 10
                                                                            *
               Regressions on the total number of months from B1 to B
           1965 National Fertility Study, white, non—farm, non—aoinan Catholic
              mothers aged 40—54,   married     once—spouse present; N — 585.


                  Regression coefficients with t—values in parentheses


 Eq. No.        W Ed     H Ed     Y1965                              #C2   Yr Mar
               —5.06     —.09       —.24
 10.1           (3.46)    (.08)      (.33)                                                .04

               —1.58      1.10      —.62                  30.96
                (1.66)   (1.37)     (1.32)               (28.19)                          .60
 10.2
               —2.06       .78      —.61                  53.68  —2.67
 10.3           (2.27)   (1.02)     (1.38)               (18.25) (8.26)                   .64

               —4.35       .40      —.22                                    —1.88
    10.4        (2.98)    (.33)      (.31)                                  (3.50)        .06

               —1.22      1.37      —.61                  30.68             —1.05
 10.5           (1.28)   (1.70)     (1.31)               (28.02)            (2.98)        .60

               —1.64      1.09      —.60                  54.12 —2.76       —1.26
 10.6           (1.82)   (1.43)     (1.36)               (18.60) (8.61)     (3.79)        .65



               —1.69       .89      —.37                  54.09    —2.76    —1.27
 10.7           (1.86)    (.87)     (.29) Y40            (18.56) (8.61)     (3.81)

               —1.E8       .97      —.45                  54.09  —2.76      —1.27
    10.8        (1.86)    (.91)     (.36) Y EXP=20       (18.56) (8.61)     (3.81)        .65

               —1.75       .93      —.38                  54.07    —2.76    —1.27
 10.9           (1.92)    (.89)      (.33) Y W Ed-20 (18.55) (8.60)         (3.80)        .65




*
 If C 1, Tct1 Irt           0.
                                                                                          76.




                                          Table 11
         Regressions on estimated total interval; 1967 National Longitudinal
         Survey, white, non—farm mothers of two or more children; aged 40—44;
                  observations eliminated if Total mt            0.   N   597.


                                                    2
                                                          lLF                                     2
        W Ed     H Ed     Yl966               //C       After B1 Age YC          Age             R
        —.88     —.91      .59    39.55     —1.69
       (1.04) (1.44)     (1.71) (13.48) (6.84)                                                  .48
        —.46 —1.24         .50    39.16     —1.68       —10.96
        (.54) (1.96)     (1.45) (13.42) (6.88)           (3.06)                                 .49
       —1.40 —1.91         .56    25.07     —1.05         2.21        —5.81
       (1.97) (3.58)     (1.97)   (9.67) (5.06)            (.71) (16.00)                        .64
       —.46     —1.25      .50    39.05     —1.68       —11.30                   1.42
        (.54)   (1.97)   (1.47) (13.38) (6.88)            (3.15)
                                                                      Yrs LF
                                                                                 (1.14)         .49

       —.63   —1.05        .52    38.39     —1.64                     —1.00
       (.76) (1.67)      (1.52) (13.15) (6.74)            LFPR        (3.70)                    .49

       —.47 —1.03          .50    38.35     —1.64       —26.89
        (.56) (1.65)     (1.47) (13.15) (6.73)           (3.85)                                 .49

        —.89   —.90        .59    39.48     —1.69                                1.09
       (1.06) (1.43)     (1.73) (13.45) (6.84)                                    (.87)         .48
       —.48     —1.03      .51    38.28     —1.61       —26.29                   1.10
       (.57)    (1.65)   (1.49) (13.11) (6.73)           (3.85)                  (.89)          .49
      —3.96      —.93     1.24
      (3.54)    (1.10)   (2.69)                          1Li                                    .05
      —3.11     —1.54     1.06                          —19.80
      (2.77)    (1.81)   (2.32)                          (4.16)                                 .07
      —.322     —1.22     1.05                                        —2.11
      (2.9L) (1.48)      (2.34)                          Li (6.01)                              .10
      —2.91 —1.18         1.02                          —53.60
      (2.64) (1.43)      (2.27)                          (6.03)                             .10



imilar regressions on other sub—sets of the 1967 NLS observations are presented in
ppendix E.
                                                                             77.

 between 0 and —l when variables measuring labor force        activity are
 included (extept when #C and I/C2 are excluded); the only exception to
 this occurs when the dummy variable for labor force participation is
 used while standardizing for the age of the youngest child. As
 explained in Chapter IV,     because   of the complementarity of birth
 intervals and the amount of labor force activity this may be the         best
 specification of the equation. (The simple correlations between          Total
 tnt and respectively Yrs LF, LFPR, and the dununy variable,     are —.252,
 —.264, and —.173.)
        Themodel predicted that in families, with steep earnings profiles
 (high H Ed) children might be spaced more closely together. In re-
 gressions on the NFS data the coefficient is positive but of low
 significance. Since the income measure for the NFS data is not good,
 H Ed may be picking up some of the income level effect. In regressions
 on the LS data, which has more adequate inco         information, the
 coefficient of H Ed is negative.
       A large value for the income variable was expected to cause shorter
 intc'rvais, trt a price effect, for tnose wonen who are not in the i!:
 force; an offsetting positive influence results from the income effect, as
 couples with higher incomes demand more child-related activities and
child quality cnd can afford lorer bIrth intervals. This is based on
an assumption that prospective parents believe that longer birth intervals
produce more quality per child, as suggested by the authors of the
articles cited in   Chapter   I. In regressions on FS data the coefficients
of the several income measures are negative and insignificant  (Table 10).
The coefficients of Yl966, for the NLS data in Table 11, are positive; the
t—vales averae )Out 1.6 if the number of children is held constant
and about 2.4 if #C and I/C2 are omitted from the regression equation.
Although the :csults are inconclusive,      since the income data are apparently
more reliable in the National Longitudinal Survey than in the
                                                              National
Fertility Stud,, 1 would conclude that the positive income effect is
stronger than that part of the substitution effect that works through
the husband's incore for women not in the labor force. Still another
possible explanation for the difference in signs between the two data
sets is that, since they represent two substantially diiferent cohorts ——
women horn between 1922 and 1927 for the NLS d bct.;ee 1913 and
                                                                1925 for
                                                                          78.

the NFS —— the income effect may have changed. Finally, in addition to
its other shortcomings, Y1965 measures incomes for husbands of many
different   ages, not a desirable characteristic for a "permanent income"
proxy.
         In some regressions on the   NFS data, Yr Mar was introduced to
reflect changing economic conditions over time. But, its strongly
negative coefficient probably was inevitable, however economic condiUons
varied across time; for more recently married couples cannot have birth
intervals that are as long as those who were married earlier can.
Similarly, the coefficient of the Age variable in Table 11 reflects the fact
that some women do have children after the age. of forty, greatly lengthening
Total Int for them.
         These reressjons were run on other subsets of the National
Fertility Study observations; the results are listed in Table 12 with
those frcm the primary sar'ple for purposes of comparison. There are no
surprising changes in coefficients ——     the    only obs   ed sign reversals
occur in instances where the t—value is less than .4.
         The negative coefficient cf.W Ed becomes insignificant only in
regressions on women who claimed that the first birth was a timing
success, when the number of children was included as an independent
variable. This is more likely attributable to the small sample size
than to possible effects of education on contraceptive        knowledge; for,
in   the sample of parents with no unwanted children the W Ed coefficients,
given C,    are virtually identical with thoe for the primary sample.
This   sample is probably more representative ofsuccessful contraceptors
than the samples of couples reporting L1 as a timing success. Most
tiraing successes were births that occurred because contraception was
neverus.d at any time in the relevant inte:val. 1any of the couples
who did not contracept in the first interval did not contracept in sub-
sequent intervals until the desired family size was achicveci) For
uo c:o, it        1vJ. cf U Ed is li.elv tu have littl.e effect on the

         1Ryder and Westoff,   Reproduction in   the   United States: 1965.
                                                                                79.

                                            Table 12
                 Regressions on Total Int for other sub—sets of the
                               1965 National Fertility Study


 Sample: Primary Sample: Married once, one or more children; N    585
          W Ed      H Ed     Y 1965       ftC      //C2    Yr Mar               R2
         —5.06      —.09      —.24
          (3.46)       (.08)         (.33)                                     .04
         —2.06          .78         —.61         53.68     —2.67
         (2.27)       (1.02)       (1.33)       (18.25)    (8.26)              .64
         —4.35          .40         —.22                             —1.88
         (2.98)        (.33)        (.31)                            (3.50)    .06
         —1.64         1.09         —.60         54.12     —2.76     —1.26
         (1.82)       (1.43)       (1.36)       (18.60)    (8.61)    (3.79)    .65


Sample: Married once, two or more children; N              496
         W Ed      H Ed     Y 1965       f/C                ftC2     Yr Mar
         —6.66          .46        —.16
         (4.66)        (.38)        (.22)                                      .07
         —2.71         1.00        —.66         45.90     —2.02
         (2.56)       (1.13)       (1.27)      (10.76)     (4.77)              .51
        —5.48         1.10         —.08                             —2.47
         (3.83)        (.92)       (.11)                             (4.30)   .10
        —1.98         1.41         —.59         46.20     —2.11     —1.70
         (1.87)      (1.50)       (1.16)       (10.99)    (5.05)    (4.02)    .52


Sample: Mothers married any number of times; N 748
          W Ed     H Ed     Y 1965      f/C     f/C                 Yr Mar
        —4.19         —.76          .20
        (3.29)        (.70)        (.30)                                      .03
        —2.24          .61         —.33         56.93     —2.98
        (2.88)        (.92)        (.80)       (21.16)    (9.81)              .65



                       .
        —3.39         —.31          .22                             —1.85
        (2.65)        (.29)        (.33)                            (4.21)    .05
        —1.78                      —.31        55.92      —3.02     —1.12
        (2.29)       (1.30)        (.77)       (21.39) (10.05)      (4.20)    .65
                                                                          80.


                                        Table 12
                                         (cont'd)


Sample: Married once, no unwanted children; N — 530
          W Ed      H Ed        Y 1965                           Yr Mar    R2
         —3.17      —.48         — .19
         (2.10)     (.38)        (.26)                                    .02
         —2.11       .78         —.82          54.83    —2.78
         (2.23)     (.99)       (1.85)        (18.31)   (8.41)            .62
         —2.62       .04         —.18                            —1.81
         (1. 74)    (.04)        (.25)                           (3.40)   .04
         —1.76      1.11         —.81          55.13    —2.85    —1.24
         (1.87)    (1.41)       (1.84)        (18.62)   (8.73)   (3.70)   .63


Sample: Married once, one or more C., B1 a timing success ; N = 387
          W Ed      H Ed        Y 1965                           Yr Mar    R2
         —4.54     —1.10          .30
         (2.61)     (.73)        (.33)                                    .04.

        —1.45        .85         —.97          52.01    —2.37
         (1
         J.. -,     (.9 3)      (1.73)        (13.25)   (5.19)            .65

        —3.88      —.48           .25                            —1.83
         (2.22)     (.32)        (.27)                           (2.63)   .06
          —.98      1.30        —1.01          53.11    —2.54    —1.45
                       /   •'
          (.92)      • .4 .)    (1.82)        (13.68)   (5.60)   (3.44)   .66



Sample: Married once, two or more C., B1 a timing success ; N = 322
                                                                            2
         W Ed      H Ed         Y 1965                    #c2    Yr Mar    R
        —5.45      —.98           .29
         (3.15)     (.67)        (.32)                                    .07
        —1.85        .92        —1.03          43.27    —1.58
         (1.48)     (.87)       (1.55)         (7.15)   (2.50)             52

        —4.38      —.26           .29                            —2.26
        (2.52)      (.18)        (.32)                           (3.13)   .10

        —1.08      ] .44        —1.02          44.82    —1.79    —1.76
          (.86)    (1.37)       (1.56)         (7.50)   (2.86)   (3.39)   .54
                                                                             81.



 length of birth intervals, at least in its role as a proxy for contra-
 ceptive knowledge. If nearly all of the women who wanted some or all
of their births as soon as possible are included in this subsample,
while approximately two hundred (or 260) of the      other   observations are
excluded, the smaller coefficient on W Ed does not counter our hypothesis
about the effect of wife's education on spacing.
           W Ed and H Ed are more significant in regression on families with
two   or   more children thanin those for the sample including also one—
child      families. The lower level of significance in the sample that
includes     one—child families may have resulted because, for want of a
better alternative, I had assigned the value zero for the length of
the interval fron B1 to B to one—child families (B1 to B1); therefore,
the data are not homoskedastic. Also, the relationship between the
number of children and the total Interval may not be able to fit the
specified "b1. #C + b2. #C2." Finally, it is possible that another
regression technique than OLS should have hc used when the sample
included one—child families, and the dependent variable was distributed
with a concentration of observations at zero) Of the regression results
in Table 12, those in the second panel, "Married once, two or more children,"
are probably econometrically most reliable.

           In regressions on the various sub—sets of the 1965 NFS (Tables 10
and 12), when the nunber of children is not held constant the coefficient
of Y1965 is much less negative or is even positive although, in all
cases, its t—value is very snail. In regressions on the 1967 NLS (Table
11) not standardizing for family size more than doubles the size of
the (positive) coefficients of Y1966 and raises their t—values. This
suggests that higher income couples have had more children. Although
this is not a study of completed frti1ity, we may note that the income
effect apparently not only makes possible wider spacing of births but
also results in more births. Note    also   that allowing family size to vary
strEthens the stituticn         ffcct reresented by     U Ed: women   with

       'This looks    like
                        a candidate for PROBIT analysis, but I have not
found a working conputer     prorn to
                                    periorm this form of regression
analysis.
                                                                                  82.


high 1' have the same number of children in a shorter length of time, and
the shortening of the total interval, with           higher    education, is even more
pronounced with #C is not held constant. In Table 10 the coefficients
of WEd are about two and one—half times as large when family size varies;
for the NLS sample the coefficients increase by a factor of about five.
These women approntly have births closer together and have fewer births.
         B.      Avern"c   Interval;   Uurnher of Births

         Since decisions about the total length of the childbearing period can
be implemented both through the          length   of the   average   interval between
successive births and through the number of births, I briefly examined
each of these phenomena separately. The results of regressions on Ave
mt for the 496 womna in the National Fertility Study who had had two or
more births are presented In Table 13. Ave tnt (average interval) is
the total number of months between B
                                   1
                                     and B divide.d by the total number
of birth interv:Js, that is, by one lers th'n the number of births.
       The results are similar to those in Table 12 ' cond panel) except
that, s expected, the coefficients are smaller in the regressions on
Ave Tot. heciuso. the deperdant variable is sm:ller. Comparisons of
Equations 13.1 and 13.2 with comparable regressions on Total tnt ——
10.6 or the last equation in Table 12's second panel —— show little
chanc    in the t—values for W Ed, H Ed, and         Yr Mar and about a twenty

pcr     reduction in the r—vnluc of Yl5 n the regressions on Ave tat.
These results tend to support the spacing hypotheses but they do not
pri'co           ie' rhto;   they   do si''et hrever, with their much laer
levels of R—square,. that the number of children            is also a spacing
decision variable.
       Since couples may choose childlessness or an only child in order
to 3.chieve "short opacing intervals," I co-pared the mean values of
numerous variables for the primary sample of white, non—Catholic non—
farm women in the 1965 NFS who were forty to fifty—four years old and
  r irc                         pre.nt. The         no nd     th' t-values   for the

         'Women wIth multiple births were excluded from all analyses of
the 1965      NFS data.
                                                                       83.


                                      Table 13
        Regression on °verage interval between successive births;
            1965 National Fertility Study, white non—Catholics
                        with two or more births; N 496

                                      *                  2
         W Ed      H Ed       Y1965           #C       #C     Yr Mar   R2
13.1    —1.20       .41        —.34        —5.87              —.86
        (1.75)     (.73)      (1.02)        (7.02)            (3.17)   .11
13.2    —1.21       .47.       —.33        —9.69       .40    —.84
        (1.77)     (.82)      (1.00)       (3.56)    (1.48)   (3.09)   .11

*
then predicted—income   variables were used instead of Y1965 their coefficients
were even less significant.
                                                                           84.


differences between sanpie            larger than 1.0) are presented in
                                  means (if
Table   14. The observations are also distributed by other variables of
interest.
        The percentage of childless women whose husbands were not in the
labor force (or Armed Forces), thirteen percent, was significantly higher
than the percentage for women with one or with one or more children.
Given our social norms and the high level of labor force participation
among married white males, it is reasonable to assume that the causality
runs from the   husband's   non—particIpation to the childlessness, rather
than vice versa ——   that   is,    one response to a husband's inability to work
or to work regularly is to have no children (truly a "zero" total interval
spent in child caring), so that the wife can work end because family
incote is low. Moreover, significantly more childless women were working
because they liked to (forty—two percent) than among women withchildren
(almost fourteen percent). The proportion of mothers of one child who
were working because they preferred to also is s at greater than
the proportion for mothers of two or more children. Thus,        at   least

part  of the response by couples when the woman has a preference for
labor market participation —— for whom child-related activities are
particularly costly —— is to shorten or eliminate the child caring life
stage by having only one or no children.
        Ti-icchj1dies co les also had much lr3te education th:n the other
couples. This and the high labor force participation of the non—mothers
suc'c'cst that the cost of children, that is, of the time input to child—
related activities, would have been higher on the average for those women
who did not have children) The sIgnificantly higher average age at
marriage for childless women (almost twenty—seven years) also fits the
assumption of a greater commitment to careers by these women.
       That the childless and one—child mothers are older than the
mothers of two or more children probably reflects an income effect, as
th c      cc rt. •'cre in thcir tv tit dri' t:i yi'ars of the ])epressicn;
         conditions were much more favorable for the more recent cohorts.


       'This is not to su est that labor force participation is the only
altertit:ive to raiiir children, but ratboir recognizes that market
activ       are less c ,lentary t t1Ie prodsiction of child—related
activiti.; than arc othcr activities.
                                                                                               85.



                                         Table 14
         Mean values of several variables by #C, with                  t—values for testing
                       significance of difference between means


Variable         #C0          #C1         #C=2+            t—0:l t—O:2+ t—l:2+
No. Obs.              46           89             496
H Ed             12.98        11.73        11.57               2.06            2.69
W Ed             12.48       11.33         11.62               1.89            2.09
Y40             9.559        8.917         8.760               1.44            2.12
Y1965            8.446       8.781         8.583
Year Mar        44.20        40.89         41.00               2.64            3.89
W Yr Born        17.37       18.30         19.86           —1.10           —3.92             —3.24
H Yr Born        14.78       16.44         16.85           —1.56           —2.53              ——

Age Diff         30.76       23.62         36.33                                             —2.62
W Age Mar        322.7       270.9         253.9               4.39            9.04           3.18
H Age Mar        353.5       294.5         290.3               Ii,36           7.34           ——
V Age B1                     322.7         282.4                                              6.30
H Age B1                     346.3         3l87                                               3.94
W Age B                      322.7         381.4
        n
H Age B                      346.3         417.7
        n
First   mt                   51.85         28.46                                              5.89

% H not

working         13%                1%              4%          3.01            1.93           1.42 (t 0:1+,   2.9:

Labor   Force Participation since marriage:
                                                   Working Now — Reason
                None         Not Now      Need          Extras         Prefer.        Unk.
IC = 0          17%          28%              9%           47.            41%         0%
#C=1            19           40               8           16              17          0
/'C =   2+      2].          36            14             14              13          2


Chi—square (10 d.f., 1%)          23.2; observed x2            31.1
Combining    '1' & '2+': x2 (5 d.f.,    1%)        15.1; observed x2             26.2
                                                                    86.



Thus, in addition to the income and substitution effects on spacing
noted earlier in this chapter, there also were responses to economic
forces in terms of the number of children born.
       C.   Age at Last Birth
       The total result of the timing and of the spacing (and of the
number) decisions can be seen in the regression results in Table 15; the
dependent variable is the wife's age in months at the birth of the last
child 01 Age B). The first two equations show that an additional year
of education leads to an insignificant increase in a woman's age at B.
This results partly from having fewer children, but most of the year is
"recovered" by having children soonerand/or closer together (equations
15.3 to 15.5). Even if the woman with more education has the same number
of children as a woman with less education, each year of education adds
only 2.6 months to her age at B.
       High H Ed raises a woman's age at B primzii1y by causing her to
start childbearing later. The income variab s difficult to analyze
because of inadequacies in the variable as a measure of expected income
at young ages or even as an accurate measure of current income. Women
in the most recent cohorts completed childbearing at a younger age than
older women in the sample; this may be due in part to the more recent
cohorts'being able to begin childbearing sooner because of better
economic conditions, but it could result simply becau.e the most recent
cohorts have not had a chance to have a last birth at a late age. As
in tha c:a of the total interval, the s1i'ht1y le:s r- :e     effect
when family size is not held constant probably reflects a larger family
size for higher income couples.
       The reader nay wonder whether the negative effect of W Ed on the
Total mt isn't merely the result of women with more education being
older when they marry and having to compress birth intervals so that they
cart complete their childbearing at about the same age as other women.
The regressions on Total mt in Table 16 .'cre run ioth with and without
the wife's ige at marriage being held constant. Not unexpectedly, the
coefficient of WEd was lower when W Age Mar was included in the
regressions —— by about twenty—five   tothirty percent when family size
is held constant and by thirty--seven percent when family size varies.
                                                                             87.


                                          Table 15
                      Regressions on the wife's age in months at
               1965 National Fertility Study, Primary      Sample; N = 585

                                            *                                  2
Eq. No.       W Ed        H Ed    Y 1965                           W Yr B     R
15.1           .51        3.01     —.21
              (.34)      (2.35)     (.28)                                    .02
15.2           .47        3.16     —.18                            —1.49
              (.31)      (2.43)     (.25)                           (2.22)   .03
15.3       2.90           3.99     —.44         21.77              —2.07
          (2.23)         (3.63)     (.70)       (14.59)             (3.59)   .29
15.4          2.58        3.79     —.43         36.80     —1.76    —2.32
          (2.01)         (3.49)     (.69)        (8.76)   (3.82)    (4.06)   .31
15.5          2.64        3.66     —.47         34.53     —1.54
          (2.03)         (3.32)     (.73)        (8.19)   (3.33)             .29


          *
              Results using Y43 were even less significant.
                                                                          88.


                                     Table 16
     Comparison of regressions on Total Int, with and without W Age Mar
      held constant; sub—samples from the 1965 National Fertility Study


Sample: Married once, one or more children; N       585
          W Ed      H Ed     Y 1965                          W Age Mar
                                             1/C     I/C2                  R2
         —5.06      —.09      —.24
         (3.46)     (.08)     (.33)                                       .04
         —3.18       .84      —.30                            —.39
         (2.20)     (.70)     (.43)                           (6.24)     .10
         —2.06       .78     —.61         53.68    —2.67
         (2.27)    (1.02)    (1.38)      (18.25)    (8.26)               .64
         —1.42      1.12     —.63         52.55    —2.62      —.15
         (1.56)    (1.46)    (1.42)      (17.97)


Sample: All married, one or more children; N = 748
         WEd       HEd      Y1965           1/C              W Age Mar    K2
        —2.24        .61     —.33         56.93    —2.98
         (2.88)     (.92)    (.80)       (21.16)   (9.81)                .65
        —1.68        .75     —.33         55.94    —2.93      —.10
         (2.13)   (1.13)     (.82)       (20.82)   (9.71)    (3.48)       65


Sample: All married, two or more children; N = 619
         WEd       FlEd     Yl965                     C4     W Age Mar
        —3.01       .79      —.33        49.18     —2.32
        (3.20)     (.99)     (.66)       (12.04)   (5.63)                .50
        —2.05       .97      —.32        48.16     —2.29     —.15
        (2.12)    (1.22)     (.65)      (11.89)    (5.60)     (3.79)     .51
                                                                       89.



The coefficients are, however, still significantly negative. The
coefficient of H Ed is somewhat more positive while those of Yl965,
#C, and #C2 are virtually unchanged.

      Including the wife's age at        reduces the coefficient of W Ed by about
one—third if #C is included or by about one—half if it is not. The effect
of W Ed is still to reduce the total interval but the effect is weaker; part
of it apparently is a response to an older age at B1. Of course, W Age
                                                                               B1
is assumed to be endogenous in this model; therefore one cannot rule out
the possibility, that more educated women plan a shorter total interval
irrespective of when they   begin   childbearing and that then, because they
plan a short Total I:it, they   czn afford to have B1 later.




       'See ppen1X I.
                                                                                 90.
                                      CHAPTER VI
         LABOR FOPCE_PAPTICIPATICN AND TI!F. TINING AND SPACING OF BIRTHS


           A.      Introduction
           The    hypotheses generated by the timing and spacing model and
 generally      supported by the data do not require an assumption that women who
 are not in the child caring life stage will participate in the labor force.
 There are other uses of a woman's time, called here "other activities;"
 even if   a given wor:.n does not plan on a career she would be expected to
 take account of the relative costs of child—related and other activities,
 which are assuned to denend on her education and her husband's income, in
 planning when to have her children. Nevertheless, labor force participation
 is an important alternative to child care activities and many people believe
 it plays a signifjcat role in the tIming of the life cycle stages.
          have investigated, using the 1967 National Longitudinal Survey
           I

        Experlenc (c:. an agad 30—44), the effects of educzton and income
variables on the relationship between the extent ('Lgth) of labor force
participation and the timing of the first birth and the spacing of subse—
qn. births. The basic anlc from this data set conaicts of nhite, non—
farm   mothers aged 40—44 who were married once—spouse present. Certain
types of analyses required further restrictions. For example, to study
work e::perience between child births I had to eliminate one—child mothers;
similarly, work experience i.n other intervals such as between leaving
school   and marriage required that the interval be positive) The date of
                  f:,t   -1J -            bect:-- th- d:zi 1:clii-:c tk c1ate     of
acquisition      of first child and I eliminated all mothers wh acquired a
child by other means than childbirth. For analyses requiring the date of
irth    cE the last child, I calculated it froi the ae of         the youngest
cc.ild prc3ent in thc household. If no children were still at home, I
eliminated the observation unless it was the mother          of an only child;
in   those instances, I    used the birth date of   the   "first" (only) child.
                   LLL11              ac L.    ud
                                             in -ai.s. Th ic.:.;
        1 is the l96 income of the family, exclusive of the wife's wages,

         1The year of Jeaving     school was not recorded for forty—fx women,
forty—one of whom had never worked; these ohservation:3 were eliminated
whcnevr the      interval cince school cas    involved In the analysis.
                                                                        91.


salary, and self—employment income, in thousands of dollars. The number
of children is not reported directly In this data set but was reconstructed
from answers to several questions on missing children and acquired children
and from a count of household members listed as children of the respondent;
thus, it is subject to more measurement error than the 1/C variable in most
data sets. The average interval equals the total interval in months from
      to B divided by one less than the number of children; it is undefined
if nl. The lengths of the intervals relating the dates of school leaving,
marriage, and B1 were expressed in months; the amount of labor force
experience in those intervals was measured in years, using in both
instances, the units of measurement used in the original data set. Dummy
variables are described as they are introduced.
          There are 706 women who were white, non—farm, married once—spouse
present, aged forty to forty—four, with one or more  children. Since labor
force experience is recorded for the three mt rvais from school to

marriage, marriage to first birth, and first birth to the interview, there
are eight possible combinntions of labor force participation or non—
participation for each women. Table 17 presents the participatlor. rates
for each of the three intervals and the probe.bility of participation or
non—participation in an interval given the labor force status in an earlier
interval. The mean values of several variables of interest, by labor force

participation in the three intervals, is presented in Table 18.
                 17 indicates, the participation rates are highest for
          As Table
the&.e wcn in the interval before marriage and lcest in th interval
between marriage and first birth, when the participation rate is less than
half the pre—marital rate. By far the most usual pattern of labor force
participation ws to work before marriage only (thirty percent of the
women).    (This suggests that results from   this study should be extrapolated
to more recent cohorts with caution, for labor force participation by
married women has been increasing; indeed, more of these women may have
entered the labor    torce   since the 1967 interview.) Not surprisng1y, of
the   195 women who did not work in the Sch—Mar interv3l only twenty—five
percent did work between marriage and first birth. Ninety—seven of them,
or fifty percent, did work at some time after marrying. However, fully
sixty   percent of the women who were working before marriage dropped out
                                                                                   92.


                                    Table 17
      Labor force participation rates and transition probabilities;
                   1967 National Longitudinal Survey; N       706




        S ch—Mar
                                         Mar—B1                      After B1

                                                                           98 non LF
                                                     .67
                                         147                        -      (14%)
                         .75             (21%)
                                   -,    non LF
                                                                     —1 49 LF
        195                                                             (7%)
        (28%)
       non LF
                                                                           18 non LF
                                         48          .38
                                                                      ->   (3%)
                                         (7%)
                                         LF
                                                     .62
                                                                        3OLF
                                                                           (4%)


                                                     .70
                                                                           214    non LF
                         .60
                                         306                            ; (30%)
                                         (437.)
       511                              nonLF
       (72%)
                                                     .30      —       92LF
       LF                                                                  (13%)


                         .40                                               77 non LF
                                                         38
                                        205                                (11%)
                                        (29%)
                                        LF
                                                     .62
                                                                  _.—; 128 LF
                                                                           (18%)


195 (28%) non LF                        453 (64%) non LF                 407 (58%) non LF
511 (72%)     LF                        253 (36%)   LF                   299 (42%)         LF
                                                                     93.


                                Table 17
                                (cont'd)




       S ch—B1                                         After B1

                                                       98 non LF
                                    .67
       147                                   ..        (1,4%)
       (21%)
       non LF
                                                       49 LF
                                    .33
                                                        (7%)



                                                        309 non LF
                                    .55       ,
                                                        (447.)
       559
       (79%)
       LF
                                    .45
                                                       250 LF
                                                        (35%)




       S ch—Mar                                        After Mar

                                                       98 non LF
                                    .50                 (14%)
                                                  )
       195
       (28%   '
       non LF                       .50                97 LF
                                                  I) (14%)



                                                       214 non LF
                                    .42
                                                  )r    (30%)
       511
       (72%)
       LF                           .58                297 LF
                                                        (42%)



IncluJs all       'rzic:::;, even if rric 'hile still in sc.ocl, B1
pre—marital, etc.
                                          Table 18
Neca 'ialu*.s of   v-al variables by wi.f's labcr force p:iclpatien;                                lc67 Nacional Longitudinal Survey;               N   706


                                                                                      *    To ccl                                        *
               LFP         s     W   Ed      H   Ed         Y196r1    #C                   mt        Grad
                                                                                                            * Yrs
                                                                             Sch—B1                                 LF    Age     LFPR Age
               000        98     10.14       10.86          6,442    3.786    45.2 106.5             42.42     0.00               0.00 11.19
               100    214        11.28       12.02          7,8Th    3.379    91.2         95.3      41.91     4.56                .18        8.79
              010         18     11.78       13.17         10,133    3.056    87.9         82.3      43.41     3.78                .16        9.00
              001         49     10.37        9.84         4,5)5     3.265    39.8         91.4      41.22     9.02                .35       13.74
              011         30     12.10       11.70         8,105     3.067    37.3         89.5               13.37      41.97     .54       12.34
              101         2      10.85       10.66         6,533     2.978    70.5         77.0      41.36    11.28      42.06     .44   12.31
              110         77     11.77       12.10         7,963     3.039    83.2         88.3      42.43     6.12                .25       9.54
              111     123       11.90        11.59         7,233     2.773    77.8         67.6      42.31    14.57      42.02     .49   11.74
             "Air'    7)6       11.21        11.4R         7,235     3.207    74.6         87.8      42.04     7.45      42.01     .32   10.67
              Forty—six observations lacking Grad were eliminatc                      1;       forty—one of these were in the
              first LFP category, 000; N   660.
             **
               This is reasonably accurcte for am11ies with more                           than one child only        if the     youngest
               child is still at hone.
             Exp1aatjon of           LFP:


             100     I. LF only during Sch—Mar                                                         Mar—B1
                                                                             101          In LF during Sch—Mar and after
             010     Ia   LF   only during                                                                                          B1
                                                 Mar-g.,                     110          In   LF during Sch—Mar and
             001     Ir   LF only    after                                                                                 Mar—B1
                                              B1                             ill          In
                                                                                     95.

of   the labor force at (or before) marriage. A minority of these women
eventually returned to the labor force after having had children, but
214, or    forty—two percent of      those women who had worked before marriage
never    worked after marriage.
          Labor force participation between marriage and first birth is more
predictive of later labor force activity. Sixty—two percent of the married
women who worked before B1 also worked after B1; 312 of the 453 women who
did not work during Mar—B1, or sixty—nine percent, did not enter the labor
force after B1 either. Only twenty—one percent of the women did not work
in   the labor force at some time prior to their first births; of these,
exactly two—thirds also did not work after B1.
         From Table 18 one can determine what patterns of labor force
participation       are associated with high or low        values of each variable, but,
0 course,      one cannot simultaneously hold constant the values of the other
variables; because some of these variables are correlated significantly
with others one should not attach too much             0nificance to observed
relationships.
           As should be expected, the lowest level of wife's education —— more
than one year below the mean for the entire sample ——             is    that of women who
have    never entered      the labor force. Those women who worked only after B1
also had a low value for W Ed —— an average education level of 10.37 years;

probably many       of   tic women in these two   groups   were pregnant when they left
school. The model in Chapter II predicted            somewhat similar behavior for
voren   'ith   hf"   education levels — namely, workin' for only a short time
after school, before B1; if such a pattern was in fact followed, its
existence may have been obscured in my analyses by the labor force activity
pattern of those low education women who did not work before B because of
unplanned early pregnancies. Of the women who ever worked at all, those
who worked after having children were the women with the lowest education
(10.68 years) and the women with        the   highest education (11.94). Those low
educir: c, 1o were in the               families   with the    1o:est    iiusbad's   incoi;
so that the motivations for working may have been quite different.
           All four groups of women who worked after marriage, before having
.childrcn,   were   the four groups withthe highest average         W Ed.    There is a
tendency     fr the sante phenomenon to appear with respect         to   both   H Ed and
                                                                              96.

Y1966; that is, four of the five highest values for husband's education
and for his 1966 income are associated with women who worked during the

Mar—li1
          interval.                                        the wife's
                        A similar pattern emerges with respect to
age when she was interviewed: the four groups who worked after marriage
and before B1 were auong the five youngest groups of women. The average
age   of women who had worked then was 41.90; for those who had         not, 42.07
years.     (Since all women in this sample are aged forty to forty—four there
is not much room for variations in the average ages of different sub—groups.)
This may represent a change over time in attitudes towards labor force
participation by married women, to changing economic conditions over time
——   availability    of jobs, need for the wife's income, wage rates of womenq
etc. ——   or     the like.
          If wocn who worked in all three intervals are omitted, the
average age of the remaining women who worked during the Mar—B1 interval
falls below 41.8 years. The women who worked in all 4ntervals are the only
ones whose family income is below the average of t..entire sample; the
remaining women have the highest average Y1966. This suggests that the
younger womcn may have werked even though their earnings were not needed,
or that their working enabled their husbands to earn more in 1966, perhaps
by financing human capital investment —— behavior         apparently not so conon
among earlier cohorts. Perhaps reflecting some. of the same forces, all
three groups of "omen w:ose year of leaving school was earlier than the
average for the entire sample did not work between marriage and B1.
          T1'2   t"e ro'' of uc"n who    never   wo,rk'd in th   hor force after
th'fr marriage have the largest families. There is a tendency for voen
.'ho worked either before marriage or between marriage and first birth to
have fewer children thm the average. Not surprisingly, the three groups
with an average interval from school to first birth of forty—five or fer
monttls all were non—participants between school and marriage; this birth
ier"'l. exceethd seventy months for all other groups. None of the three
         :c grou;        tt loa, .t Scii—31 intcrvdl hs        since
e,iii1ng to bear children. As expected, women who worked in all three
intervals have the shortest Total Int, as well as the fewest children (and
the greatest number of years of labor force experience); while those who
have never worked have the longest Total mt        and   largest 1/C.
                                                                              97.

          B.   LFP Before    B1
          I examined the    components of the     interval   from leaving school to
the date of the first birth separately as well as j toto. Table 19
presents regression coefficients for the effects of several variables on
the amount of labor force experience between school and marriage, given
the length of that interval. Table 20 presents regressions for the interval
from marriage to B1; Table 21, the total interval from school to B1. In
each table observations with a. negative interval were excluded from the
analysis, as were observations for which Grad, the year of leaving school,
was unknown.     In each table results are presented for all women whether or
not they worked in that interval and then for only those women who were in
the labor force during the interval.
          From regression equations 19.1 through 19.12, it is obvious that
the wife's education level is a very important determinant of how much
of the interval from school to marriage she sp ds in the labor force.
The higher her education the more she will work between school and
marriage, given the length of that interval. The larger coefficients and
t—values for W Ed in the first six equatioas. compared to 19.7 through 19.12
indicate that the level of education also affects whether or not a woman
will work at all after leaving school. The average W Ed for the 508
wci vho worked in this interval was 11.45 years; for all 612 women, 11.33
(Table   22); therefore the average education of the non—workers was approxi—
                      1
mately 10.74 years.
          The variables for the husband's attributes, H Ed and Y1966, were
not expected to affect the wife's labor force decisions premaritally.
The positive but insignificant signs may be indicative of women who are
more firnly attached to the labor force meeting and marrying men with
higher education and/or income, but this is only speculation. Nor dd
the ntmber of children a woman would later have affect significantly the
aot of her lbor force parttcpaton in the pre—marital interval, given
the length of that interval, although the negative sign does seem appropriate.
          Inthe sample of women who did work during this interval the fact
that   she wculd re—enter the labor force at some time subsequent to B1

         1(612 . 11.3     — 508   .   ll.45)/(E12—508)   10.74.
                                                                            98.


                                   Table 19
Regressions on the number of years worked between school and marriage;
1967 National Longitudinal Survey, white, non—farm mothers, aged 40—44,
                          married once—spouse present


          RegressIon coefficients, with t—values in parentheses


Szrp1e: All with positive interval from school to marriage; N — 612
                                           *                2
Eq. No.   W Ed   H Ed Y19b6 #C        dummy     Sch—Mar    R
           .280                                            .068
19.1      (9.23)                                          (38.55)     .71

           .275                     —.034      .021        .U67
19.2      (8.92)                    (.89)     (.15)       (39.55)     .71
           .250   .C29              —.036                  .067
19.3      (6.61) (1.14)             (.94)                 (37.26)     .71

           .254   .031                         .067        .067
19.4      (6.78) (1.18)                       (.46)       (37.52)     .71

           .267             .015 —.038                     .067
19.5      (8.45)           (1.06) (.99)                   (38.08)     .71

           .273             .015               .058        .068
19.6      (8.77)           (1.04)             (.41)       (38.16)     71

Sample:   Women who worked between school and marriage;           N   508
                                                      *
Eq. No.    W Ed    Ii Ed Y1966       #C       dummy       ScIi—1ar     R

           .184                                            .069
19.7      (6.10)                                          (41.39)     .77
           .181                     —.036      .223        .070
19.8      (5.91)                    (.98)     (1.67)      (40.72)     .78
           .151    .034             —.048                  .069
19.9      (4.19) (1.42)             (1.31)                (40.25)     .78
           .156    .038                        .270        .070
19.10     (4.39) (1.59)                       (2.02)      (40.76)     .78
           .178             .001 —.045                     .069
19.11     (5.69)           (.09) (1.22)                   (0.89)      .77
           .185             .003               .245        .070
19.12     (6.01)           (.22)              (1.84)      (41.15)     .77

*
 Dutty    1 if the wornan ever worLed after B1; otherwise, duy —            0.
                                                                    99.

                            Table 20
Regressions on the number of years worked between marriage and Li;
                              1967 NLS


  Sample: All with positive interval from marriage to B1; N — 66

  W Ed      H Ed     Y1966               Dummy                     R2
                                                  Mar—B1
  .022                                            .029
  (.93)                                           (13.99)         .23
  .026                                   .777     .030
  (1.18)                                 (7.12)   (14.95)         .29
  .019               .014                .794     .030
  (.80)              (1.29)              (7.23)   (14.95)         .29
  .018      .010                         .786     .030
  (.66)     (.51)                        (7.11)   (14.92)         .29
  .025                        —.010      .772     .030
  (1.12)                       (.31)     17.02)   (14.43)         .29
  .013      .006     .013     —.011      .795     .030
  (.45)     (.32)    (1.25) (.35)        (7.10)   (14.60)         .29


  Sample: Women who worked between marriage and B1; N       250


  W Ed      H Ed     Y1966               Dummy
                                                  Mar—B1
 —.030                                            .056
 (.83)                                            (22.17)         .67
 —.032                         .054               .057
 (.90)                         (1.02)             (21.44)         .67
 —.030                                   .243     .057
 (.86)                                   (1.62)   (22.82)         .67
 —.033                         .065      2.63     .058
 (.95)                         (1.21)    (1.75)   (21.59)         .ó8
 —.030     —.005     .001      .065      2.61     .058
 (.72)      (.17)    (.05)     (1.21)    (1.71)   (21.44)         .68
                                                                        100.


                             Table 21
Regressions on the number of years worked between school and
                                                                  B1;
                             1967 NLS


 Sample: All with positive interval from school to          N    656


W Ed       H Ed     Y1966        i/C    Dummy                         R2
                                                  Sch—R1
 .207                                             .053
 (5.12)                                           (26.77)         .52
 .170      .055                         .523      .054
 (3.45)    (1.57)                       (4.24)    (26.94)         .54
.207                .019                .802      .055
(5.03)              (.99)               (4.14)    (27.93)         .54
.166       .051     .014                .839      .054
(3.35)     (1.43)   (.76)               (4.29)    (26.92)         .54
.168       .051     .014       .010     .844      .055
(3.33)     (1.43)   (.75)     (.18)     ('     ) (26.09)          .54


Sample: Women who worked ever between school and B1; N          554
W Ed       H Ed     Y1966       I/C     Dummy     Sch—B1
.174                                              .052
(4.00)                                            (25.68)         .55
.179                                    .803      .054
(4.18)                                  (4.17)    (26.39)         .56
.151       .036                         .832      .054
(3.00)     (1.04)                       (4.28)    (26.06)         .56
.150       .037     —.001 —.005         .828      .053
(2.92)     (1.04)   (.053)    (.098)    (4.18)    (25.03)         .56
                                                                        101.,



                                     Table 22
                                                                       20, and 2].
Mean values of certain variables for the six sub—samples in Tables 19,


          Sample: All with positive interval from ——


                           Sch—Mar     Mar—B1             Sch—B1

                                       11.4                11.4
          W Ed             11.3
                                       11.6                11.6
          H Ed             11.5
                                       $7.4                $7.4
          Y1966            $7.3
                                        3.2                 3.2
                            3.2
                                          .9                4.1
          Yrs 12            3.4

          % working                                          46
                             46           46
          after B1
          Length of
          interval                      28.1               75.2
                           51.2
           (months)

           Smp1: All ho worked during the interval —


                           Sch—Mar      Mar—B1             Sch—B1

                                        11.9                11.5
           W Ed            11.4
                                        11.9                11.8
           H Ed            11.7
                                         7.8                 7.6
           Y1966             7.5
                                         2.9                 3.1
                             3.1
                                         2.3                 4.8
           Yrs LF            4.1
           7 working                                          46
           after              44          64
                   B]
           Length     of
                                                            80.7
                            56.3         32.7
                                                                               102.


increased sigziificaatly her work experience after school, before marriage.
This re1atioship disappears in the          sample   of all women regardless of work
experience before marriage. These results may be affected by the omission
of    the women who never worked at any      time    (omitted because the length of the
interval    from school to marriage cannOt be        determined); 104 women in this
sample who  did not work before they married did work after. Inclusion of
the other women would raise the (positive) significance of the dummy
variable in equations 19.4 and 19.6.
        The coefficient of the interval in months, .07, indicates that
lcngthening the interval by one year increases the time spent in the labor
force by about twelve times .07 or .84 years. The average interval for
all women was 51.21 months; for those who worked, 56.77 months, indicating
much shorter intervals — about two years1 —— for women who did not work.
Same of these 104 non-workers may have had very short or even zero—length
intervals. (The marriage month was reported but the mnnth of leaving
school. was not; my assumption that the month of le school was June

may have produced positive         intervals where they did not exist.) Also,
lbor force e::prrlerice was reported to the nearest year; so Lhai. any woan
who married within six months of leaving school must report no labor force
participation during that interval.
          Only 250 or about thirty—eight percent of the 656 women who had
their first birth subsequent to their marriage worked during any of the
twenty—eight months (average) between the           marriage and B1.2 The average
educational   level was nearly one—half year highr for ie :oi:ers than
for   the entire sample, 11.89 as against 11.44.          Their husbands had more
education and income. The probability of their participating in the labor
force after was much higher —— sixty—four percent for workers, forty—
six percent for the total sample, and therefore thirty—five percent for
the non—workers.
          The only si2njfjcant variable in the regression on work experience
bct:2n marriage and first birth (Table 20), other than the length of the
UL17a2, is the dummy variable: if a woman plans to work after having

          1(612 . 51.21   -- 508   . 56.77)/(612-508)      24.05.
       2Thjg    ludis oeIt for whom Grad iS unknown; thirty-six percent
(253), of the 7O wohen in the total sample worked between marriage and
                                                                                    B1.
                                                                                     103.



children she. Is much more likely to continue working after her marriage
rather than quitting her job. If she does            continue working she is likely
to   work somewhat more than the woman who will not work once she has begun

childbearing.
          An additional year in this period adds less labor force experience
than   an additional    year before marriage. Even among only those women who
did work in the period between marriage and B1 an additional year added to
the interval results in. only a little more than          two—thirds of a year of
additional  labor force experience.
          The dependent variable in the regressions in Table 21 is total work
experience in the two intervals Sch—Mar and Mar—B1 together. The regression
coefficients in Thble         21 are for those women whose first birth occurred
after they left schcol         (Grad known, N—656) and for those who worked
between leaving school and having their first child —— either               before or
after marriage. The two important determinant'- of the degree of labor
force participation (after leaving school) Liore B1               are   the wife's
education and     the   likelihood that   she   will work after having children,
rcprase:cd     by the dury variable       IndIcating whether or not she did
actually work after B1. Women with more education do'work during more
of the pre—maternal period; and        ceteris    paribus women with a strong
enough labor force commitment to work after having children work more
pre—maternally.
          C.    LFP   After   B1
          In   a study of   women's labor force participation after the start
of the childbearing stage two phenomena are of special interest: labor
force entries or re—entries before the last           birth (if   there are two      or
more births) and labor force (re)entry after the last birth only. Of the
302 women who worked after having had one or more birth,1 253 had worked
pre—maternally.       The 302 women were divided nearly evenly between those


        'Three observations are included here that were categorized in
Section A of thIs chapter as not working after B1. These women were
reported as hzving been in the labor force but having worked zero years
——
   i.C., either they dId net worI at least six months In any one year or the
infornation on yca- w;s is3ing. ift Secticn A where calculations involving
years of labor fo:ce experience were used, these observations were omitted;
they are !nc1ded here because the nurher of years worked is not relevant
to the at,a1yes.
                                                                              104.

 who worked between the births of their children ——       i.e., before BU ,   125
 women,    and those who entered the labor force only after the last birth,
 129 women; forty—eight of the women had only one child.
            I   first attempted to predict whether a woman would enter the labor
 force after having children, on the basis of her education, her husband's
 education and income, and measures of the extent of her childbearing and
 labor    force interruption —— the number of children    she bore, the length
of the average interval, and the length of the total interval from B1 to
B. In the regressions reported in this section, 1 eliminated observations
eporting a husband's and others' income of less than $1,000 in 1966 on
 the assumption that these were mainly refusals to answer or reporting
'rrors. Although this reduced sample sizes, that cost seemed justified
here, for Yl966 was expected to be an important consideration or to be
'orrelated with important factors in determining a woman's post—B1 labor
dorce behavior)
           The dependent variable in the regressions on ble 23 is a dichotomous
'rariable whose value is "one" if the     woman ever worked after       and   "zero"
otherwise.2 As expected, the h1her the wife's         education, the more likely
ic is that she will work even after having children. The strong negative
sign on the      income variable also is not   surprising: data in Table 14
dicated that many mothers who work report they do so         because   of family
i:ancial need.
        The negative signs on the fertility variables were also predictable;
fo: uc:cn who have m:r.y children or who have them far apart are probably
     committed to market work. It should be noted however that many women
•:;rk between births, so that a long average or total interval does not
i:omatical1y preclLde labor force participation after B1. The negative
sign for H Ed is      a bit surprising; for more educated husbands ought to be
ic   open—minded      about their wives working outside the home, and, regressions

           husband's 3.966 income was not expected to be very relevant to
          ur force participation, most of which was pre—marital; therefore,
  1i not bother with this refinement in Section B. Regressions excluding
 Lervations with Y1965 of less than $1000 are presented in Appendix F.

           2Although t—values are recorded, their interpretation is not entirely
dantical wfth     t—values in regrecsions on normally distributed dependent
variables.
                                                                    105.

                            Table    23
 Regressions on labor   force    participation after B1; 1967 NLS


Dependent Variable: 1 if woman worked after B1, 0 if she did not.


Sample: All women; N      664


W Ed      H Ed          Y1966        1/C    Ave    mt   Total mt
.019     —.026          —.010
(2.00)    (3.73)        (2.66)                                         .04
.016     —.027          —.009 —.030
(1.71)    (3.81)        (2.50) (2.94)                                  .05
.019     —.027          —.010               —.002
(2.03)    (3.83)        (2.61)               (2.86)                    .05
.016     —.028          —.009                            —.001
(1.70)   (3.96)         (2.32)                           (4.01)        .06
.017     —.027          —.009 —.029         —.002
(1.75)   (3.91)         (2.45) (2.81)        (2.72)                    .06
.02      —.03
(1.65)    (4.19)                                                       .03
.01      —.03                     —.03
(1.37)   (4.26)                    (3.08)                              .04
.02      —.03                               —.00
(1.69)   (4.29)                             (2.91)                     .04
.01      —.03                                            —.00
(1.38)   (4.39)                                          (4.23)        .05
.013     —.030                    —.030     —.002
(1.41)   (4.34)                    (2.95)   (2.76)                     .05
                                                                 106.


                            Table 23
                            (cont'd)


Sample: All women with Y1966      $1000; N — 554


W Ed      H Ed       Y1966        //C    Avt mt    Total   tnt
 .03      —.02       —.02
(2.62)    (2.28)     (4.33)                                         .05

 .02      —.02       —.02      —.03
(2.38)    (2.37)     (422) (2.51)                                   .06

 .03      —.02       —.02                —.00
(2.57)    (2.36)     (4.10)               (2.80)                    .07

 .02      —.02       —.02                           —.00
(2.33)    (2.52)     (4.04)                          (3.91)        .08

 .024     — .019     —.020     — .026    —.002
(2.3/4)   (2.43)     (4.01) (2.30)        (2.61)                   .08
 .0?      —.02      —.02         .01     —.00       —.00
(2.35)    (2.52)     (4.01)     (.27)    (.25)      (1.58)         .08
                                                                            107


on Total tnt for the NLS data yielded negative coefficients for H Ed
(Chapter SI). But the sign is appropriate if child quality is education—
elastic a well as income—elastic. Husbands with high H Ed lr.ay desire
"high    quality" children requiring large iflpUtS      of   the wife's time.'
          Given that a woman enters or reenters the labor force after having
had erie or more children, what factors determine whether she will work
before she has corpleted childbearing or only after having had her last
child?  To answer this question, regressions were run on a dummy variable
whose value was "one" if the woman worked between B 1
                                                      and Bn and was
"zer&' if her work experience commenced only after B. The results are
presented in Table 24. The sample is all mothers of two or more children
who worked after 1' either before or after B. A positive coefficient
meansthat larger values of that independent variable increase the
probability that a woman will enter the labor force before completing
childbearing.
           econo:nic variables have little ect: W Ed and H Ed are
         The
insignificant and Y1966 is significant only when the total interval is
also entered into the regression. Two plausible explanations for the
positive coefficient of fi966 and (1) that women whose husbands have
high iPcomes can afford to hire competent child care, and (2)' that for
some couples this high level of income was sorncwhat unexpected and
rLl.cc     i: thcir revi.Ln Lhir decicion as to ho; r:iny chiidron          t.o

have.    1.n such cases, the wife's labor force activity, when it occurred,

may have been viewed by the couple as post—B, the decision to have
another child coming only later.
         The demographic variables, #C and Ave mt        both   are significantly
positive as is the     total   interval ( Ave   tnt •      The coefficients
                                                        (#C—l)).
of /C and /ve mt are iarer and more significant when both variables
are nc1uded in the regressions than when either appears alone. Ave

tnt has the lcrger t•value; the slope coefficients cannot be compared
  Y:t ' h         tilO Z' ol      ti
                                   coefficient of .ve tnt depends on the
units of rneasuretents for Ave tnt. According to the coefficients from
Equations 24.4, 24.7, and 24.8, having ore additional child with unchanged

         11f   there are elenencs of this In W Ed apparanci)- they are more
than offset        the suhstitut:ion effects.
                                                                         108.

                                Table   24

Regrcssions on labor force participation between B1 and B; 1967 NLS,
  wotnen with two or more children who ever worked after B1 (or B)


     Dependent Variable: 1 if woman worked between B and B
                                                    1      a
                         0 if she worked only after B (and not between).


            Sample: All, N    254



  Eq. No.    W Ed      H Ed   Y1966               Ave mt   Total   lot

            —.006     —.003
  24.1       (.36)    (.20)                                                 .00
             —.005     .006              .056
  24.2       (.32)    (.48)              (2.64)                                 .03
             -.008     .006                       .006
  24.3                (.49)                       (4.24)                        .07
             (.47)

             -.007     .012              .076     .007
                                         (3.72)   (5.01)                        .12
  24.4       (.44)    (.96)

              .000     .011                                .003
                      (.89)                                (5.85)               .12
  24.5       (.02)
              .000     .011             —.038     .001     .004
                      (.86)              (.75)    (.53)    (2.44)               .14
  24.6       (.03)
                               .018      .076     .007
             —.004                                                              .14
  24.7                         (2.68) (3.78)      (5.33)
             (.3,5)

             —.00c     .004    .017               .007
  24.8       (.48)    (.34)    (2.51) (3.78)      (5.33)                        .14
                                                                              109.



                               Table 24
                               (cont 'd)



       Sample: All with Y1966 > $1000; N        213


Eq. No.     W Ed     H Ed    Y1966         IC         Ave mt   Total    tnt
           —.006    —.000    .126
24.9        (.32)   (.01)    (1.29)                                                  .01

           —.006     .004    .014     .067
24.10       (.35)   (.30)    (1.49) (2.95)                                           .05
           —.007     .C1     .014                     .006
24.11       (.39)   (.04)    (1.52)                   (3.44)                         .06
           —.008 .o          .017     .081            .007
24.12       (.44)   (.45)    (1.82) (3.68)            (4.10)                         .12
           —.003     .007    .017
24.13       (.15)   (.51)
                                                               .003
                             (1.89)
                                                               (5.53)                .14
            —.002    .006
24.14                         .018 —.04               .000      .004
            (.09)   (.43)    (1.91) (.78)             (.08)    (2.45)                .14
            —.01             .01
            (.40)
                             (1.35)
            —.00                                                                     .01
                             .02      .07
24.16       (.21)            (1.66) (2.94)
                                                                                     .05
           —.01              .01
21.17                                                 .01
            (.4s)            (1.61)                   (3.45)                         .06
           —.003             .018     .080
24.18                                                 .007
            (.22)
                             (2.05) (3.66)            (4.09)                         .12
                             .02
24.19      (.18)                                               .00
                             (2.14)
                                                               (5.52)                .14
           ..00              .02   —.04           .00          .00
24.20      (.20)             (2.14) (.80)         (.07)        (2.46)                .14
           —.007     .014             .078            .006
24.21      (.39)    (1.02)            (3.54)          (3.96)                         .11
                                                                     110.



                                   Table 24a
Mean values of variables, by the woman's labor force status between B1 and B


                             Worked After B Only      Worked Between B and B
                                          n                          1      n

                             All          Y > 1000    All             Y > 1000
    Variable                 N129          N105       Nl25             N103
    W Ed                     11.48         11.46      11.39             11.44

    H Ed                     11.12         11.10      11.10             11.23

    Yl966                    6.258         7.679      7.233             8.360

                             3.070         3.076      3.560             3.648

    Ave mt                   35.99         35.39      47.18             44.65

    Total mt                 71.50         71.31      108.5             108.4
                                                                          111.



spacing and lengthenIng the average interval by ten to eleven months, holding
contant 1C, have about       the   same quantitative efect on the probability that
a woman will work before having her last child (given that she ever works
after B]). For Equations 26.12, 24.18, and 24.21, the effect of one
additional child is equivalent to that of twelve to thirteen month longer
intervals.   A long interval probably reduces the costs (includingpsychlc
costs) of working between childbirths —— e.g., the child may be in public
or nursery school; a large number of children may make such labor force
participation more necessary.

             A   cc'r1on of the equations not containing demographic variables
(24.1,   24.9, and 24.15) with the other equations suggests that women with
more education do not alter the number           or spacing of their children in
orr diher to be able c or              working between child births rather
                                      to avoid
than only after the child—care period. The coefficients and t—values of
W Fd are affected very        little by   inclusion orexclusion of #C and Ave mt.
         I   n.::t investigated what. determin      ow soon after women enter
the labor force and, for those who wait, what determines how long after B
'cn wi f"—r' '-eting the labor force. Pcgressicns on the length of
the interval (in months) from B1 to labor force entry were run on many
subsamples of the women in the 1967 NLS who worked after B1. Results of
sr'a of the recressions which used the total interval from 1B to B
                                                                 n as
the   fertility measures are presented in Table 25. Other of these regressions
as   well as      comparable equations using I/C,   Ave Int, and both #C and Av
l i;tid of T...l mt             are   prc.;cnted in Acndix C.
             If one   examines together the women who worked before B     and those
who worked only after B, no cause—and—effect relationships emerge.
         cily ca the wo'.2n who worked between births provides only a little
more enlightenment: the economic variables are still insignificant, whIle
a longer total interval increases the time from l to labor force entry.
This oppoars to be almost trite; for obviously those women who have a
total interval o1, say, 3t i.:ouths cdnnot irage, say, 48 nchs frci
to labor force entry, while other women with a longer interval, say, 72
months, can. Also, when other regressions were run on the sub—samples used
                                                                           112.



                                    Table 25
Regrsions on the nun'ber of months from B1 to labor force entry, for various
          sub—samples of women who worked after B (or B ); 1967 NLS
                                                 1     n


   Eq. No.     Sample         N      W Ed       H Ed    Yl966    Total mt
   25.1      'wo or more C;   254    —2.30 —.52         —1.10    —.01
             worked after             (.85)     (.24)   (.96)     (.06)           .01
             B1 (or B)

   25.2      Two or more C;   213    —2.66     —.81     —.65      —.03
             worked after             (.94)    (.36)    (.42)     (.32)           .01
             B1 (or B );
             Y • lOOO



   25.3      Two or more C;   125      .11     —1.61     .70       .20
             worked between           (.06)    (1.07)   (.86)     (2.81)          .08
             B '.nd B
              1      n


   25.4      Two or more C;   108    —.92      —1.38     .65       .18
             worked between           (.44)    (.83)    (.61)     (2.36)          .08
                and B
             Y1o00n

   25.5      T-   cr r'r C;   12      —4.7      1.97    1.23       .78
                                                                                  .46
             worked after             (2.18) (1.14)     (1.32)    (9.53)
             B only
              n

   25.6      Two or more C;   105     —5.52     1.36    3.37       .76
             worked after             (2.34) (.74)      (2.42)    (8.24)          .44
             B only;
             Yn> 1000
                                                                                113.



in equations 25.3 — 25.6 but with the total interval replaced by its
corponcnts, 1/C and Ave tnt, the coefficients of the number of children
were always more significant than those        of   the length of the average
interval (Appendix G). A more useful exploration of the timing of the
labor force entry by women who do not wait until after completing
childbearing to work would require more detailed information about the
dates of all child—births and of all labor force entries and exits than                is
available in the 1967 NLS.
       Turning finally to those women who worked (after B1) only after
B,' I found much more significant results (Equations 25.5 and 25.6).
Given the length of the total interval from B1 to Bn women with more
education return       to   work (after B) sooner after B1, while high family
inc. (husband's and others' incore) increases the length of the interval
from B1 to labor force entry.         Of course, examining the effect of a
variable     on time out of the labor force after B., for women who worked only
after Bn ,      tha interval from 1B to B
             when
                                        a i: ..luded, is testing mostly- the
effect of that variable on the interval from B to labor force entry, the
irtc'rvil treated exicitly in the next paragraphs. Th2 tctal interval
variable in equations 24.5 and 24.6 is also of interest however. It
indicates     that   a longer work hiatus is produced by a longer total birth
interval; but, since the coefficient is significantly less than 1.,
compression of the non—working interval occurs as the birth interval
lengthens. (Both the dependent variable and the total birth interval
             in I:.mth3.) Ar :'    :..1. year bctwccn first and 1st
births adds about nine months to the time out of the labor force, for             these
women who did not work until after B
                                           a
        The     averare interval from B
                                      1
                                        to Bnfor these two samples is 71.5
and 71.3     months, or about six years; from B1 to labor force entry, 155.9
and 154.8 months,      or    about thirteen years. The average age of the   last
child when the mother begins working for these two samples, is within one—
LJL icunLh of seven yiars. the regressions on the length of ti from
B to labor force entry —— i.e., the age of the youngest child when the




        1'They may or may not have       worked before B1.
                                                                                  13.4.



mother began market work ——            in Table 26 show that women with more education
begin to      work significantly sooner after B than women with less education.
Using the coefficient of W Ed in Equation 26.9, a woman with four. more years
of education than another will begin working when her last child Is younger
by almost two years (21.76 months).
           The positive coeffIcient of H Ed becomes less significant when
husband's income (Y1966) also enters the regression. The effect of higher
family income is to keep the woman at home until her last child is older,


and   tr
as there is less need for her to supplement the earnings of her husband
               family menbrs) The          coefficient   of iC Is negative ut it
b:or; totally insiaifIcant :n Total mt is held constant; even if
a family with a given level of income has more children within an interval
o tine, the         uirc   i11 not return to work sooner     to n:c,t the added drain
on family      Income. Woren with more        children have been out of the labor
force longer; the equations showed in Table 25 that this causes an earlier
labor force entry. Equations 5, 7, 10, and 12 of Table 26 also show that
a longer Total Tnt results In a woman's entering the labor force sooner
aft--    '.     O:e        1       , fr   this may he that the tir' oi other, older,
children in the home is substituted for the mother's time In household
activities, and        the     first children of women with longer intervals are older
t'a far       those with       ort rva1s. Also, the woman's earniiv's may         be needed
more because      they have been forgone for a longer        time and/or because college
expenses      for the oldest child are more imi.inent.
              ise          t1\2             Ui'3' ci;i-              fimi..;     end
the positive effects of           husband's education and income are not observed
or are much weaker whEn           mothers of only one child are added to the sample
or are   tudie'J      eparatclv. It is not clear :hy        this   should be so but it
may be that many of the parents of an only child expected to have
additional, children later, but did not for either economic or physiological
reasons,   and postponed labor force participation for a long time before
ri.alIzing that they had already had all the children they             would ever have.

         1Of the working mothers of two or more children in the 1965 NFS
sample, one—third wnrkcd c.1t of necessity, one—third to prQvide for extras,
and one--third by preference.
                                                                          115


                                     Table 26
         Regressions on the number of months from last birth to labor force
        entry; women who worked after B but not between B and B ; 1967 NLS
                                       n                 1     fi
                                                                  Total
Eq. No.      Sample         W Ed      Ii Ed     Yl966      1/C     tnt           R2
             Two or        —4.04      2.80
26.1         more           (1.77)   (1.62)                                     .03
             children
                           —4.37      2.80               —5.82
26.2
             N 129
                            (1.94)   (1.64)              (2.14)                 .06
                           —4.32      2.27       1.34
26.3                        (1.90)   (1.29)     (1.41)                          .04
                           —4.64      2.28       1.31    —5.74
26.4                       (2.06)    (1.31)     (1.39)   (2.12)                 .08
                           —4.87      1.78       1.23    —.43     —.21
26.5                       (2.17)    (1.14)     (1.31)   (.11)     (1.64        .10
                           —2.73                 1.57    —5.74
26.6                       (1.58)               (1.71)   (2.11)                 .0
                           —3.24                 1.45    —.09     —.23
26.7                       (1.87)               (1.58)   (.02)    (1.77)        .09


                                                                            ,
             Two or        —5.12      1.60      3.68
26.8         more          (2.12)    (.84)      (2.57)                          .09
             children
                           —5.41L     1.79      3.47     —6.73
26.9                       (2.28)    (.96)      (2.47)   (2.20)                 .13
                           —5.53      1.43      3.37     —1.36    —.21
26.10                      (2.34)    (.76)      (2.41) (.29)      (1.48)
                           —4.08                3.90     •6.6O
26.11                      (2.14)               (2.93) (2.16)                   •13
                           —4.47                3.70     —.89     —.23
26.12                      (2.34)               (2.78) (.19)      (1.59)        .15
                                                                  116.


                                Table 26
                                (cont'd)




Sample                 W Ed      H Ed      Y1966

One   child   N — 48   1.66      —4.56
                       (.40)     (1.21)                     .03

One child               .73       —.45
t > 1000; N — 41       (.16)     (.16)                      .00

                       3.09      —5.73      .62
                       (.63)     (1.32)    (.21)            .05

One or more C;         —.98        .17
N 177                  (.48)     (.10)                      .00

                       —.95        .15              —.67
                       (.47)     (.09)              (.26)   .00

One   or   more C;     —2.02               2.38
Y> 1000; N — 146       (1.06)              (185)            .02

                       —1.42      —.93     2.58
                       (.63)     (.50)     (1.91)           .03

                       —2.00               2.35   —2.01
                       (1.05)              (1.83) (.69)     .03

                       —1.38      —.92     2.56   —2.02
                       (.61)     (.50)     (1.89) (.69)     .03
                                                                          11.7.


Meanwhile the others       in   this sample may be women with a strong career
commitment who returned         to work while the child was quite young. Thus
the two     effects   of the variables for the two groups could cancel out
each    other.
        For all of the sub—sets of observations, adding the variables #C
and Total mt to the regressions did not affect the other coefficients
very much. Considering the mothers of two or more children, the longer
the total interval from B 1 to Bn or, if Total mt is not held constant,
the more chLldren the sooner the mother started working. The more
education the wife had, whether or not #C or Total tnt is held constant,
the sooner she worked. The coefficient of W Ed was affected little by
the inclusion of #C and Total Int, even though highly educated women have
fewer   children and    have    them closer together. The positive coefficients
of Y1966 and of H Ed also changed only a little. If families whose Y1966
is   less   than $1000 are excluded, because they ?robably represent non—
responses, the coefficient of H Ed is no 1uger significant while that
of the income variable is highly significant. The higher the husband's
income the longer these women waited to enter th3 labor force after B
                                                                      n
                                                                    118.
                               CRAPTER VII
                                 SUHMARY


         This dissertation has analyzed some economic aspects of the
timing and spacing of births and examined women's labor force participa-
tion relative to this timing and spacing. According to the model
developed in Chapter II women with more education, who have a higher
price of time        and a more steeply rising P profile over their
lifetimes than   do less educated women, should have their children closer
together and earlier than less well educated women. This is primarily
because child—related activities are time—intensive; close spacing
produces more of a saving for women with high Pt than for other women.
Having the first birth (B1) early produces more of a cost    reduction   the
greater the increase 1n P over time.
         These effects are reinforced to the extent that women with more
education have a greater labor force commitment and acquire more depre-
ciable market skills. Aside from the fact that the present value of
income  is lowered as the receipt of that income is postponed, the most
prfIabla timing of a woman's labcr force participation Is In one con-
tinuous perlod,after childbearing.1 This allows the woman to acquire
on—the—job training at the very start of her work experience —— maxi-
mizing her earnings —— without the problem of skill depreciation through
non—usc during the child—caring period and increases the likelihood of
the employer paying for firm—specific investments.
         The income effect depends on both the level and timing pattern of
income. Families with high    incomes should, other things equal, have the
first birth sooner and subsequent births more wIdely spaced. Those with
a stecply rising income, especially in the early adult years, should have
B1 later; this later start would probably cause them to have subsequent
births closer together.
         The empirica]. tests of the timing hypotheses, reported in Chapter
IV, found   that women with rore education were. significantly less than one



       'Even more desirable is having the career first and then raising
children   after the career
                          is ended; but pcstponement of children reduces
the level of lifetime child—related   activities
                                               and increase.g the chances
of suhfecundity in the woman, birth defects in the child, crphanir.g of the
child,   etc.
                                                                          119.


year   older for each additional year of schooling. Since an additional
year of education raises women's average age at leaving school by
slightly more than one year (based on my calculation on published 1960
U.S. Census tables), the women with more education were having B1 sooner
after leaving school. This finding was confirmed by regressions on
another data set which found a significant negative effect of wife's
education    on the   interval between   leaving school and B1.
         In both data sets the husband's education had a positive effect
on wife's age at B1 (given her education) and on the interval from
school  to B1. In the data set with more reliable information on family
income, income's effect was to shorten the interval from school to B1)
If the income variable measures the level of family income and the
husband's education, given income, is regarded as a proxy for the slope
of    the lifetthe income stream then these results support the hypotheses
about the income effect on the timing of            for the correlation between
education and the size of the slope of the income profile is positive.
         Because the wife's year of birth is positively correlated with the

general level ot economic conditIons it was used as a proxy for the
(expected) level of family income. It had the expected negative effect
of an income level measure on the timing of B1. A similar result was
observed in the second data set when using the year the wife left school
as    a cohort variable; but since those women spanned only five, not fif-
teen, years of age, the cohort measure is affected strongly by the level
of education, as well as by the cohort, of the wife. The interpretation
of the cohort effect in regressions on both first interval and total
interval is muddied somewhat because the time period represented by the
cohort varic5le limits the dependent variable; the average age at B1 for

the    forty—ye.2r—Old women will be slightly   highet when they reach age    fifty
because a ew women of that cohort will be added to           the data set after
having   a first birth after the age of forty, and the average total
inte.va1 will be longer because some women will have another child while
they are in their forties.


         1
           It was insignIfcnt in tne other data       sat.
                                                                      120.

           The results of the regressions on the husband's age at marriage
 were similar except that a—squared was higher, primarily because the
 cohort variable (the husband's year of birth) was much more significant.
 RegressIons on different sub—groups of the population of white, non—farm,
 non—Catholic Americans did not produce notable differences in the results
 reported above, excpt that for couples who received substantial financial
 help from their parents in the early years 'of marriage the t—values of
 the wife's education, the husband's education, the completed family size,
 and the   cohort variable all were reduced. This is to be    expected, since
 this   raising of the family income (and flattening of the   income profile)
 is not reflected in the independent variables.
         The total effct of family income and wife's and husband's educa-
 tion on the interval from marriage to first birth is significant but the
Individual effects are not. Only the cohort variable, year married, (and
the family size variables) retained their significance when the interval
to   B1 was measured from the wedding date rather ti from the date the
woman left school.
       Tests of the hypotheses about the spacing of births are described
in Chapter V. The higher the wife's education the shorter the total
interval between B1 and her last birth (B), as predicted by the model
because of the substitution effect. The effect is even stronger f
fari1v size is not held constant, as highly educated woen also have fewer
children.
       The sign of the husband's education in regressions on the total
interval is positive and insignificant for the NFS data, perhaps because
it is flickIng up some of the income effect from that sample's less than
ideal measure. '11965; the coefficient of H Ed for the NLS data is negative.
A negative sign was emected. The weakly positive coefficient in the NFS
data may also represent an education—related demand for child—quality
that operates in addItion to the income—related demand for more quality
and mi:e c'iiid—reL:ted   activities. Wider spacing of births facilitates
e parents' spending more time with each child to produce more quality
her child. (Che positive effect Is weaker when the number of children is
net held constant, ai there is a negative relation between husband's
education level and family size.)
                                                                           121.


         The family's expected 1965 income had a weak negative effect on
the    1enth of the total interval for the 1965 NFS sample; Y1966, for the
1967 NLS sample, had     the   predicted positive effect on Total tnt. The
insignificant but negative coefficient observed in the        NFS data may have
resulted   because the income measure was inadequate or because of a possible
relation bet'een Y1965 and the price of time for women with no labor
force artachent. Moreover, although closer spacing lowers the opportunity
cost of children by reducing the amount of time       the   wife stays out of the
labor force, it   concentrates the money costs of children into a shorter
time period.    Since imperfect capital markets limit borrowing, couples
with lc incomes may be forced into wider spacing by monetary income
constraints even though this raises the total cost of children to them.
The ch-igcs in the coefficients when I stndardized for family size
suggest that families with higher incomes have more children. As noted
above, much or all of the negative coeffic tt on the cohort variable,
year marrIed, used as a proxy for income levels, may be due to the fact
that more recent cohorts have not had time to have long total intervals.
The cfficierts wee not affected much by the Inclucion or a:clusion
of    the family size variables.
         Although   having zero or one child was more common among the
older   women in the sample, these low—parity women were       older   at marriage
than those with two     or   more children, so that they actually had a some-
what later year of marriage. Also, women with one child were older and
rr.d 1c:r                than atILrz of t;o or more chiidrcn. Even though
they were older on the average, more of the zero— and one—parity women
were in the labor force and more of them worked because they liked to
than ar'on ';cen of parity two or higher. Many of the childless women
were married to men who were not in the labor force.
       Similar regression results were obtained from other subsets of
the   samples of   whIte, non—farm,   mothers.
       ihen r:gt ::ons were run on the length of the average interval
between births, the coefficients did not change sign but generally were
smaller aad s1iht1y less significant; but the reduction was very small
for the variable wife's education.
                                                                            122.

            The total effects of timing and spacing on a wmans age at
 her last birth (B) were        also   determined. Although additional
 education makes a woman older when she leaves school (and when she
 enters the labor force and when she marries), by having fewer children
 and having them sooner and closer together, she is no older at B than
 women with less education. If 1/C is held constant, she Is only slightly
 older. High levels of education for the husband, by postponing the first
birth result in the wife being older at Bn
            The income effect as measured by expected 1965 income is insig-
 nificant. The cohort variable is negative, perhaps because more recent
 cohorts have not all yet had B
                                n
        Since the fertility and labor force participation decisions are
interrelated, the labor force activities of woren bewcen various events
——
   leaving school, marriage, first birth, last birth, and the interview
date   ——
            were
             examined and reported in Chapter VI. It was found that
women with higher levels of education were likelL, to work longer between
leaving school and marriage or between leaving school and B1 than other
WO!flofl. Woien who woiad after having chlldrcn were likely to work 1cner
between school and marriage, between marriage and B1, and between school
and B1. The husband's income (in 1966) had an insignificant positive
effect and the number of children she later bore had an insignificant
negative effect on the length of labor force participation between
school and marriage, given the length of that Interval.
       F'er tha h:l         ::y :c:.'n i;orkad bQt'ccn i.: 'e nr,d B1 as
worked between school and marriage. The only variable affecting the
length of labor force participation in this interval, given the
length of the interval, was the variable indIcatin' whether the woman
worked after having children; its coefficient was positive and significant.
       The probability that a woman will work after having one or more
children is higher the more education she has. It Is lower the more
cduc3tkoa and      incoia hcr utind ias. increased chiid—i-elhtcd activitic, -
rpresented by larger family size or longer average and total birth
intervals,     reduce the   likelihood that a   woman   will ever work after havIng
her first birth.
                                                                           123.


          If   a woman works after having children, she is more likely to

enter the labor force before completing her childbearing life—stage
the higher her husband's income, the more children she has, the farther
apart she has successive births, and the longer the total interval
between B and B . The level of educational attainment of the husband
               1     n
and of the wife have little effect in this decision.
          The interval from El    to labor force entry   is longer the longer

the   total
          interval from B to B for both those wonen who entered the
                         1     n
labor force between births and those who remained outside the labor
force   until after B .
                   U
                       The only
                              - other discernible effect on the length

of the labor force hiatus among the former group was a weak negative
effect for the husband's income. Among the woman who worked after Bn
but not between births the effect of the husband's ed.tcation was
insignificant (and positive); the effect of his income was positive
nid of her own education, negative. For mothers of wo or more children
who worked after B , but not between B 1 iand Bn, additional education
                  n
shortened the interval from B to labor force entry; that is, more
edcatcd     wor"n entered tie 1zi focce when their lest child was younger
than    did other women. Women with a longer interval between B1 and Bn
entered the labor force sooner       after B than did women with a shorter
                                            n
total     interval. The husband's education had no sigrdficant effect on
how long the wife waited after B to enter the labor force but             if his
income was high her market entry caine      later.
          Thus it appears th:2t nt c:iy do the price of time and the
family    income affect the number, timing, and spacing of births, but also
that women with      high   potential wage rates are more   likely    to work after

havlnc'children and enter the le.bor force sooner after B and that
                                                                 11


women with high family incoc are less likely to work after having
children and enter the labor force later after Bn if they do work —
rational responses to economic forces.
                                                                                 124.

                                         AFTER0RD


         A womn ho ,raduates from college will have her first child two
  or v:ore years sooner after finishing school that a woman who is a high
 school graduate only; she will be less than two years older at B1. For
 won in the ]965 NFS, the additional four years of schooling increased
 the interval fror marriage to B1 by less than three months. The more
 educated wonn had a given number of children in an interval that
                                                                    as
 more than eight months shorter than for the less educated women; and,
 since the average family size is smaller for more educated women, she
 h: hcr chc.:i r.u:.cr of children in a
                                         twenty to twenty—one month shorter
 interval. For '.cn in the 1967 NLS               the   difference in the total interval
 was only two to four months, and the effects of H Ed were not much larger.
 Fou more years of education for the husband resulted in the NFS
                                                                 wives
 being    one ye-r cider at B1.
           For the NLS couples an additional $5,000 of income for the
 husband resulted in the wife having B1 four or five months sooner after
 she left school and in increasing the total interval
                                                       by three months,
 c:. tL :ar:. F- fly           of cour:c, lied large eftects on the inter-
vals. The effect of having four rather than two children was to reduce
the wife's age at Bi, ceteris pbus, by almost two years (NFS) and
tli Srtervei       f::
                  'c1iool to J3 by seventcen months (NLS). The
                                                               total
interval will be longer by seventy (NLS) or seventy—five (NFS) months,
or approximately six years.
          Since           of these effects ——     ej cthdiy for the Totl mt
regressions    with the NLS data ——        are   quite small, I considered the
possibility thet errors            in variables or specification errors might be
bi:.,ir    the C         iclonts    tc;;ard zero. Sore of the data problcns have
been described in earlier chapters: the minimal income information in
the NFS; the lack of a religion, variable in the NLS and of labor force
porti- ont4 r'r               on,      coot c.nrrerit status. in the NFS; the nex—
actness of the coastructed IIC variable in the NLS,             especially critical
in regressions oi Total Int; the fact that, in the              LS,   the age of the
youngest child is not given in months so that, even if he is the last
child, the Total mt estimate may err by as much as six mouths; and
                                                                        125.


the    complete inaccuracy of Total tnt if the vouncst child still in the
household   does not   represent the last birth of the mother.
         Even   if every variable was measured completely accurately,
generally the infonnation that is available can serve only as a proxy
for the information actually needed to test the model's hypotheses.
For    example, no one has yet devised a method for determining theshadow
price  of time for persons not in the labor force. For those in the labor
force, equatLng i' with the wage rate assumes that equilibrium conditions
exist. Couples with the same current income and education levels vary
greatly in man'p ur—sured but important respects, including tastes;
their incowe in previous years may have followed very different paths;
the costs of child—related activities may differ because of differences
in the avaiir)11ty     of cp    or free child—care facilities such as rela-
tives; World War II    may have disrupted or altered family planning for
many   of tlies copies; and so on.
      Because such errors in variables may bias coefficients downward,
I re—ran some of the Total mt regressions for the 1967 NLS data after
arccciri the cht into thirtv—oue cells on the b,.;5s cf tha wife's
and husband's education level) These seemed to be tti regressions most
likely to have been affected by such problems. Although the aggregation
precedure will r.t necessarily overcome errors in vri'bles, if t.hey
exist, most of the coefficients were larger in the regressions on the
cell mean of the a,gregated data (Table 27). Of course, all of the t—
                 i1         ..uch of t van              variables is
eliminated by using cell means, and the values of R—square are larger
because there are fewer data—points.
         Even with rer'tjon the coefficients are small. Hoever, Table
28, for data in th 1960 U.s. Census of Pcpulation, sioi.Js that women in
successively higher education classes from nine through sixteen or more
years have substantially shorter total intervals. For example, college
graduaLL bev iotc cildren in an average of 99.& zonths, whIch is not
much longer than the 95.4 months in which high school dropouts bear only

         3Cell size Varied from seven to twenty—nine except for one cell
W Ed      12, ii I"i i2) with 19 observations.
                                                                                               126.



                                            Table 27
      Corparison of regressions on Totci Int for gregated and micro—data;
        1967 NLS, white, non—farm, married once—spouse present mothers of
one or more children; 706 observations aggregated by W Ed and. H Ed into 31 cells


              Regression coefficients with t—values in parentheses

                                       Aggregated Dt
                                                                                   l=LF
         Ed     H Ed     Y1966    #C                   Yrs LF    LFPR         After B1        2         R2
      —1.05   —1.22       i•07 99.23         --11.11
      (.77)    (1.28)    (1.08) (2.39)       (1.78)                                           .71       .76

       -.41   -1.45       1.01 91.60         -10.46 -2.t9                      ,
      (.31)    (1.60)    (.57) (2.33)        (1.78) (2.04)                                    .74       •79

        .39   —1.44        .70 83.40          —9.34             —86.18
      (.28)    (1.66)    (.40) (2.17)        (1.63)              (2.47)                       .76       .80

        .48   —2.44       1.56 82.65          —8.81                           —36.43
      (.28)    (1.97)    (.87) (1.96)         (1.40)                          (1.49)          .72       .78

        .48   —2.44       1.56 83.22          —8.90 —.43                      —36.22
      (.28)    (1.93)    (.85) (1.89)         (1.36) (.06)                    (1.44)          .71       .78
                                                                Ae yc
       —.13    -2.35      1.74 EO.46          —9.17              1
                                                                              -31.53
      (.11)    (.2.35)   (1.00) (1.99)       (1.52)
                                                                i2)           (1.33)          .74       .80




                                                       Micro—data                         ,




       —.81     —.81       .71 42.41     —1.92
      (.)      (1.13)    (1.43) (12.24) (6.42)                                                          .49

       —.50     —.87       .48 41.32     —1.89 —1.08
      (.54)    1.23)     (1.02) (12.04) (6.3) (3.57)                                                    .50
                                                                  LFPR
       —.30     —.84       .44 41.34    —1.89                   —28.27
      (.32)    (1.20)    (.93) (12.05) (6.39)                   (3.70)                                  .50

       —.07   . —1.12    .39 47.70    —2.27                                    —8.80
      (.09)    (2.02) (.128) (22.89) (11.70)            Age                    (2.83)                   .63

       —.07    —1.12       .39 47.67          —2.27      .76                   —8.90
      (1fl)    (.fl)     (1..) (22.87) (11.70) (.70)                     •T    (2.86)                   .63
       —.78    —1.75       .42 35.2           —1.70                  —4.        2.36
      (i. )    (3.63)    (1.63)   (17.86)    (9.93)              (15.43)        (.85)               .   .73
                                                                               127.




                                  Table 28
        Total mt (in months) for mothers of two to four children,
               by wife's education; derived from Table 25,
            Childspacing, for white women aged 35 to 39 in 1960




                         Elementary                High School             Co11ee

 children            less than                   1—3     4years    •1—3         4 years
Ever Born   Total     8 years    8 years         years   or more       years    or morc

   2         52.0      54.3       55.3            56.0   51.8           47.5     42.5

                                             :                     :
   3         90.2     93.3       93.0                    90.1           84.1     76.3


   4        116.1     119.8      119.2       : 121.6     115.5         108.6     99.8
                                                                                           126.

 three    children. In y          regressions     such effects are spread over several
 variables ——   W    Ed, I! !LI, income, labor force activity, etc.; the                 effect
 of aiiy one of these alone could be smaller because                  of    the   correlations
 among these variables, although some of the effects are offsetting:
High levels of W Ed and           11   Ed shorten the total interval while the high
income associated with more education tends to lengthen it.
          CertaInly at lcz t           part   of the explanation for the small
coefficients in some of the NLS regressions is the inclusion of Catholics
in those datasets. Certain of the independent variables have completely
opposite effects on the           dependent     variables for Catholic and for non—
Catholic couples. (See Appendix H.) Still another possible partial
explanation    rn lie in the inclusion             of women   with    less than     nine   years
of education. Although a linear relationship was assumed between W Ed
and TotalInt, for example, from the data of Table 28 it appears that
the length of the total interval does not change at all for education
levels from zero through nine to eleven years bnt that it decreases for
education classes "nine •to eleven" through "sixteen and over." Of the
706 observations in the flLS sample, 103 had eight or fewer years of
education, enough to bias downward the coefficient.
       Finally, the observed relationships may have                    been blurred or
weakened if knowledge of contraceptive techniques is correlated with
                                                t iS s.'- .:& rLportcd as
                                ta:' LirtJ to wo.. n in
occurring sooner than desired because of contraceptive failure or non—use;
(rlso,a few worsen reported difficulty in conceiving when desired.)
Women who are inefficient contraceptors may have shorter intervals. On
the other hand, women who know that they are efficient contraceptors may

have children sooner than others because they need not fear a long
fertile interval after their last desired birth. Thus, the effect of
differential   knowledge of fertility control is ambiguous.
          The findings presented in this dissertation apply                   to white
           wn       ic::: 1::           1510 rd 1927.     Extr:ci:                F the results
to et'ier populatIons, at          dIfferent times or different places, must               he
done with care. For example, as noted in Chapter VI, Section A, a
change in labor force participation after marriage before childbearing
occurred   even withIn the u-arrow (five year) span              of   the   NLS cohort.      The
average   'alues of    au.      the variables have    probably   been chanIng over time.
                                                                             129.



As an example, since women have becn obtaining more education in recent
years the averae are at first birth ought to have risen, as it has.                   In
addition, the average increase in W Age   ought to be less than the
average increase in education, but I have not seen data presented In such
a way as to make that comparison possible. Before attributing this change
In fertility behavior for women currently in their twenties to changes in
W   Ed, one shc'uld note that the average level of husband's education also
has been ricir.r, althou-t perhaps not as much as W Ed; that this cohort's
equivalent of Y1965 or Y1966 Is not known, or, conversely, that the income
of the sample woren when they were in their twenties is not known; and
that ftC   is   not   vet   known fr the   current cohort. Since ftC has   a positive
effecton W Ac l' the observed ri't in that ge may hav resulted in
part hecaua on who will h-ye, $'2, oilv     c th2 children arc
being compared to that most fertile of twentieth century cohorts —— woman
born betwcn 1930 and 1934.
         Even the most robust of fertility          - ir.ionships for the American
women may not apply to women in very different cultures. For example,
both in the S and           NLS t'nd in the 1960 U.S. Cer.s" of   Popit]attnn   and
the 1967 Survey of Economic Opportunity I found that larger family size

was associated with shorter average intervals between births. Using
data for women in Sierra Leone, Snyder found that couples with larger
numbers of children had longer average intecvals; he suggested that those
couples who wanted more children may have, for the same reasons, also
 td to                c1d       .rmmi for a        'r t a av r!      2     'c'pty
nest"   syndrome.1


        'Snvd.r,       c.. cit.,
                            pp. 36—37. I have not ecn Snyder's ca1cu1at1os.
but if he dcfinad Ave mt as Total mt divided by C, rather than (#C—l)
his calculations of Ave tnt could yield an increasing interval, while
mine would be decreasing for the same data set. For example, i average
Total mt for two— through five—chiid families were 40, 70, 96 and 125
           recr'ecte1v, divisIon b ftC yields avera-e intervala of 20, 23.3,
   , n.L   2.iuntJ,,            Lu: v    CS-i) v I... c:cr.;i: va1:- c.
40, 35, 32, and 31.2 months.
         In the regressions on Ave hit in Table 13 the coefficient of ftC is
 very sIgidficazt1v reative. The simple correlation between Ave tnt and ftC
is significantly i'eative for families with two or more children, although
it is n mific:ntly positive            if   one—child families also ar included. (and
assigned a Ave ime — 0.)           This negative correlation exists despite the
negative cot ltor.s between           \ve tnt and W d and betwen ftC and J Ed.
                                                                             130.




                 about tizr and spacing decisions —— especially the income
 efrect on spacing ——     still is not completely understood, as I have noted
 throughout this     dissertation;   but much has been added to our knowledge.
 Among   the   tost signiricant contributions was the separating of the effects
 of wife's educatIon, noted in Childspacinc and other publications, into
 at least some of its components; the effect of the level of her education
 was assessed separately from that of correlated variables such as her
 husband's education or income. Secondly, I have demonstrated that non—
 Catholic couples respond differently to education and income than Catholic
 couples ira their tiring and spacing of births. Finally, as the model
predicted and the empirical evidence bore out, researchers have in the
past   been analyzing   the   "wrong" first birth interval; instead of the
 traditional    "interval from marriage to first birth," the timing decision
variable    that differs across couples in response to economic forces is
the interval from leaving school to having the f.::t child, (or the age
at B1 given the education level.) This seems to be an important
innovation; I hope analysis of this interval will be pursued in the
future.

          If one had to compare the relative impact on couples of timing
and spacing decisions and of the decision on family size, it is likely
that   on the average anadditional child raises the Costs of child—
related activities more than do changes in the timing or spacing of a
given number of births. An additional child probably also reduces labor
force participation by the wife by more than do wider birth intervals,
although the 1960 Census did show women with W Ed 16 having four children
in nearly the same length of time that women with W Ed 9—11 had three
children. Although completed family size can assume only discrete,
integer values, the level of child—related activities produced and con-
sumed in a household is a continuous variable because parents can alter


's
th 'lity per child, the timi: and st'acin          of   births,   arid the

           child per time period. Thus, variations in timing and spacing
         per
serve as a vehicle for "fine tuning" the quantity of child—related
                                                                              time


activities.
                                                                                131.




                                    4ppendix A


  Anong married wonen, aged 20 to 44, with husband present, more than half
  of those with no own children aged less than 18 years were employed:

                                         Percent Employed

           20—24                                 63.9
           25—29                                 66.7
           30—34                                 62.7
           35—39                                 58.1
           40—44                                 52.7

 The labor force participation rates for mothers of young children are low,
 esp.2cialiy if         is
                        more than one child; but the LFPR rises with the
 age of the youngest child:
                                    Lrhor Forre                  r.tes
                         Age: 20—24       25—29         30—34   35—39    40—44
 One   child,
 age > 6 yrs                   .41         .45           .47     .46      .44
       5 yrs                   .36         .40           .36     .31      .28
   3 — 4 yrs                   .34         .34           .30     .27      .25
   0 — 2 yrs                   .23         .23           .21     .22      .26

 Two   children,
 younger aged 6+               .33         .38           .39    .40       .39
                   5           .27         .28          .26     .25       .25
            3 — 4              .26         .24          .22     .21       .21
            0 — 2              .16         .16          .16     .17       .18
 SOURCE:    Above figures all were calculated from Table 8 "Women Ever Married.
   14—59   Years Old, by Number and Ages of Own Children, Children Ever Born,
                Charnctcrjstlcs, Marital Status, Ace, a;d Color, for the U.S.:
   lu,' in PC(2)—6A "L..ployment Status and Work Experience," U.S. Census
   of Population, 1960.

 The 1bor force particinatlon rates for women In the 1:1000 sample from
 the 1950 U.S. Census who, with their husbands, were whice—othcr married
 once—spouse present, had no missing children, no premarital pregnancies,
 from one to ten thildren. and at least one child aged less than three years
 old are:
                                                  Education of Wife               —____
                              0—8         9—11                  13—15     1C+    Irtt1
 25—29                       .094         .145          .1146   .157     .157      .144
 30—34                       .136         .133          .116    .094     .136      .121
 35—39                       .149         .091          .162    .169     .179      .150
•Tota!s                      .122         .130          .139    .135     .152      .137
                                   •
                                                                    132.




                                 Appendix A
                                  (cont'd)


The labor force participation rates for all white women indicate that,
within each age category, women with more education are more likely to
be in the labor force:
                 Proportion of Wo!en Who Worked One or More Months In 1959,
                                               by Ao
Education        20+      20—24         25—34      3—54   55—64     65+
 0—8             .291     .381          .357       .420   .319      .105
 9—11            .426     .468          .411       .488   .421      .167
12               .472     .647          .417       .499   .453      .173
13—15            .512     .739          .457       .529   .504      .218
16+              .599     .853          .549       .625   .656      .306
Totals           .414     .608          .421       .485   .393      .135

SOURCE: Calculated froi Table 20, "Years of School Completed for Persons
  20 Years Old and Over, by Weeks Worked in 1959, Age, Color, and Sex,
  For the United States...1960," pp.208-09, in S sploytient Status and Work
  Expr1ence."
                                                                                              133.



                                            APPENDIX     B



Estimation           of earnings function used to assign values to the variables
Y40, Y EXP 20, and Y W Ed +                 20,   for each observation in the 1965 NFS:


Sample: rn whose 'ives are 25—54 years old, non—farii, etc., with
at least one child; (all religions).


Y      3.9094    —          .40278 II Ed —             .39809   S   + .037340 II Ed2 +
      (t—4.4709)                (2.9799)               (2.3575)            (6.5449)


      .2460( E:•:i.         —      .0350416   I::7.2     +                  '[SA
      (7.9355)                     (7.0681)                     (9.9,u2)


      + 1.0296 'r —                  .85668   dr —           .94511   Cf           1.6818 Op
        (3.82)                       (3.0140)                (3.2852)              (5.4982)


      —       2.2871 Other
              (6.3440)


R2    -   .3434
N = 2174

S = 1 if South, 0 if non—South.
Exp. = Age In 1965 minus assumed age at LF entry of 14 if H Ed   0—7,
       16 1       2, 13 if 1d = 9—11, 20 if !:d  ]2, 23 if Ed = 13—15,
       26 if Ed   16, 28 if Ed = 17+.
SNSA = 1 if rural, 2 if              size  = 25,000 — 49,999, 3 If city or more than
       50,003            but not 16    largest or rings of those cities, 4 if 14 largest
       SMSAs — central            city or ring.
      = 1       if   occupation is 7nanagers, officials, and proprietors (non—farm).
Cir           1 if cicrical and kindred or sales.
Crf           1 if craftsmen, foremen, and kindred.
          1  if o.raiv.s and kindred (or farm—relatcci emp1oy:ent but not
          living on a farm).
Other =        1 if any other occupation, except professional, technical, and
               kindred.  (All occupation dummies = 0                if professional, technical
               and kindred.)
                                                                                       ArPENDIx C
                                        Two—Stage Le      Squ:"es Procere; 1965NFS, non—Catholics; N
                                                           't                                                                                       5B5
                                        First   Stage: Dependent Variable Number of Children
                                                              Independent Variables

                               W   Ed     W   Ed2           Y40*                Y402                               II   Ed             SMSA                        R2
                                                                                           Age                                                  Intercept
                             —.51101      .018049         —.21419          .013061        —.034384            —.050310              —.075769        9.4510
                              (3.42)       (2.82)          (1.18)              (1.34)          (2.15)          (1.18)                 (.90)                        .077
                             —.53323      .019034         —.25450          .013565            —.034257        —.036556                              9.5167
                              (3.62)       (3.02)          (1.45)              (1.39)          (2.16)          (.91)                                               .075
                             —.55224      .019261         —.25773          .012002        —.033591                                                  9.3961
                              (3.79)       (3.06)           (1.47)             (1.25)          (2.11)                                                              .074

           A coding error for two orcupation s f d after these r' r Joe weri' run. The reresions were not
          re—run because he effett o7 corr cting the error i.' other rcr'ssins hiv been very

                                  Seccnd Stage                                                                      Ordinary Least            Squires
                   H   Ed     W    Ed         Y40   II    (:St     //    est2            i2                                                                 "C                   R2
                                                                                                         H   Ed              W Ed             Y40
W   Age    B        1.88      4.29         1.08          5'.lO          6.16                             2.28                4.64         1.18        —19.09            1.12
               1                                                                        .16
                   (1.44)    (2.99)        (.69)    (1.2) (1.35)                                        (1.86)               (4.16)       (.80)           (5.28)        (2.83)   .24
Total     mt           .78   -3.33         —.97          1.97           —.25                                             —2.10            —.59            53.62      —2.66
                                                                                                             .70
                    (.48)    (1.85)        (.49)          (.41)         (.04)           .05                                                                                      64
                                                                                                         (.71)               (231)        (.49) (18.20)                 (8.24)

                   Because of the dranatic deci ne in R—square and the decrease in every t—value, as compared with
                   regressions using the actual number of chi1dr'n as Independent variables, It dd not appear fruitful
                   to pursuo further the 2SLS    roach.  ap
                                                                                                                                                                                  (A)
                            .     ,,,                                                                     V




                                                                APPENDIX   D

                    Spp1ement    to Table 3:    Regrcslons on Sch—B1 using different NLS sub—sai'iples

                                 (and knowr); N         ('56.
Sarnp1':   Sch—R1. positiv'                                                                    1LF
                                                   2                                                                R2
 W Ed       H Ed       Y1966            PC       1/C            Grad     Yr8 LF     L1}>R    After            Age
                                                                                                      8
—6.39       2.92        —.37      -12.l9         .64
(c.93)     (4.41)      (1.02)      (4.93)      (2.7)                                                                .12

--2.98      3.08        —.36      —12.31         .63            —4.98
(2.77)     (6.75)      (1.01)      (5.10)      (2.79)           (5.76)                                              .16

•-6.32      3.03        —.27      —10.94         .60                       1.18
                        (.76)      (4.45)      (2.66)                    (4.26)                                     .14
(6.94)     (4.63)
—3.16       3.16        —.27      —11.23         .60            —4.62      1.02
                        (.79)      (4.66)      (2.68)           (5.36)   (3.72)                                     .18
(2.96)     (4.92)
—6.53       3.01        —.27       —11.10        .61                                25.67
                                   (4.50)      (2.66)                               (3.68)                          .14
(7.15)     (4.57)       (.76)
—3.16       3.16        —.26       —11.25        .59            —4.91               24.87
                         (.76)     (4.67)      (2.67)           (5.74)              (3.65)                          .18
(2.96)     (4.92)
—5.97       2.37        —.53       —12.47        .61                                         —18.61
           (3.59)       (1.49)     (5.1/4)     (2.72)                                        (5.13)                 .16
(6.57)
—2./40      2.51        —.52       —12.61        .60            —5.18                        —19.52
                                               (2.72)           (6.12)                       (5.53)                 .20
(2.27)     (3.90)       (1.52)     (5.34)
-6.07       2.43        —.55       —12.52        .59                                         —19.20        4.50
                                   (5.21)      (2.65)                                        (5.34)       (3.58)    .17
(6.74)     (3.72)       (1.58)
—5.82       2.96        —.50
                                                                                                                    .06
(6.15)     (4.32)       (1.36)
                                                                   .

—5.40       2.68        —.65                                                                 —16.20
                                                                               .                                    .09
(5.76)     (3.63)       (1.78)                                                               (4.33)
                                                                            1.50                                          'A,
—5.84       3.08        —.36                                                                                              U'
                         (.98)                                             (5.44)                                   .10
(6.31)     (4.60)
—6.11       3.06         —.36                                                       33.98
(6.56)     (4.54)        (.97)                                                      (4.87)                          .09
                                                       APPENDIX    D

                                                        (conttd)
Saiiiple: Sh—l positive and Y1966    >   1000;    N   547.
                                                                                         1—LF
 W   Ed   H Ed                                                                                                      2
                   Y1966      #C           I/C2       Grad     Yrs      LF   LFPR     After                Age     R
                                                                                             B1
—6.80      3.12     —.68    —14.59         .89
(6.91)    (4.27)   (1.39)   (5.23)       (3.30)                                                                   .15
—3.23      3.16     —.72    —14.39         .84        —4.97
(2.76)    (4.43)   (1.51)   (5.29)       (3.1)        (5.33)                                                      .19
—6.83      3.10     —.48    —13.78         .87                   .91
(6.9a)    (4.27)    (.98)   (4.96)       (3.25)                (3.00)                             .               .16
—3.45      3.14     —.55    —13.74         .82        —4.70            .73
(2.95)    (4.42)   (1.16)   (5.05)       (3.14)       (5.02)   (2.45)                                             .20
—6.98      3.09     —.49    —13.93         .87                               18.50
(7.10)    (4.24)   (1.00)   (4.99)       (3.25)                              (2.42)                               .16
—3.44      3.13     —.54    —13.76         .82        —4.92                  17.54
(2.94)    (4.40)   (1.12)   (5.06)       (3.13)       (5.29)                 (2.35)                               .20
—6.25      2.72    —1.05    —14.73         .86                                        —18.13
(6.41)    (3.76)   (2.16)   (5.38)       (3.25)                                       (4.58)                      .18
—2.49      2.74    —1.11    —14.52         .80        —5.20                           —19.19
(2.15)    (3.90)   (2.35)   (5.46)       (3.11)       (5.68)                          (4.98)                      .23
—6.31      2.77    —1.10    —14.73         .84                                        —18.91               4.35
(6.52)    (3.87)   (2.28)   (5.43)       (3.1{)                                       (4.81)           (3.23)     .20
—6.27     3.21      —.83
(6.17)    (4.24)   (1.64)                                                                                         .08
—5.73     2.86     —1.17                                                              —16.27
(5.66)    (3.80)   (2.31)                                                             (3.96)                      .10
—5.38     3.16      —.54                                                                                                C.'
                                                                   1.24
(6.36)    (4.23)   (1.07)                                      (4.03)                                             .10
—6.60     3.15                                                               2.84
(6.52)    (4.20)   (1.07)                                                    (3.47)                               .10




                                                                                                      I,
                      4       ,..




                                                       APPF    )IX D
                                                         (cc:it 'd)

          Grad Xrown, Y1966    >     1000;    = 551.
Sample:
                                                                                           1LF
                                                                  Yr    LF     Ae   YC              R2
                    Y1966                              Grad                              After Bi
 W Ed      U Ed
                                                                                         —17.99
—6.36      2.60     —1.18           —15.41      .91
                                                                                         (4.51)     .19
          (3.58)    (2.44)          (5.59)    (3.41)
(6.51)
                                                                               —6.40      -2.15
—7.21      1.70      —.76           —31.98     1.68
                                                                               (15.62)    (.62)     .44
          (2.80)    (1.90)          (12.65)   (7.35
(8.Eó)
                                                                               —7.04      —2.22
                                    —33.04     1.65    —7.78
—1.65      1.70                                                                           (.71)     .54
                                              (7.97)   (11.02)                 (13.75)
(1.85)    (3.10;    (2.05)          (14.43)

—6.40      3.07      —.96                                                                           .08
(6.26)    (4.02)    (1.91)
                                                                                         —16.01
—5.89      2.74     —1.30                                                                           .11
                                                                                         (3.85)
(5.79)    (3.62)    (2.50)
                                                                               —2.56      -8.52
-5.96      2.47     —1.21                                                                (2.04)     .17
                                                                               (6.32)
(6.06)     (3.37)   (2.47)
                     —.96                              —5.41
—2.48       3.16                                                                                    .13
                     (1.96)                            (5.68)
 (2.05)    (4.26)
                                                       —5.58                             —17.05
—1.82       2.82    —1.32                                                                            .16
                                                       (5.95)                              (4.23)
(1.51)     (3.84)    (2.71)
                      -.69                                             1.13
 —2.84      3.12                                                                                     .16
                     (1.42)                             (5.29)        (3.73)
 (2.37)    (4.25)                                                                          —8.86
                                                        —6.26                   —2.84
 —1.39      2.54     —1.22                                                                           .24
                                                        (6.95)                  (7.28)     (2.21)
 (1.21)    (3.60)    (2.61)
                                                                                                           LA)
                                                            APpi::[)IX F
                                                       1ipplepen t Table 11:
                            Regressions on Total       'it for ot!!er sub—s-.pi      from the 1967   NLS
  Sample:    all c     ervatiops; N   706.

   W Ed       H   Ed     Y1966
                                                           After       Ae     YC    Age     Yrs LF                          .7
  —.35        —.87         .45                                                                               LFPR       R
                                   47.88     —2.26
 (.48)       (1.58)      (1.50)    (22.88)    (1l.)
  —.07       —1.12         .39                                                                                        .63
                                   47.70     —2.27        —8.80
 (.09)       (2.02)      (1.28)    (22.89)   (11.7 )       (2.83)
  —.78       —1.75         .42                                                                                        .63
                                   35.24     —1.70         2.36
 (1.2)       (3.63)      (1.63)                                     -4.99
                                   (17.86)   (9.9         (.85)
  —.22       -.96                                                   (15.43)
                           .41    47.03      -2.23                                                                    .73
 (.30)       (1.79)      (1.37)   (22.48)                                                   .79
                                             (1l.5!)
 —.07        —.97          .40                                                              (3.41)                    .63
 (.10)                            46.98      —2.23
            (1.78)      (1.33)    (22.46)    (11.52)                                                        —20.72
 —.07       —l.J2         .39                                                                               (3.56)    .63
 (.10)                            47.67      —2.27        —8.90
            (2.01)      (1.22)    (22.87)                                           .76
                                             (11.7,)      (2.86)                   (.70)                              .63
-2.96       —1.29        1.17
(2. 54)     (1.45)      (2.Lo)
—2.28       —1.83        1.01                                                                                        .03
(1.96)      (2.06)                                      —19.26
                       (2.08)                            (3.89)
—2.40     —1.59         1.00                                                                                         .05
(2.12)      (1.84)     (2.11)                                                              —2.34
—1.98     —1.56          .96                                                               (6.60)                    .08
(1.74)    (1.81)       (2.03)                                                                              —59.69
                                                                                                           (6.63)    .08
                                        is




                                                               APPEflx       E
                                                                (co:   'd)


 Samp1:     all    i J'   Y1966    >   1000; N     582.

                                                               1=Lr
  W   Ed     H Ed          Y1956             tic     //c2    After
                                                                      1    Age YC             Yrs    LF    LFPR      R2
  —.50       —.77            .61        50.36      —2.50
 (.61)      (1.26)         (1.49)       (21.17)    (10.9)
                                                                                                                    .65
 —.09      —1.02             .39        50.22      —2.51     —1l.2
 (.11)     (1.65)          (.96)        (21.29)    (11.0)    (3.30)
 —.76                                                                                                               .65
           —1.72             .76        37.16      —1.89       1.4        —5.00
 (1.08)    (3.22)         (2.13)        (16.56)    (9.40)    (.45)        (13.96)                                  .74
 —.36       —.79            .44         49.47      —2.47                                      —.90
(.46)      (1.29)         (1.07)        (20.89)    (10.93)
                                                                                             (3.55)                .65
 —.18       —.77            .40         49.41      —2.47
(.22)      (1.26)         (.97)         (20.88)                                                           —23.57
                                                   (10.91)
                                                                                                          (3.68)   .65
 —.11      —1.00            .38         50.17      —2.52     —11.54                  1.50
(.14)      (1.62)         (.93)         (21.28)    (11.12)   (3.38)                 (1.29)                         .65

—3.54      —1.09           1.20
(2.67)     (1.0?)         (1.76)
                                                                                                                   .03
—2.73      —1.52            .79                              —20.53
(2.05)     (1.50)         (1.16)                             (3.67)
                                                                                                                   .05
—2.96      —1.10            .67
(2.3&)     (1.11)                                                                            —2.48
                          (1.01)
                                                                                             (6.19)                .09
—2.48      —1.06            .58
(1.91)     (1.05)         (.87)                                                                           —63.25
                                                                                                          (6.22)   .09
                                                                     APPE!'TX     E

                                                                      (coni.'d)

          Total      mt   >    0,   ?1966   >   l00); N       490.
Sample:
                                                                       1LF                                                    2
                                                          2                                             Irs LF    LFPR      R
W Ed       Ii   Ed        11966                                      After            Age YC   ge
 —.81      —.81             .71         42.41        —1.92
                                                                                                                            .49
(.86)     (1.13)          (1.46)        (12.24)      (6.42)

 —.21     —1.13             .41         41.84        —1.91           —13.51
                                                                                                                            .50
(.23)     (1.59)          (.86)         (12.19)      (6.44)          (3.37)
                            .78         25.71        -1.13             l.3        -6.11
-1.11     -1.86                                                                                                             .66
                          (1.98)        (8.49)       (4.54)           (.39)       (15.06)
(1.50)    (3.15)
                                                     -1.89                                              —1.08
 —.50      —.87             .48         41.35                                                                               .50
                                                     (6.38)                                             (3.57)
(.54)     (1.23)          (1.02)        (12.04)
                                                     —1.89                                                        —28.27
 —.30      —.84                 .44     41.34
                                                                                                                  (3.70)    .50
(.32)     (1.20)              (.93)     (12.05)      (6.39)

                                .40     41.66        —1.91           —14.29                    2.31
-.20      —1.16                                                                                                             .50
                                         (12.16)     (6.45)          (3.55)                    (1.68)
(.21)     (1.63)              (.84)



—3.58       —.94                .89                                                                                         .03
(2.62)     (.97)              (1.36)

—2.47     —1.48                 .33                                   —22.7)
                                                                                                                            .07
(1.9k)    (1.54)              (.58)                                   (4.22)
                                                                                                        —2.17
—2.78      -1.05                .43                                                                                          .09
                                                                                                         (5.46)
(2.24)     (1.11)             (.67)
                                                                                                                  —54.91
—2.42       —.99                .36                                                                                          .09
                                                                                                                   (5.43)
 (1.93)    (1.05)             (.56)
                                                                APPF'YnIx E
                                                                  (c: t'd)

 Sample:    Grad     wwn;    N =   660.
                                                                           1=LF
                                                               Grad      After      Yrs LF    LFPR       Age YC
  1.03       —.81         .53         47.37      —2.22         —2.24
 (1.10)     (1.4        (1.74)        (22.34)    (l1.':)       (3.0 )
  1.17       —.3             .47
                                                                                                                    .63
                                      46.47      —2.2i        —2.52
 (1.26)     (1.55'                                                                   —.82
                        (1.53)        (21.92)    (11.:: ;)     (.4)
  1.17       —.87
                                                                                    (3.43)                          .64
                             .45      46.47      —2.10
 (1.26)
                                                              —2.3o                           —20.27
            (1.55       (1.50)        (21.92)    (11.l:)       (3.12)
  —.33                                                                                        (3.38)                    U I,
                                                                                                                          .
            —1.13         .44         47.23      —2.22
 (.42)                                                                   —8.04
            (i.9)       (1.43)        (22.22)    (11.22)                 (2.53)
  —.90      —1.82           .51                                                                                    .63
                                      34.44      —1.65                    3.64
 (1.33)     (3.65)      (1.91)        (17.10)    (9.44)                                                 —5.09
  1.80                                                                   (1.28)                         (15.14)    .72
           —1.73          .54         33.62      —1.63        —3.97      3.67
 (2.28)     (3.58)      (2.09)        (17.13)    (9.60)                                                 —5.42
                                                              (6.27)    (1.33)
                                                                                                        (16.38)    .74

Sample:    Grad             Y1966 >   1000; N      551.
 % Ed       H Ed                                                          1=LF
                       Y1966           //C         1/C2      Grad       After      Yrs LF    LFPR
 1.06       —.87                                                              B1                       Age IC       R2
                         .72        50.08       —2.4         —2.30
(1.03)     (1.39)      (1.74)       (20.94)     (10.72)       (2.86)
 1.32       —.84            .52                                                                                    .65
                                    49.22       —2.4?        —2.65
(1.30)     (1.36)                                                                  —.94
                       (1.25)       (2o.69      (1o.;•j)     (3.32)                (3.59)
 1.32       —.83         .49                                                                                      .66
                                    49.20       —2.4         —2.39
(1.30)     (1.34)      (1.18)                                                                —23.02
                                    (20.67)     (10.73)      (3.00)
 —.29                                                                                        (3.53)               . 66
           —1.13         .49        49.81       —2.43
(.34)                                                                   —10.55
           (1.79)      (1.18)       (20.85)     (10.(,a)                (3.05)
 —.96      —1.84         .82                                                                                      .65
                                    36.58       —1.87                    2.10
(1.32)     (3.4o)      (2.29)       (16.12)                                                            —5.11
                                                                        (.68)
1.88      —1.8'                                                                                        (13.95)    .74
                         .P3        36.04         .2'        —3.9':      2.0/
(2.20)     (3.s                                                                                        —5.44
                                                                                                       (15.10)    .76
                                                                                   ' )IX E
                                                                          APPI
                                                                           (c" 'd)
            GrF       cn,    To       Lut   >     0:   N     55
Sample:                                                                                  1LF
                                                                                                         Irs   LF   LR           Age YC     R2
 W   Ed     11   Ed     11966                                            Grad          After
            —.22             .73       39.21               —1.67         —2.43
     .65                                                                                                                                    .48
(.61)       (1.32)      (2.16)         (13.13)             (6.68)        (2.93)
                                       37.98               —1.63         —2.89                           —1.06
     .93    —.98              .64                                                                                                           .49
                        (1.86)         (12.84)             (G.52)        (3.43)                          (3.74)
(.93)       (1.54)
                                                                         —2.62                                      -26.15
            -.98          .63          37.97               —1.62
     .98                                                                                                                                    .49
                                                           (6.57)        (3.14)                                     (3.73)
(.92)       (1.53)      (1.82)         (12.83)

            —1.31             .6       38.62               -1.64                        —10.17
 -.72                                                                                                                                       .48
(.79)       (1.99)      (1.71)         (12.96)             (6.56:.                      (2.78)
                                                            —.97                             3.47                                -6.05
—1.52       —2.08             .69      23.60                                                                                                .64
                                                           (4.59                        (1.11)                                   (16.02)
(2.01)      (3.82)          (2.3)      (8.96)
                                                            -.96         —4.92               3.35                                -6.55
 1.76       -1.98             .7       22.74                                                                                     (17.82)
                                       (9.02)              (4.79:'        (7.22)        (1.12)
 (2.06)     (3.80;          (2.71.)
            Grad Lown, Total          mt     ' 0,      Y1966           1000;   N      460.
Srnp1e:
                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                             1=LF                                             2
                                                                   2                                     irs   LF    LFPR        Age IC      R
 W Ed        H Ed           Y1966           1/C              1/C          Grad          After       B1
             —.93             .88      42.07               —1.92          —2.54
      .81                                                                                                                                   .48
                            (1.83)     (11.94)             (6.27)         (2.73)
 (.68)      (1.28)
                                                           —1.89          —3.04                           —1.16
     1.31    —.94             .62      40.93                                                                                                .50
                                        (11.74)             (6.25)        (3.27)                          (3.72)
 (1.11)     (1.31)          (1.30)
                                                                          —2.73                                     —28.83
     1.31     —.92            .59       40.91              —1.86                                                                             .50
                                                            (6.23)        (2.97)                                    (3.70)
 (1.11)     (1.28)          (1.22)      (11.73)
            —1.26             .54       40.83              —1.83                         —12.97
     —.52                                                                                                                                    .49
                            (1.10)      (11.63)             (6.02)                       (3.18)
 (.52)       (1.72)
                                                                                             1.84                                 -6.38
 -1.52      —2.02.             .83      23.75               -1.03
                                                                                                                                  (15.36)    .66
                            (2.10)      (7.77)              (4.09)                       (.53)
(1.8G)       (3.38)
                                                                          —5.16              1.47                                 —6.92
     2.12    —2.07             .69      23.48               —1.10
                                                                                                                                  (17.21)    .70
 (2.29)      (3.65)          (2.36)     (8.08)              (4.56)         (7.05)        (.45) -
                                                                                 143.


                                 APPENDIX F
Supp1.'(flt to Ta1,! 19, 20, and 21; but      llu.hnn!'s   andot'   rln—or,e (1966)
                       $1O00j One or hore Cliildrt±n

   Dependent Varj)1e: Years of LFI' between school and marriage
   Sample: All %'itlt posjtjvt. interval from school to
      W Ed
                                                              rlarrige; N        510
               II Ed     Y1966                  duirny        Sch—1ar       R2
       .28
   (8.79)                                                      .06
                                                              (33.15)     .68
       .28                             —.06
   (p.62)                                                     .06
                                   (1.49)                     (32.66)     .69
       .28
                                                .16           .06
   (8.81)                                       (1.07)        (33.06)     .69
       .25      .03                —.06                      .06
  (6.13)      (1.18)               (1.50)                    (31.80)     .69
      .25      .04
                                                .19          .05
  (6.31)     (1.33)
                                                (1.25)       (32.25)     .69
    .27                 .02       —.06                       .06
  (7.58)                (.85)      (1.54)                    (32.66)     .69
      .2/               .02                    .19           .07
  (7.o)                 (.99)                  (1.25)        (33.07)     .69
      .28
                                  —.06         .13           .06
  (8.45)                          (1.36)       (.88)         (32.47)     .69
      .25      .03      .01                    .21           .06
             (1.1:;'    (.6i)                  (1.35)        (52.21)     .69
      .24      .03      .01       —.06         .18           .06
  (5.88)     (1.09)     (.73)     (1.37)       (1.16)       (31.68)      .69


 *1   if worked after B,   0 if not.
                                                                144.

                           APPENDIX F
                               (cont'd)

        Var.: LF S—H
Sample: Women who worked between school and marriage; N = 430


W Ed         H Ed      Y1966          1/C    dummy    Sch—Mar

  .20                                                 .07
(6.04)                                                (34.87)    .74

  .19                               —.06              .07
(5.74)                              (1.62)            (34.53)    .74

  .20                                          .31    .07
(6.08).                                      (2.16)   (35.04)    .74

  .16         .04                    —.07             .07
(4.13)      (1.42)                  (1.71)            (33.86)    .74

  .17         .04                              .34    .07
(4.32)      (1.60)                           (2.34)   (34.48)    .75

  .18                    .01         -.07             .07
(5.26)                  (.61)       (1.66)            (34.51)    .74

  .19                    .02                   .33    .07
(5.49)                  (.91)                (2.29)   (35.04)    .74

  .19                                —.06      .28    .07
(5.81)                              (1.38)   (1.98)   (34.62)    .75
  .16                    .04          .01      .35    .07
(4.17)                 (1.43)        (.56)   (2.40)   (34.41)    .75
  .15         .04        .01         —.06      .33    .07
(3.90)      (1.48)      (.60)       (1.48)   (2.23)   (33.98)    .75




*1 if worked after B1, 0 if not.
                                                                       145.

                            APPENDIX F
                             (cont 'd)


 Dependei Variable: Years of LFP
                                 between marriage and B1
 Sample: All with positive
                             interval from
                                             marriage to B1; N    549

  W Ed      H Ed    Y1966
                                           dununy                      R2
   .03                                                Mar—B1
 (1.21)                                                 .03
   .03                                                (13.42)      .25
                                —.03
 (1.11)                                                 .03
                                 (.80)
   .03                                                (12.83)      .25
 (1.37)                                     .90         .03
                                          (7.38)      (14.60)     .32
   .04     —.01
                                —.03
(1.18)     (.48)                                        .03
                                (.80)
  .02                                                 (12.83)     .25
            .01
 (.74)                                       .91       .03
           (.64)
                                          (73g)      (14.57)      .32
  .04
                   —.02        —.03
(1.5!)                                                 .03
                   (1.26)      (.75)
  .03      .00                                        (12.83)     .25
(1.17)    (.24)                            .91           .03
  .03                                    (7.25)      (14.58)     .32
(1.37)                          .00        .90           .03
                               (.08)     (7.33)      (14.14)     .32
  .02       .01     .00
(.70)     (.60)                            .92          .03
                   (.10)                 (7.27)
 .02       .01                                      (14.55)      .32
                    .00        .00         .92
(.71)     (.60)    (.09)                               .03
                              (.10)      (7.22)     (14.10)      .32
                                                                    146.



                                 APPENDI1
                                      'd)

sep. Var.    LF
                                                N — 219
Sample: All who worked between marriage and B1;

                                                                    R2
 W Ed       H Ed      Y1966                   dummy     Mar-Br
 —   .04                                                (21.80)     .69
(.98)
                                    .06                 .06
 —   .04                                                            .70
(1.05)                              (1.11)              (21 .05)

 —   .04
                                              .28       .06
                                                                    .70
 (.99)                                        (1.75)    (21.91)

                                    .06                 .06
 —   .04    —.00                                                    .70
 (.81)      (.16)                   (1.11)              (20.96)

  --.04     .00                               .28       .06
                                              (1.75)    (21. 82)    .70
 (.91)      (.14)
                                    .06                 .05
  —.03      —   .02                                                 .70
                                    (1.13)              (21.06)
 (.76)      (.74)
      .03             —.01                     .26       .06
  —
                                               (1.62)    (21. 89)   .70
 (.78)                 (.62)
  — .04                              .08       .31       .06
                                    (1.36)     (1.93)    (21.25)     .70
 (1. .07)
  — .04      .01       —   .01                 .27       .06
                                               (1.64)    (21.80)     .70
 (.83)      (.31)      (.68)
     —.04    .01       —   .01       .08       .30       .06
                                               (1.80)                .70
  (.87)      (.24)     (.68)         (1.35)              (21.13)
                                                                                    1.47.

                                   APPENDIX F

                                    (cont'd)


   Dependent Variabic:       Years of LF? between      school   and B]
  Sample: All with     positive   interval between school
                                                                  and B1; N 547
      W Ed      H Ed     Y1966
  .22
                                                 dummy
                                                                  Sch—B1
  (5.03)                                                          .05
  .21                                                             (22.98)     .49
                                     —.04
  (4.81)                                                          .05
                                     (.73)
 .23                                                              (22.12)     .49
 (5.34)                                          1.03            .05
                                                 (4.92)          (23.94)     .51
 .17           .05
                                    —.04
 (3.19)       (1.20)                                             .05
                                    (.76)
 .17                                                             (21.62)     .49
               .07
 (3.18)       (1.90)                            1.08            .05
 .22                                            (5.15)          (23.46)      .52
             —.01                   —.04
(4.60)        (.34)                                             .05
                                    (.72)
.22                                                             (22.09)      .49
                       .02                      1.06
(4.72)                 (.70)
                                                                .06
                                                (4.95)          (23.93)     .51
.23
                                   —.00        1.03
(5.23)                                                          .05
                                   (.02)       (4.86)
.17           .07
                                                                (23.08)     .51
                       .01
(3.09)                                         1.09             .05
             (1.78)    (.24)
                                               (5.10)           (23.36)     .52
.17           .07      .01         —.00
(3.05)                                         1.09             .05
             (1.78)    (.24)       (.02)       (5.04)           (22.55)     .52
                                                       •               148.



                                APPENDIX F
                                 (coat'd)
Dep. Var.      LF S—B1
Sample:     Worled between school and B1; N — 470


 W Ed         II Ed    Y1966                 dummy         Sch—B1
                                                           .05
.20                                                                   .53
                                                           (22.71)
(4.31)
                                   —.06                    .05
.19                                                                   .53
                                   (.95)                   (21.84)
(4.11)
                                             1.01          .05
.20                                                                   .55
                                             (4.94)        (23.74)
(4.49)
                                   —.06                    .05
 .18         .02
                                                           (21.48)    .53
 (3.25)      (.45)                  (.98)
                                             1.04          .05
 .17         .04
                                             (5.04)        (23.42)    .55
 (3.27)      (1.06)
                       —.02        —.05                    .05
 .21                                                                  .53
                        (.79)       (.91)                  (21.80)
 (4.13)
                         .00                 1.01          .05
 .20                                                                  .55
                        (.11)                 (4.86)       (23.66)
 4.20)
                                    —.01     1.G0          .05
 .20                                                                  .55
 (4.39)                             (.24)     (4.85)       (22.86)
              .04       —.00                  1.03          .05
 .18                                                        (23.26)   .55
 (3.23)       (1.06)    (.14)                 (4.94)
              .04       —.00        —.02      1.02          .05
 .17                                                        (22.37)   .55
                                    (.29)     (4.85)
 (3.14)       (1.07)    (.13)
                                                                    149.




                            APPENDIX C
                     Supplement   to L'ble 25
Dependent Variable: Number of months from B1 to labor force entry


Sample       W Ed    H Ed    Y1966                Ave mt Total mt R2
T'r or      —5.53
more        (2.62)                                                         .05
chIldren,   —6.62    1.21
worked
            (2.29) (.55)                                               .05
B only;     —6.05               .91
N'1= 129    (2.73)            (.78)                                        .06
            —6.79     .89       .81
            (2.33) (.40)     (.67)                                         .06

                                                             .79
                                                           (9.76)          .43
            —2.46                                            .76
            (1.48)                                         (9.32)          .44
            —4.62    2.44                                    .77
            (2.07) (1.45)                                  (9.45)          .45
            —3.25             1.45                           .77
            (1.88)           (l.9)                         (9.46)      .45
            —4.87   1.97      1.23                           .78
            (2.18) (1.14)    (1.32)                        (9.52)      .46

                                         19.97
                                         (G.46)                        .25
            —4.41                        19.28
            (2.38)                       (6.32)                        .28
            —5.52    1.24                19.28
            (2.17) (.64)                 (6.30)                        .28
            —4.99             1.04       19.34
            (2.57)           (1.00)      (6.33)                        .29
            —5.72     .86      .94       19.33
            (2.24) (.44)     (.88)       (6.31)                        .29

                                                   1.02
                                                  (3.56)               .09
            —4.96
            (2.44)                                (3.41)               .13
            —6.47   1.68                            .97
            (2.33) (.30)                          (3.45)               .14
            —5.73             1.41                 1.00
            (2.70)           (1.23)               (3.55)               .14

            —.73     1.19     1.27                 1.01
            (2.41) (.55)     (1.09)               (3.55)
                                                                                150.




                                 APPENDIX
                                      (cont'd)


                         H Ed         Y1966          i/C       Ave   mt   Total mt     B.2
Sample       W Ed
                                                   21.79        1.24
Two   or                                           (7.68)      (5.21)
                                                                                       .38
more
children,                                          21.16        1.19                               t
worked       —3.59                                                                     .40
                                                   (7.51)      (5.05)
after B      (2.11)
                                                   21.19        1.21
only         —5.2.2      1.82                                                          .41
N      129                                         (7.52)      (5.11)
             (2.25) (1.04)
                                        1.67       21.33        1.25
             —4.49                                                                     .42
                                       (1.76)      (7.63)      (5.28)
             (2.54)
                                        1.53       21.34        1.25
             —5.52   1.23                                                              .42
                                        (1.57)     (7.62)      (5.29)
             (2.39) (.69)


Two or       —4.64                                                                     .04
more          (2.13)
 children,   —6.13   1.64                                                               .05
 worked      (2.04) (.72)
              —6.29                      2.57                                           .06
 only,
 Y > 1000     (2.e))                    (1.52)
 N = 105      -6.76     .62              2.42                                           .06
              (2.23) (.26)              (1.35)
                                                                             .75
                                                                           (8.07)       .39

                                                                             .73
              -2.22                                                        (7.74)       .40
               (1.26)
                                                                              74
              —4.68   2.75                                                              .41
                                                                           (7.88)
              (1.96) (1.52)
                                                                              .75
               —4.49                      3.69                                           .44
                                                                           (8.24)
               (2.37)                    (2.78)
                                                                              .76
               —5.52       1.36           3.37                                           .44
                                                                            (8.24)
               (2.34) (.74)              (2.42)
                                                     18.74
                                                                                         .22
                                                     (5.32)
                                                     18.23
               —3.90                                                                     .25
                                                      (5.24)
                (2.00)
                           1.36                       18.17
               -5.13                                                                         .25
                                                      (5.21)
                (1.91) (.67)
                                           3.00       18.60
                —5.81                                                                        .27
                                          (2.00)      (5.42)
                (2.71)
                                .10        2.93       18.59
                —5.88                                                                        .27
                                          (1.88)      (5.38)
                (2.19) (.05)
                                                                                 151.


                                         APPENDIXG
                                          (cont'd)

  Sample               w Ed      H Ed      Y1966
  Two    or
                                                               Ave mt      Total mt         R2
 more                                                           1.09
 children,                                                     (3.29)                   .10
 worked               402
                                                                1.03
                     (1.92)
                                                               (3.14)                  .13
 only)               —6.19       2.40
                                                                1.07
 Y > 1000            (2.15) (1.10)
                                                               (3.24)                  .14
 N 105              —6.03                  3.20                 1.10
                     (2.62)               (1.97)               (3.39)                  .16
                    —6.95    1.21          2.92                1.11
                    (2.41) (.53)          (1.71)              (3.41)                   .16
                                                     20.12     1.25
                                                     (6.18)   (4.42)                   .34
                   • —3.12
                                                     19.66     1.21
                    (1.72)
                                                     (6.08)   (4.26)                  .36
                    —5.12       2.22                 19.60     1.24
                   (2.06) (1.18)                     (6.07)   (4.37)                  .37
                   —5.47                  3.79       20.24     1.30
                    (2.81)               (2.76)      (6.44)   (4.70)                  .41
                   —6.03         .74      3.62       20.19     1.31
                   (2.47) (.38)          (2.50)      (6.40)   (4.70)                  .41

Two or             -1.66
more               (1.02)
children,                                                                             .01
                    — 23      —l 97
worked
between            (.12)      (1:33)
                                                                                   .02
  and Il          —1.68                   .11
N= 125             (1.02)               (.13)
                                                                                  .01
                   —.17 —2.18              .42
                  (.09)       (1.41)    (.50)
                                                                                  .02
                                                                          .21
                                                                        (3.06)    .07
                   —.89
                  (.55)                                                   .20
                                                                        (2.92)    .07
                    .01      —1.29
                  (.01)                                                   .19
                             (.88)
                                                                        (2.73)    .08
              •    —.97                  .49
                  (.60)                                                   .21
                                        (.61)
                                                                        (2.97)   .08
                    .J!.     —1.6]        .70
                                                                          .20
                  (.06)      (1.07)     (.8)
                                                                        (2.81)   .08
                                                                                      152.



                                      APPENDIX C
                                       (cot'd)

                             II Ed      '11966           1/C        Ave mt       Total mt    R2
Sample            W Ed
                                                          4.84
Two or                                                                                       .03
TflOtC
                                                         (1.97)
cliii dren,       —1.33                                    4.62
                                                                                             .04
worked            (.82)                                  (1.87)
between                                                    4.11
B1 and BU          —.29      —1.47                                                           .04
                  (.15)      (.98)                       (1.63)
N = 125                                                    4.64
                  —1.36                    .17                                               .04
                  (.83)                  (.21)            (1.87)
                   —.25      —1.67         .40             4.10                              .05
                  (.13)      (1.07)      (.48)            (1.62)
                                                                       .09
                                                                    (.55)                    .00
                                                                       .09                    Al
                  —1.68
                  (1.03)                             .              (.58)
                   —.28      —1.92                                     .07
                                                                     (.48)                   .02
                   (.15)     (1.28)
                   I                       .                           .
                  —j_.,_,
                                                                     (.61)                    .01
                   (1.05)                (.25)
                             —2.15          .51                        .09
                    —.24                                                                      .03
                   (.12)      (1.29)     (.60)                       (.58)
                                                           5.92         .21
                                                                     (1.28)                   .04
                                                          (2.29)
                   —1.30                                    5.70        .21
                                                                     (1.27)                   .05
                   (.80)                                  (2.19)
                              —1.20                         5.18        .19
                    —.46                                                                      .05
                   (.24)      (.79)                       (1.92)     (1.13)
                                            .42             5.85           .23
                                                                     (1.35)                   .05
                   (.85)                  (.51)            (2.22)
                              —1.47            .61          5.29           .21
                    —.41                                                                       .06
                   (.21)      (.94)       (.72)            (1.96)     (1.24)


   Two or          —2.38                                                                       .02
   no re          • (1.37)
   children,        —1.03     —1..85                                                           .03
   wocd             (.49)      (1.16)
   between                                 —.13
   B.1 and Bn       —2.3(                                                                      .02
                    (1.34)                 (.13)
   y'      1000
                                               .22
   N = 103          —1.00                                                                      .03
                    (.47)      (1.17)      (.20)
                                                                                    153.

                                   APPENDI
                                    (cont 'd)

Sample          w Ed       H Ed      Y1966              1/C      Ave   mt Total mt R2
Two    or
more                                                                         .19
children,       1 79
                                                                           (2.66)  .06
worked                                                                        18
between        (1:04)
B   and B
                                                                           (2:49)         .07
               —1.00     —1.13
1> 1000"       (.49)      (.71)
                                                                             .17
                                                                           (2.30)         .08
N     108      —1.85                   .43
               (1.07)                                                       .19
                                    (.42)                                 (2.51)          .07
                —.92 —1.38                .65
               (.44) (.83)                                                  .18
                                    (.61)                                 (2.36)          .08
                                                   4.82
                                                  (1.87)                              .03
              —2.03                                4.46
              (1.16)                              (1.72)                              .04
              —1.20 —1.19                          3.92
              (.57)      (.72)                    (1.45)                              .05
             —2.05                    .17          4.54
              (1.17)               (.17)         (1.72)                               .04
             —1.15      —1.34        .38          4.02
             (.55)      (.78)      (.36)         (1.47)                               .05
                                                                 .09
                                                               (.50)                 .00
             —2.44
                                                                 .10
             (1.39)
                                                               (.58)                 .02
             —1.08 —1.86
                                                                 .10
             (.51)      (1.16)
                                                               (.59)                 .03
             —2.42                 —.10                          .10
             (1.37)               (.09)                        (.57)                 .02
            —1.05 —1.97              .26                         .11
             (.50)     (1.18)     (.24)                       (.60)                 .03
                                                 5.56           .19
                                                (2.08)        (1.04)                .04
            —2.07
                                                 5.21           .19
            (1.19)
                                                (1.94)        (1.07)                .05
            —1.32      —1.07                     4.70           .19
            (.63)      (.66)                    (1.67)        (1.02)                .06
            —2.12                   .30         5.37            .20
            (1.21)                (.29)         (1.95)        (1.09)                .06
                                                                               154.




                                   A1'PE.NDIX G

                                    (cont'd)


                                                           Ave mt Total mt            R2
              W Ed       H Ed        Y1966
Sample
                                        .49       4.86       .19
Two or        —1.28 —1.26                                                             .06
                         (.73)        (.46)       (1.71)   (1.06)
more          (.61)
children,
worked
between
B andB,
 1.   n
Y >   1000
N108


One or        —1.70                                                                   .00
more          (.78)
children,      —.06      —2.13                                                        .01
worked                   (.94)
              (.02)
              —2.02                      .58
only;                                                                                 .00
               (.88)                   (.45)

               -.29      —2.44           .86
                                                                     -                .01
               (.10)      (1.06)       (.66)
                                                                         .95
                                                                    (12.67)            .48

                                                                      .95
                —.88                                                                   .48
                                                                    (12.61)
               (.56)
                                                                         .95
                —.93        .06                                                        .48
                                                                    (12.51)
               (.46)      (.04)
                                                                         .96
               —1.64                    1.37
                                                                    (12.73)            .49
               (.99)                   (1.49)
                                                                         .96
               —1.33 -     —.44          1.42
                                                                                       .49
                                                                    (12.61)
               (.65)      (.26)         (i.51)



 One or        —1.33                                                                   .00
 more          (.79)
  children,     - .50     —1.69                                                         .01
                (.17)      (.72)

               —2.72                     1.49
  on1y                                                                                  .01
  Y > 1000;     (1.07)                  (.87)
  ;=146         -1.04      -2.55         2.06
                                                                                        .02
                (.34)      (1.04)       (1.14)
                                                                          .91
                                                                     (1O.56)            .44
                                                            155.


                              PENDIX C
                               (cont 'd)

Sample        14 Ed    H Ed    Y1966
Twoor                                      Ave mt Total mt R2
              —.72
more         (.41)                                  .91
children,                                         (10.49)      .44
worked        —.71     —.01
after B      (.31)    (.01)                         .91
         n                                        (10.41)      .44
only         —2.08
Y > 1O0o                        2.30
             (1.09)                                 .92
N   146                        (1.79)
                                                  (10.66)     .45
             —1.38 —1.06       2.54
             (.61)    (.57)                        .91
                              (1.88)
                                                 (10.56)      .4.5
                                                                               156.




                                 APPENDIX H

      COMPARISON OF TIMING AND SPACING FOR ROMAN CAThOLICS
                           AND NON—CATH0LI

                                                           National
      As indicated in Chapter Iii the research on the 1965
                                         dissertation focused on non—CatholiC
Fertility   Study reported in this
                                                                   anomalies in the
women. Because Ryder and estoff1 reported finding
                                                                      Catholics, I
relation between education and completed fertility for

investigated    the educatiOn/fertilitY relation more intensivelY. One
                                          between Catholics       and non—Catholics
of the most striking differences
                                                 included as dependent
was observed when timing and spacing regressions
                                                                but also
variables not only the wife's education and completed fertility
                                 #C. The table below shows that when regressions
an interaction term W Ed

                                  Coefficients and t—valuas


       Dependent Variable:        First Interval
                                                              N      Sample
       VEd HEd                   W Ed'#C Y1965       R2

        2.27       50    2.17     —.64       .24
                                                                     non—CatholiC
        (1. 89) (.77)    (.70)    (2.19) (.64)       .06     585

       —3.67    1.20     —12.31  .79    .48
                                       (.92)         .12     257     Roman Catholic
        (2.41.) (1.67)   (3.46) (2.41)
           .86 .67       —1.90    —.23        .32
                         (.80) (1.03) (1.03) .07             842      All
        (.90) (1.35)

        DpcfldCflt Variab le: Total t'-iterval
        —5.26 1.14     19.27 1.16 —.61                                non— CthO lic
        (3.53) (1.42) (5.05) (3.20) (1.31) .60                585

            2.68 —1.42   31.76      —.45 —.47
                                                              257     Roman Catholic
        (1.10) (1.24) (5.62) (.CG) (.57)
        —2.72      .36   23.41       .58 —.60
                                                              842     All
        (2.16) (.54) (7.42) (1.97) (1.48)            .60




            I                         .       't-.....     1965
                                                                                        1.57.


        were   run on the combined
                                  samples of Catholics and
                                                           non—Catholics,
        the coefficients of some variables were less
                                                      signifja than for each
        group separately, often because of the coefficients
        signs in the two samples.                            having Opposite

                 Many of the timing and
                                            spacing regression results presented in
        this dissertation for
                                    non—Catholics are listed in the tables at the
        end of this appendix
                                   along with the results for
                                                       the comparable sample
        of Roman Catholics.
                           In regressjon5 on the wife's and husband's
                                                                        ages at
      B1 and on the length of the first
                                        interval the coefficient of W Ed is
      much smaller for Catholics
                                 than for non—Catholics
                                                         and the t—va].ues
     drop dramatically —— by
                              fifty to eighty percent. Even more startling
     is the coefficient of W Ed in regressjo
                                                on the length of the total
     interval from
                   B1 to B; the coefficients are
                                                   negative for the non—
     Catholic sample and positive for the Catholic
                                                          sample. (The coefficient
     is very weakly negative in the Roman Catholic
                                                   sample when cohort and
     family size variables
                           are left out; but
                                                similar equations for non—
     Catholics the coefficients
                                are very strongly negative.)
               A1th3u the husband's education
                                                    is, lIke    the :±fe's, less
     sIgnjfjca      for Catholics than for non—Catholics in regressj05
    W   Age B1   and H Age B1, it is
                                                                                   on
                                     more sIgnifjca f or Catholics in
    reressjons  on the length of the first
                                           interval (from marriage
    As the W Ed coefficient                                        to B1).
                            switched signs in regressions on the total
    interval, so also did
                          the sign of H Ed, but in this case the coefficient
    was Positive for non—Catholics and negative for
    signifcp in each simple.) A further             Catholics (and occasior.i11y
    In H Ed's effect                       apparent difference by religion
                        on the total interval is
                                                     that if a family Size measure
                 the regrcssjo5 the coefficient of H Ed becomes
    is dropped from
signifi1 In the ron—Catholic regressjo5 but                     less
Catholic regressj05 This really is a similar more signifjc in the
instances, of a niore negative                   phenonon in the two
                                         or less
                                                posItive coefficient when (IC is
exc1uded         prehably   for   both snp1es the family size declines as H Ed is
larger.

           Y1965 and Y40 are Insignificant
H
                                           in regress05 on W            Age
     Age B1, and total inteva1 for both religIon
                                                         groups, except when H Ed
                                                                      158.




                    equations.1 In regressions on H Age B all. t—values
is omitted from the
                            In all regressions on the total interval the
of H Ed are less than one.
coefficient of Y1965 is more positive (or less negative) for Catholics
                           I/C is excluded it even approaches (positive)
than for non—Catholics; if
                                                              Catholics
significance. The income variables are more significant f or
than for non—Catholics in regressions
                                        on the   first   interval.
                                                                  virtually
        The negative cohort effect on W Age B1 for non—Catholics
                           for Catholics; in regressions on H Age B1 the
disappears in regressions
                                 one—half but the sign is still significant
significance declines by about
                                    of the cohort variable declines by
 (and negative.) The significance
                                in regressions on the first interval, but
about one—third for Catholics
                                  In regressions on the total interval the
the sign is still significant.
                                      for Catholics if IIC is excluded, more
 cohort variable is less significant
                                                            and #C2 both
 significant If I/C is included and nearly unchanged if

 are inc1uded
                                      less important for Catholic
        The completed family size is
                                interval, and total interval, than for
 regressiOnS on W Age B1. first
 non—CatnOlics. For regressions on B Age B1 the
                                                  coefficient of #C is
        significat in rr.ssionS on   non—CatholiCs however, whn both
 more
 //Cand //C2 are in the equation their coefficients are more significant
 for regressions on Catholics.
                                                       responses to economic
        In view of the many differences In fertility
                                                the timing and spacing of
 variables between the two groups, studies of
                                    Catholics and non—Catholics.
 births should examine separately




          'There is one t—valne of .1.65 for Catholics in     a regression on
  the total interval.
                                                                       XH
                                                                (cont 'di

                        Comparison of regressjcn results on
                                                            Catholics (N=257) and non—Catholics
                          1965 N'S — white,                                                     (N585);
                                            non—farm, married cnce—spouse
                                                                          present, one or more children

                                                   Dependent Variable:      W Age
                                                                                  B1
             Roian Catholics
  W   Ed     H Ed                                                                 flon—Catho1j
                     Y1965      //c             1YrB       R2           V Ed      H Ed     Y1965
  2.50       2.61                                                                                      1/C       1/c2    W Yr B
                                                —1.12                                                                               R2
 (1.41)     (1.94)                                                      5.52      3.29
                                                (1.25)    .06                                                            —2.15
  2.19       2.26                                                      (4.83)    (3.68)
                             —6.63               —.84                                                                    (4.22)    .18
 (1 .27)    (1.73)                                                      4.50      2.99               —9.20
                             (4.05)             (.96)     .12                                                            —1.91
  2.31       2.18
                                                                      (4.08) (3.49)                  (7.23)
                           —11.67       .55      —.85                                                                    (3.89)    .25
 (1.34)     (1.67)                                                     4.68   3.09                  —17.41
                             (2.42)   (1.11)    (.98)     .12                                                    .96     —1.77
  4.67                                                                (4.24) (3.62)                  (4.82)    (2.43)
                                               —1.03                                                                     (3.59)    .26
 (3.39)                                                                8.39
                                               (1.15)    .04                                                            —2.08
 4.12                                                                 (9.96)
                           —12 • 29     .60     —.77                                                                     (4.02)    .16
(3.06)                                                                 7.09                         —9.41
                            (2.55)    (1,21)   (.89)     .11                                                            —1.83
 4.06                                                                 (8.9)                         (7.34)              (3.70)    .23
                            —682                —.76
(3.02)                                                                 7.33
                            (4.16)             (.87)     .10                                       —17.02       .89     —1.70
 4.21                                                                 (8.84)                        (4.67) (2.23)
                        .73                     —.98                                                                    (3.42)    .24
(2.79)               (.75)                                             7.81                .81
                                               (1.09)    .05         (8.48)                                             —2.10
 3.25                 1.24 —7.09                                                          (1.56)                        (4.07)    .17
                                                —.66
(2.20)               (1.32) (4.29)                                    6.49                 .84 —9.43
                                               (.76)     .11                                                            —1.86
 3.35                                                                (7.22)               (1.68) (7.36)
                      1.17 —12.17      .55      —.69                                                                    (3. 75)   .24
(2.26)                                                                6.72                 .86     —17.12
                     (1.24) (2.53) (1.12)      (.78)     .12                                                    .90     —1.72
 2.47      2.55                                                      (7.45)               (1.72)    (4.71)    (2.26)
                       .11                     —1.11                                                                    (3.47)    .24
(1.38)     (1.79)     (.11)                                           5.51       3.24      .06
                                               (1.23)    .06         (4.81)                                             —2.16
                                                                                (3.32)    (.11)                         (4.21)    .18
                                                                     APPENDIX H
                                                                      (cont'd)
                                                        Dependent Variable:          W Age
                                                                                           B1
                                                                                           non—Catholics
          Roman Catholics
                                                                                           H    Ed   Y1965      I/C     I/C2    W   Yr
                                                   W    Yr B    R2               W   Ed
W Ed      H Ed       Y1965       I/C        I/C2
                               —6.83               —.77                       4.48          2.87      .17     —9.21             —1.91
 1.99     1.69        .76
                                                   (.87)       .12           (4.05)        (3.06)    (.32)    (7.23)            (3.89)
(1.15)    (1.36)     (.76) (4.12)
                                        .53            —.79                   4.66         2.98       .17 —17.42         .96    —1.77
2.13       1.84       .71 —11.69                                                                                                         .26
                               (2.43) (1.01)       (.90)       .12           (4.22)        (3.19)    (.31)    (4.82)   (2.43)   (3.69)
(1.22)    (1.32)     (.71)
 2.07      2.42       .23                                                     5.57          3.11      .03
                                                               .05           (4.79)        (3.14)    (.05)                               .16
(1.18)    (1.70)     (.22)
 1.71      1.79       .86      —6.97                                          4.50          2.74      .15     —9.55
                                                               .11           (4.01)        (2.89)    (.27)    (7.43)                     .23
(1.00)    (1.29)     (.86)     (4.22)
                                                                                                      Y 40
                      Y40
                                                   —1.04                          6.42               3.43                       —2.07
 2.50                4.81
                                                   (1.17)      .07               (6.09)              (3.06)                     (4.05)   .18
(1.58)               (2.64)

                                                         Dependent Variable:         W Age B

           Roman    Catholics                                                               non—Catholics

                                                                R2               W   Ed     H Ed     '11965
 W   Ed   II   Ed     '11965
                                                                                     .51   3.01       —.21
 1.64     —1.40       2.15                                                                                                                .02
(.71)      (.75)      (1.60)                                   .01               (.34)     (2.35)     (.28)


                                                                                                                                                C'
                                                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                          i_s

                                        V
                                                                                                                                            4.




                                                                                     APPENDIX     H

                                                                                      (cont 'd)
             Ronan         C:.to1c
                                                                     Depcdent Varfrble:               H Age                                      non—Catholics
       W    Ed         H    Ed     Y1965       f/C       i/C2    IIYrB           R              WEd           liEd         Y1965                        iic
   4.18             1.43                                                                                                                                                       R2
                                                                 —4.18                          5.33          2.01
  (1.04)           (2.34)                                                                                                                                      —4.69
                       1
                                                                 (6.14)      .15             (4.47) (2.14)
       3.              .1.'                 —7.19                                                                                                              (10.95)     .22
                                                                 —3.91                        4.49
  (2.25)           (.75)                     (4.32)                                                  1.78                           —7.61                      —4.68
                                                                 (5.91)      .21             (3.83) (1.94)
       4.11                .78              —18.08
                                                                                                                                     (5.64)                    (11.21)     .26
                                                        1.18     —3.78                        4.57
  (2.40)           (.59)                    (3.70) (2.37)                                            1.83                           —11.66              .48    —4.65
                                                                 (5.74)      .23             (3.89) (1.99)
   1. -Ic                                                                                                                           (3.05)         (1.13)      (11.12)     .27
  (3.87)                                                         —4.09                        7.06
                                                                 ( 6.05)    .15                                                                                —4.57
   4.70                                                                                      (8.04)
                                            —7.28                —3.84                                                                                         (10.73)    .22
 (3.50)                                     (4.39)                                            6.00                                  —7.72
                                                                 (5.87)     .21                                                                               —4.57
                                                                                            (6. 86)                                 (5.72)
                                            —18.34     1.20     —3.72                                                                                         (11.02)     .26
 (3.6)                                                                                        6.12                                  —11.44           .44
                                            (3.78) (2.42)        (5.72)     .22             (6.93)                                                            —4.54
  3.62                           —.44                                                                                               (2.99)         (1.04)      (10.93)    .26
 (3.73)                                                         —4.08                        6.92
                                 (.45)                          (6.02)      .15                                           .20                                 —4.59
  4.67                                                                                      (7.22)                        (.37)
                                   .05 —7.30                    —3.84                                                                                         (10.70)     .22
 (3.18)                          (.05) (4.35)                                                5. 4                         .23      —7.73
                                                                (5.85)     .21                                                                                —4.59
                                                                                            (6.14)
  4.31                                                                                                                    (.43)     (5.72)         •
                                 —.11      18.35       1.20     —3.72                                                                                         (11.00)     .26
 (3.   30)                                                                                   5.95                         .24
                                 (.11)     (3.77)     (2.42)    (5.71)     .22                                                     —11.47              .44    —4.56
 4.37             1.83                                                                      (6.21)                       (.45) (2.99) (1.04)
                                 —.87                           —4.18                                                                                         (10.92) .26
(2.43)           (1.25)          (.84)                                                       5.36         2.21       —.30
                                                                (6.14)                      (4.48) (2.16)                                                     —4.68
 3.94             1.11           —.22      —7.14
                                                                                                                         (.50)                                (10.90)    .22
                                                                —3.91                        4.51   1.92             —
(2.26) (.78)                     (.22)     (4.22)                                                                        .20       —7.59
                                                                (5.90)     .21                                                                                —4.67
 4.19    .94                                                                               (3.84) (1.92)                 (.35)     (5.63)
                                 —.34      —18.06     1.19      —3.78                                                                                         (11.16)    .26
(2.42) (.6 7)                    (.33)     (3.69)
                                                                                             4.60   1.97             —.21
                                                     (2.38)     (5.74)     .23
 -I                                                                                        (3.90) (1.97)
 .J.               •   71        —.84                                                                                    (.36)
(1.    7         (.46)                                                                      5.48   1.08              —
                                 (.75)                                                                                   .63
                                                                           .03             (4.18) (.96)
 3.00            —.03             .10                                                                                    (.97)                                           .07
                                         —8.11
(1.62)           (.02)                                                                      4.62           .78       —
                                 (.10)   (4.53)                                                                          .53      —7.64
                                                                           .10             (3.57)        (.71)           (.84)     (5.14)                                .11
                                                                           \ppE;I)1X ii
                                                                            (cant 'ci)


                                                               Dependent Variable          1st    mt
                                                                                                   non—Catholics
             Ronan Catholics
                                                                                                   H Ed      Y40                          Yr Mar
                                                          YrNar       'R                 W Ed
W Ed         11   Ed    Y 40
                                                                                                   1.01               —11.25      .79      — .90
                                                           —.66                       .73
—.07         1.39                  —9.35          .59                                                                           (2.93)    (3. 19)   .03
                                                                     .13             (.95)        (1.72)              (4.58).
                                   (3.77)       (2.33)    (2.11)
(.08)        (2.07)                                                                                                               .69      — .66
                                                                                                                      —10.87
                                   —9.71    .61           —.47                                                                            (2.37)    .07
                                                                     .11                                              (4.40)    (2.56)
                                   (3.89) (2.38)          (1.56)
                                                                                                                                           —.84
                                                           —   .60                        1.06     1.04
 —.10         1.67                                                                                                                        (2.91)    .03
                                                          (1.82)     .04                 (1.37)    (1.71)
(.11)        (2.37)                                                                                                   —11.12      .77      —.84
                                                  .62      — .o2                          1.57                                                      .08
 IS. *                             —9.73                                                                              (4.52)    (2.85)    (3.00)
                                                          (i.')5)    .12                 (2.68)
(1.54)                             (3.91) (2.44)                                                                                           —.86
                                                                                                    1.37              —11.22      .78
                                   —9.36          .59      —.67                                                                                     .08
              1.36                                                                                                    (4.57)    (2.88)    (3.10)
                                                                      .13                          (3.04
             (2.59)                .3. 79)      (2.34)    (2.17)                                                                           — .89
                                                                                                     .46       .94    —11.25      .79
                                                           —.68                            .67
      10                 1.66      —9.50          .61                                                                                     (3.16)    .09
                  .56                                                                              (.54)     (.87)    (4.58)    (2.94)
                                                          (2.17)      .14                (.87)
(.11)        (.61)      (1.32) (3.83) (2.39)                                                                                               —.81
                                                                                                              1.84    —11.18      .77
                         2.27      —9.62          .62      —.67                                                                            (2.96)   .08
                                                                                                             (3.04)    (4.56)   (2.86)
                        (2.84)      (3.91)      (2.45)    (2.18)      .14
                                                                                                                                            — .83
                                                                                          1.00         .45    1.01
 —                .89    1.36                              —.62                                                                            (2.88)    .03
     . :14                                                                               (1.28)    (.51)     (.91)
                                                          (1.87)      .04
(.15)        (.93)      (1.18)                                                                                                     .79      — .87
                                                                                           .82                1.36 —11.23
                         2.19       —9.63          .62     — .68
                                                                                                                                           (3.12)    .09
    .14                                                                                                      (1.85) (4.58)       (2.93)
                                                           (2.15)     .14                (1.16)
 (.17)                  (2 . 39)    (3.90) (2.45)                                                                                           — .86
                                                                                                     .75      1.02 —11.23          .78
                                                   .61     — .69                                                                                     .08
                  .52    1.66       —'1.   51                                                                                    (2.90)    (3.07)
                                                                                                   (.93)     (.95)     (4.58)
                                                 (2.41)    (2. 23)    .14
              (.63)     (1.32)      (3.65)




                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                     -I




                                                                                 APPENDIX H

                                                                                  (cont 'd)
                                                                     Dependent Variable:       1st      mt
                    Roman     Catholics
      ¶.X   Ed      JI                                                                                    non—Catholics
                         Ed    Y1965       I/C                 Yr Mar                     W   Ed          H Ed      Y1965          f/C
      —.13          1.18                                                                                                                    f/C2       Yr Mar
                                  .44 —9.36           .58
  (.20)            (1.65)
                                                                -.65                          .70
                                (.s6)     (3.77)    (2.28)                                                   .84      .25 —11.26              .79
                                                               (2.06)      .13           (.91)                                                          -.90
                                  .89 —9.62                                                              (1.30)     (.68)     (4.58)        (2.93)
                                                      .58       -.53                                                                                   (3.19)     .09
                               (2.01)     (3.88) (2.30)                                                               .70    —11.04           .72
                                                               (1.76)      .12                                                                          —.73
      —.13          .1.60         .14                                                                               (2.20) (4.48)          (2.69)
                                                               —.60                                                                                    (2.68)     .08
  (.14)            (2.14)      (.26)                                                      1.04             .90        .20
                                                               (1.80)     .04                                                                           —.54
                                                                                         (1.24)         (.36)       (.52)                              (2.91)     .33
                                .74     —9.65        .59       —.60
 (.79)                         (1.51)                                                    1.26
                                         (3.87)    (2.34)     (1.91)      .13
                                                                                                                     .44 —11.18              .76       —.86
                   1.11.                                                                (2.00)                     (1.30) (4.55)
                                .43     —9.38    .58           —.66                                                                        (2.87)     (3.07)     .08
                  (.82)       (.64)     (3.79) (2.30)                                                    1.17        .27 —11.24
                                                              (2.14)     .13                                                                 .78       —.87
                                                                                                        (2.21)     (.73)    (4.58)        (2.88)      (3.11)     .08

  W
                                                                Dependent Variable: Fotal mt
       Ed         H Ed        Y1965      i/C       f/C2      Yr Mar   R2           W L.
  1.73           —1.36                                                                    H Ed                     Y1965     I/c
                                        26.71                —1.65                                                                                   Yr Mar
(1.25)           (1.29)                                                                -1.29             .95
                                        (20.30)              (3.35)      .64                                                30.64
                                                                                        (1.35)                                                       -1.05
  .24            —1.17                                                                               (1.28)
                                        53.17     -2.86                                                                     (27.98)                   (2.98)    .60
(.19)            (1.22)                                                                —2.14          .36
                                        (14.96)    (7.86)                .70                                                53.64         —2.67
 1.11             —.92                                                                 (2.36)       (.51)
                                        52.93     -2.85                                                                     (18.23)       (8.26)                .64
(.89)                                                        -1.63
                 (.97)                                                                 —1.71          .68
                                        (15.26)    (8.03)    (3.71)      .71                                                54.09         -2.76      —1.27
 —.02            —2.93                                                                 (1.90)       (.97)                   (18.57)       (8.61)     (3.80)     .65
(.01)            (1.71)                                                               —5.08             —.26
                                                                        .02
 1.08            —2.60                                                                 (3.49)       (    .23)
                                                             -2.06                                                                                              .04
(.48)            (1.53)                                                               —4.37              .25
                                                             (2.58)     .04                                                                          —1.89
                                                                                      (3.00)        (.22)
                                                                                                                                                     (3.50)     .06
                                                                 APPENDIX    H

                                                                  (cont'd)
                                                    Dependent Varia1e:           Total   mt
                                                                                         non—Catholics
          Roan     Catholics
                                                                                         II   Ed    11965      I/C       I/C2     Yr Mar
                     Y1965      I/C              Yr Mar    R2                W Ed
W Ed      U Ed
                                                                         —5.06           —.09        —.24
—0.43     -3.2        1.93                                                                                                                   .04
                                                           .03           (3.47)          (.08)      (.33)
(.19)     (2.11)     (1.43)
                                                                                              .40    -.22                         —1.88
                                                 —1.99                      -4.35
  .8      -3.41       1.73                                                                                                        (3.50)     .06
                                                           .05               (2.98)      (.33)      (.31)
          (1.9)      (1.34)                      (2.50)
(.30)                                                                                                                             —1.05
                                                                            —1.22         1.37       —.61     30.68
          —1.03       —.67     26.88             —1.67                                                                                       .60
 1.90                                                                                    (1.70)     (1.31)    (28.02)             (2.98)
                                                 (3.39)    .64               (1.26)
(1.35)    (.2)       (.84)     (20.19)
                                                                                              .78    —.61     53.68      —2.67
                                         —2.85                               —2.06
  .:.c    —1.06       —.24     53.18                                                                                                         .64
                                                           .70               (2.27)      (1.02)     (1.38) (18.25) (8.26)
(.23)     (1.03)     (.32)     (14.93) (7.82)                                                                                     —1.26
                                                                             -1.64        1.09       -.60     54.12      -2.76
           —.73       -.39     52.94 -2.84       -1.65                                                                                       .65
 1.21                                                                                    (1.43)     (1.37)    (18.60)    (8.61)   (3.79)
                               (15.24) (7.99)     (3.73)   .71               (1.82)
(.96)     (.73)      (.56)
                                                                             -1.58        1.10       —.62     30.96               ______
   .q7    -1.37       —.52     27.02             _____                                                                            1st   mt   .60
                                                           .62               (1.66)      (1.37)      (1.32)   (28.19).
(.69)     (1.20)     (.63)     (19.90)           1gtir
                                                                                              .20    —.15                          —.43
                                                  —.67                       —4.75
 75       —2.83       2.06                                                                                                         (5.59)    .09
                                                           .10               (3.33)      (.16)       (.22)
          (1.61)      (1.65)                      (4.59)
 (.36)                                                                                                                             -.15
                                                                             —1.55         1.18       —.58  30.32
          —1.20       —.43     26.40               —.16                                                                                       .60
   .87                                                                                    (1.47)     (1.25) (27.23)                (2.88)
                                                  (1.57)   .63               (1.63)
 (.62)    (1.05)      (.53)    (18.72)
                                                                             —5.31
 —2.50                                                                                                                                        .04
                                                            .01               (5.00)
 (1.47)




                                                                                                                                                    I—.
                                                                                                                                                    a..
                                                                              165.


                            L?JNDIX I

 Supplement to Table 16 ——
                           Regressjo on rotal Int, with and without
 W Age B1 held constant, 1965 National Fertility
                                                 Study.

 Sample: Married once, one or more children; N —
                                                 585.

                                                          Age B1       R2
   —5.06 — .09       — .24
   (3.46)    (.08)     (.33)                                           . 04
   —2.57    1.30  —.22                                —
                               .
   (1.84)   (1.10) (.33)
                                                      (9.17)           . 16
   —2.06     .78   —.61    53.68             —2.67
   (2.27)   (1.02) (1.38) (18.25)           (8.26)                  .   64
   —1.35     1.21 — .59            50.78     —2.50    — .15
   (1.49)   (1.60) (1.35) (17.15)           (7.81)    (4.54)        . 65
Sample: All married, one or
                                           children; N — 748.
  —2.24       .61    —.33          56.93   —2.98
  (2.88)     (.92)             (21.16)      (9.81)                 .
  —1.33       .85  —.31   5.04             —2.80     — .14
  (1.69)    (1.30) (.77) (19.97)           (9.33)    (5.12)        . 66


                     —.33      49.18       —2.32
  (3.20)    (.99)            (12.04)       (5.63)                  .50
 —1.81      1.26     —.35      46.22       —2.18     — .22
                                                     (5.74)        .50
                                                                                              166.




      Berrott, J., "Fee  dabiliy and CojCl Frecuency,'s
        XXV
            (July 1971), pp. 309-13.                                               Stidi,
      BocTor, Gary S., "An
                           Economic Anajysi of
       Natji Bureau Co1fttee for Economic Frti1ity,'. n Unjverojtles..
               c                                           P.'Jearch, Conference SerIes
                                                                                              11,
       Cojt..i0 University Press, icoO,          pp. 2L)-.O.
                                                                              New York:
  —1964.       , 1-in CJt1l, New York: National
                                                                 Bureau or Econoti0

       Locturo,
               ,         Ca,,ItAl nd th, POrO
                   Ann Arbor:
                                 University of MlChI, 1957.
                                                           Di utof Incoro, Woytinsky
  ________ "A Theory of the Allocation
  (Sepjt;or 1965), pp.493.517•                       of Tira," Econe;       JournI, Lxxv
 — —, "A Theory of t!arriage:              Part
      LXXXI (JUly/AU5                           I," Journal of Po1tti,j Ficoø.
                              1973), pp.813-46.

 BenPorh, Yorc., nd Welch, Fij R., C'
   of !---i1..s1 R/i)           Report R1117..NI                                 end Choice
                                                           , Daco 1972.
 Bupac, Larry L., "Ace at MarrIcc a
               in Fcrtility,s;
                                    a Vtrieb1o in SoCio..Econcj0
      _____ "The 'Pcrfect Contraceptive,
                                                            VI   (itpr, 9b9),
      (Scptcr 1970).                     Populatjo,,, Sej-co, CLXIX




•,
________       "Tr     Prediction of Cop1eted
              p;.l45_54•
         cnd tcctoff, Charles ".,
  rrinctc:  Princto University                   ____
                                                     Fertj1ity,           ____    VI   (Novercr


Chrjstcnc:n
  ______       r   flsrold T., "Child
                                      Sp.cj An1y!3 Via flcozd Liø,"
                       Fe-,jj. Lic, XXIi (Aut 1c53), pp.272—80,
          , mc!
         Ini:.,             Olive P., "Sttidj.in Cl11d_spc1: II - The
                                !1arrj of Parcn
 Child,"           i                             inj Birth of their First
                        For-i, XXI (1y 1953), pp.345.51,
Coc , Llon3, ard
                           ion1d, "Prc:mrjtal Pronancy, Child
         nd Lr .COflOljC lehjevcnt
 S;3cjfl.",
 (Novcbmr       1970), pp.389..412.
                                                      'a
                                                                                 XXIV

                   ,.            1rf1 OC:'--:
                                       Ot::d
                                              fl:'
                                               A,e                       of Chiic!rcn,
                                  CXIII (F3bruary
                                                                        1(.'t .J!1       of
                                                           l7), pp, 1J9.8S,
                                                                                 167.




DutrtherrY,       Jcs S.,        Ccont on Becker,, in D roh&cJd Econovtt
 C!futOJt/L2dCL!t Now York:                             ColuJia University Preas,
 pp.   231—34.

Eaton, Jozph Si., and !Lycr,             Albert J., r4'Q         city   to Rrproduc!
                                                        The Free
             sL.I1t2!e Po,,ulntlOn, Glencoo, Illinois
  Thi_D-—-'--
  kroS3,1 rcprinted from Hur'm iiic]y, XXV                   (n.
                                                3, 1953), pp. 206-64.


Frcan,D1OrLh, "Tho Relation                  of Economic Stetus to Fertility,"
  Co'unicat1On in /'riei EconO!IC Review, LIII (June 1963), pp.414-26.

                and Coorbs, Lolagone, "Child Spacing tnd Faaily
                                                                £conomlc
Frcedrian,   flc:.1d,
  Pozition,t t'rici SoCiO1OtCal Review, XXXI (October
                                                       1966), pp. 631-48.


              "2conoric ConcicioratiO15 in Faii1y         Growth   Decisions,"   PoulniPfl
________,
 Thtudies, XX (Ioebr 1966), pp. 197-222.

Fuchs, Victor R,, Diffcr#th'1s               in Hourly rn?'1±y R1on          and Ci
                au                      of conoziiC Rocoarch Occasicnal Paper 101,
  si,j21, at1cna1
  1967.
                                     Differentials for White end Non—white
1astin,   Dold ., "ChildspaCiflgLevel
 C.uples Accc.rding to Echicatioflal
                                          of Attairtr.nt fr the 1/1000



                                                                                        f
                                                                               Studie!.,
  Sc:p1c of th U1tod Statc      Population            in l90,"
  XXIV    (lrch 1971), pp. 105—16.
_______,      F        —                 ii to j/I.J S            c          Stoo
   Cc" jr'
                           U    ubiihCd    ph.D. dtsertaCiOfl, University of Massachu—
   ctts,     1II').
 Hzry, Louis,         "So Data on Natural Fertility," Eugenics Quarterly, VIII
   (Juno l9c1), pp.            81-91.
         Ncthn, "How Birth Control Affects Birthz," Soci1                    Biology,
   XVIII (J 1971), P2. 109—21.
                                   U.B., and   Martin, C.E.,       1vicr      in the
 xircy,      A.C.,    rc:rc7,
                      Phi1ac1lphiQ         Si. B. Stnidors Ccrr'cr, 19.e3.


 Kincy, A.C.,         ot i1., SY-'v!crirt                iJTi:     'i.!r.' Philadelphia:
    . B.. S(r          Cc:', L3.
 Lcrtr, K•1vIn J., "A Iu Approoch                to Conaut2r Theory,"        Jt!rnal of
   rlic1T,                       LXIV (April 1966), pp. 132-57.
 Loibowttz, Jict, "o InvestontS in Childran,"       pacr cented at
                                            Populatiofl Council Confer—
  the Nattcnal flurciau of conoiC Roerchend
                                          —
                                            Fertility, Ch1cgo,   1973.
  e!tCC on Irric':, F11y Han Ctpital

 _——-'                 r        '!:)e, tiripublishod Ph.D. disoertatior, Coiubia
    UuvcrciY, l?72.
                                                                                  t68.



    Michael, Itob"rt T., "Education and the Derived Denrnnd for
      Journ- of                                                        Children," in
     ed,   T.W. Schultz, LXXXI
                                     (Harch/.prL1 .1973), pp.   S123—64
   ________      Th
                 Effoct of Education on Etfji. In Cotr'i,tio,
     National isuresu of Economic                                   New York:
                                  Research Occasional Paper 116, 1972.
         —, and Willis, Robert J., "The
     An CConcj Analysis,"               'I1!perfect Contracepjv. Population:
     Popu1,j0 Association  paper presented at the /nnual
                                 of Al2arica, Now                  eting of the
                                                    Orleans, April 1973.
  1Incer, Jacob, "Labor Force
                              Participation of Married Won:
    Labor Suply," in National Bureau of Econojc Researcj                   A Study   of
    ferertco Scrte, vol. 14,                                         Special Con..
     Princeton University                                          Princeton:
                              Press, 1962, pp. 63-105,
  ________ '1Markee
                       Prices, Opportunity Costs, and Incoc3 Effects," in
    Ecoo 'cr1 Ci                     Stt'dL In
    Stcnford
                      in i. :ry of Ycd.     Grunteld,
                                      ed. Carl Cnrist, Stanford:
          Livorsjty press, 193,
 — —,        oli—,r3rjenco end Earj-, New York: National Bureau
   of Econo:jc scrch (in
                         press).
 _____   nd Pelachoic, Soloron, "Fa.y
    £arnin of                                      Investrent in Human Capital:
    Rc - Populationpaper
                   WOr..n,"

              d          presented at tho National Bureau
                     Council Conference on
                   Fertility,   ChIcago,   1973,
                                                          of
                                                         Marriage, Faimijy
                                                                               Ecol
                                                                             Hian
 1ti, Fran!, L., "Fertility,
   ciptjc—t In Thod3 I1cnd: Life  Cycle Sta and
                             A Retrospective               Ferale Labor Force     Part!.
   (Fcbrizj      '972), pp.173-85.                      0veryie," r'ret,, IX
 Ncr.oedjrj, .I:., "Thu wife's
                                     Work Eperjcnc, cd Child
                 Fir Ouorter, XLII (duly 1964), pp.Spacing,
                                                    65.77.
1'erc,        c al., 'Tirt Ovulej., Aftcr Cj1c:jz't:: The Effect
  of Eron Feeding,"
  CXIV (15 Dcrcr         l9/), pp.11.4/.
                                               of Otre-j            iiflocoloy,
—        "Tiit— nd Sequence of
  After Chilc':irtl,,n                 OVultio nd nstruatjon
                             S"I'.i, XV (tavc±r 1971),
  p-.,
Potter, flc:'t C., Jr. "Birth Intervals: Structure cnd
                        XVII (r;ovo,,r 1963), . 153—G6. Chne,"
                                                                          pp. 491—503.


      —,   d  l':r!:',r, :.?., "Prodjctj T1ii P.quircd to
               _____ XVIfl                                Concejve,n
                                 (July 1964), pp. S—j1ó,
Record,
 ti-    P.G, in
             lK-o,    T'c aM E&rd. J.!'., "t.n
                ..:;i4'tj
 Sjrle
           --V

                     of
                          1n L1Ac'ac   n TjnjInveitigetion
                                               md          of
                                                    X:Uv (July 1970), pp. 65-77.
                                                                            169.




Rosenzweig, :rtc R., T! Eeonoiic Doterein'nts of Fertt1ity in the
  Mricu1tt'rl Sector of the United States, Unpublished h.D. dissertation,
 Co1uta Ulveroity,        1973.

Ross, Sue GootS, "The Effect of Economic Variables on the Timing and
  Spacing of Births," plipor presented at the Annual Meeting of the
  Population Association of America, Now Orleans, April 1973.

Ryder, Norn B., and Woestoff, Charles F., "Fciily Planning Status:
  United States, 1965," Doircpirf1, VI (Noveither 1969), pp. 435.44.

________ fl'nro&ictic' In the Unitcd Stato: 1965, PrInceton: Princeton
  University Press, 1971.
                                                       Nov Econonic
Schultz, Theodore W., ed., Journ.'tl of Po1it1crt Econcfl
  pproachcs to Ferti1iy, vol LXXXI, no. 2 part II (arch/April 1973).

Shea, J.R., Spite, R.S., and Zeliner, F.A., Du1 Careers, Canter for
  Human Resource Research, Columbus: Ohio State University, May 1970.

Shops, Mirt1 C., "An Analysis of Reproductive Patterns in an Amerien
  Isolate," Population Studios, XIX (Ji1y 1965), pp. 65-80.

________, "On the T1re Required for Conception," ultic Studies,
  XVIII (July 1964), pp. 85-97.

________   "Trnctt'n Fffect        in C1oed and Open !ith Intcr.'al Data,"
                                           Aecitj,      LXV (June 1970),

  pp.   678—).
Silver, rri, "Birt rriaes, and Buainecs Cycles in the United
  States,"                                    LCIII     (June 1965), pp. 237—55.

Srith, Jare P., Th L1f'           role Alloct1on of T- In F'r'i1y Conte,
  Unpublish_d Ph.D. icrtaion,          University of tiicago, 1c72.

Snyder, Dornld U., "The Tccnonic Thory of Fertility in a West African
  Contc:t," ppr preontcd at the Annual Neetin of the Western Econcic
  AoCiatiOfl, C1rcrent, California, August 1973.
U.S. Dtircu ef the Cc':, 1960 Census of Population: Subject Report
  rc(2)-3,         cr.
—Status, l90rdV3 fl-rce.
                 Ccnu o Populctiofl         Subject Report PC(2)-6A,



________,    !O CcniEver
                     c Pcpulutlon: Subject flcport PC(2)-3A, Wocn h
                         Born.
  1h:;ber of   Children

 Vandber, Steven G,, "T:2 Nature and Nurture of            Inte11icree,"    in

  Gntie, ed. DavId C.                 Neu York:   The   Rochefollcr   University
   k'ress, 19.8, çp. 3-58.
                                                                                         170.


   rud
 West:off,   C,zi:1os   F.,
                         Pottar, Liobert C., Jr. and
                    Pr1ncet,n: Prfnceor in1vorsity Sa,i, P1lip C., The
                                                     Press, 1963.
 Whelan,   Elizabeth 2'irphy, 44Th3 terpc.r,1         eIa
   ception, iJ    Birth lr N.ssachusettg        'I
                                                            tonship   of   Marriage, Con.
  Pp. 394-414.                                                    IX (M.,y     1953),
Wbe.1pton,    Pascal    K., "Trt'nds   ar.d Differentials in the
                I (l9Yi), p.83-93                                Spacing of Births,"

             Carp1I, Arthur       A., and Pattersofl, .Johr F.,
  F'ji,            In t:)                                                          and
  kress,     19Ô.                                    Princeton: Princeton
                                                                                LiLlversity

WU113, Robrt J., 1i ccOj
 UnpubljThcd Ph.D. dieratjo Detorr.;..5 of Frtj,
                                           -      Eivior
                              Unive2rsjty o hLngton 19/i.
cray, Joe D., "ro;u1atjon
                                ?resure on Fasi1ies:
 Spciag," in                                                  Fni1y Size and Child
 C1c3,    publd for
 Th Johns     H;                   t ioj
                          Press, 1971,   pp.1 403—ój.
                                                            oi Sc.onces, ti:ro:
