NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRICE EXPECTATIONS AND HOUSEHOLDS'
DEMAND FOR FINANCIAL ASSETS

Lester D. Taylor*

Working Paper No. 31

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
261 Madison Avenue
New York, N.Y. 10016

January, 1974
Preliminary; Not for Quotation

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in
limited number for cotents only. They should not be quoted
without written permission.
This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

*

University

of Michigan

CONTFNTS
Page

I
II

Introduction

1

Theoretical. Considerations

4

III A State Adjustment Model of Saving
IV

Description of the Micro Data Sets

1. CAS Sample
2. Consumers Union Sample
V Empirical Results I: CAS and CU Data Sets
VI

Empirical Results II: Evidence From the Quarterly
Flow-cf-Funds

1. The Model, Data, and Methods of Estimation
2. Summary and Evaluation of Time—Series Results
VII

Conclusions and

General Discussion

Appendix A Estimated Equations for CAS and CU Data Sets

8

15
15
18
20

30
30
33
51

56

Price Expectations and Households
Demand for Financial Asscts*

Lester D. Taylor
University of Michigan

I.

Introduction
With the inflationary excesses beginning in 1966 a prime mover, the

last few years have witnessed considerable rekindling of interest in the

effects of price expectations on economic behavior. For the most part,
however, the recent empirical research in this area has focused on
aggregate data and has been concerned primarily with the impact of price
expectations on market rates of interest1'1 and changes in

money wages--"

The effects of price expectations on consumption and saving, in contrast,

has received relatively little

especially at the micro

level, and the present effort is addressed to this void.
*

This is part of a National Bureau of Economic Research study of the
effect of inflation on the country's financial institutions that has
been funded by the American Life Insurance Association. The
study
is not an official NBER publication as it has not yet been reviewed
by the NBER's Board of Directors. The research reported here has
also been financed in part by the National Science FoundiLion. I

am indebted to Phillip Cagan, Donald Farrar, Donald lierkerinan, F. Thoinris
Juster, Robert Lipsey, Frank Stafford, Paul Wachtel, and Daniel ciserbs
for comment and criticism, to Philippe Rouzier •for research
assistance,
to Bruce Ladwig and Richard English for programming the computations,
and to Elsa Bermudez and Donna Hoff for secretarial assistance.
See Gibson (1970), Pyle (1972), and Sargent (1972, 1973).
See Gordon (1970, 1971), Turnovsky (1972), Turnovsky and Wachter
(1972), and de Menu and Bhalla (1973).

-

The recent empirical literature, as far as I
am aware,
of two papers by Juster and Wachtel (l972a, 1972b).

consists

—2-

More specifically, the paper's primary purpose is to
whether it is possible to discern

iflvest:igate

empirically a relationship between

individually...held price expectations and decisions of households to hold

particular types of assets. To this end, I have analyzed aggregate time—
series data from the National Income Accounts and the Flow-of—Funds and
two bodies of micro household data,

households and each containing

each involving several thousand

fairly detailed information on price

expectations.

The micro data that have been analyzed are based on the well—known
Consumers Union panel study of the late 1950's and the Consumer Anticipations
Survey conducted by the U.S. Bureau of the Census during the late l960'.!1
The year of reference is 1959 for the
CU sample and 1967 for the CAS sample.
In additjon to having reasonably detailed breakdowns of the household's

balance sheet, both of these data sets contain data on income and family
characteristics together with explicit information on price expectations.
Although they refer only to the long term, the price expctationg data are
especially detailed in the CU sample, for:respondents

were questioned

regarding their expectations of changes in the level of consumer prices

for 5, 10, and 20 years in the future. CAS respondents, in

contrast,
were asked for their expectations only over the next 12 months.

The price expectations data from both household samples have been
taken

prioe

at face value, and there has been no effort either to "explain" the
expectations themselves or to assess, except in a general way, their

plausibility or reliability.
own right, is outside

To, do so, while

the scope

clearly of interest In its

the present task; the maintained
hypothesis throughout is that households take seriously the expectations
of

Henceforth, these will be referred to as the
respectively.

CU and CAS samples,

they express, whatever these are and whether or not they appear reasonable
to an outsider.

The format of the paper is as follows: The next sectidn discusses
the effects that price expectations might be expected to have on a household's saving and the composition of its portfolio. Particular attention
is given to the traditional view that expectations of inflation lead to a
substitution of present consumption for future consumption, and therefore
to reduced current saving, and to the contrary view, long espoused by
George Katona, of the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan,
that expectations of inflation are associated with increased

uncertainty

with respect to the future and that this in turn leads to increased current
saving.

Section III is concerned with specification of the model to be analyzed.

The model utilized is based on an underlying stock adjustment process in
which saving (or one of its components) is related to the hOusehold's
existing stock of assets, as well as to income, various demographic char-

acteristics, and, of course, to price expectations. The stock of assets
and Income are both disaggregated, although the extent to which this can

be carried varies between the data sets.

Description of' the two micro

data sets occupies Section IV.

Sections

V and VI are devoted to presentation of empirical results.

The results deriving from the micro data sets are discussed in Section V,

while the time—series results are presented in Section VI. Finally,
Section VII provides an overall assessment of the results and offers some
suggestions for future research.

-

—4.-

II.

Theoretical Considerations

In analyzing the effect of price expectations on a household's saving,
there are two separate questions to be kept in mind, namely, (1) the
impact

of price expectations on the overall amount saved and (2) the

differential impact of price expectations on the separate components of

the household's balance sheet. On the assumption that the household strives
to structure Its portfolio so that yields (including nonmonetary returns
and with allowance for risk) on different assets are equal on the margin,

it is clar that, because yields are, in general, not affected uniformly
by inflation, the rational household will adjust its portfolio whenever

there is a change in its price expectations. Indeed, it is quite possible
for there to be substantial portfolio restructuring even though the impact

of inflation on the overall level of saving is nil. Moreover, it is also
clear that we should expect the impact of price expectations to vary, even
for the same dependent variable, depending UOfl

the

time horizon over

which the expectations are measured and for horizons of short du-ration,
depending upon whether price changes are expected to be permanent or only

temporary. If prices are expected to rise and soon thereafter to fall,
current saving should be stimulated, while the opposite should be the case
If the higher prices are expected to persist.

The existing literature on the effects of price expectations on
saving —— which is surprisingly not very extensive ——

is

ambiguous and,

in some instance, contradiotory. There Is the old traditional idea that
anticipated inflation will induce a shift from money, savings accounts,
and bonds to real assets

including equity. The

likely effect on the over-

all amount saved, howevr, is much less cicarcut. While economists
typically take the view that an e:pected price rise will lead to increased
consumption, and thus to reduced saving, as present goods arc substituted

5—

.

for

the future goods, the assumption usually implicit is that

the

expected

price rise had not been previously anticipated. For price inflation that
is fully anticipated should not have any impact on real economic decisions
because all of the impacts will have been fully discounted and embodied
in current prices, interest rates, etc.
In

contrast with the traditional

view is a view that is rooted more

in psychology and sociology than in economics, but which is increasingly
gaining a following among economists, namely, that an increase in prices

(anticipated
In

or not) will lead to a reduction In

spending and an increase

saving'1. The argument Is usually phrased in terms of the impact on

rising prices on consumer confidence: Expected inflation leads to a
'S

decrease in the confidence with which the future is approached and

in turn leads to anincreasein_y_i'. Because it

has a strong

foundationV in additon to being a well established result

theoretical

empiricall)1,
negatively

this

the second part of the K—J argument, i.e., that

saving is

related to uncertainty of the future, evokes little controversy.

However, the circumstances surrounding the survey—based finding
that rising prices stir pessimism are much

Wachtel (1972a) suggest that the

less clear. Juster and

connection is to consumer expectations

of future real income. In particular, they argue (pp. 86—87):

high inflation rates tend to be

associated with a
Historically,
relatively high variance in the rate of inflation. If consumers
commualy believe that the rate of increase in nominal income will
As Katona (1960) puts it:

Most

people hold that the future is uncertain; they speak of

possible emergencies such as accidents, illness, unemployment, or
bad times as their reasons for accumulating' reserve funds (pp. 95).
See also Juster and Wachtel (l972a, 1972b).
This will be referred to as the K—J (for Katona and Juster) argument.

See Mirman (1971), Sandnio (1970), Levhari and Srinivasan (1969),
and Leland (1968).

Most of the empirical evidence is based on survey data. See in
particular, ue11er (199), Katona (1960) and Juster and Wachtcl

(1972a,

1972b)

-6-

less variable than the rate of increase prices, the expectation of rising prices will generate greaterindispersion
of expectbe

ations about real income. A wider dispersion may not have syuI—
metrical effects on behavior, in that the prospect of rising real

income, even though the two arc regarded as equally probable. In
short, consumers may be more concerned that price inflation will
erode their real income, even though the two are regarded as equally
probable. In short, consumers may be much more concerned that price

Inflation will erode their real income than pleased i:hat rising
nominal incomes will outweigh rising prices. If so, the appropriate
reaction to inflationary expectations would be to curtail spending
in an attempt. to guard against declining real income, thus, as a
corollary, raising the saving rate.
Despite

first appearance, the traditional and K—J views of expected

inflation and saving are not necessarily in conflict. For once
uncertainty
(especially with regard to the stream of future income) is admitted into
the traditional model, the K—J

positive relationship between saving and

expected inflation emerges almost as a matter of course. Readers interested in details are referred

to the papers cited in footnote 7.

In approaching the analysis, a reasonable attitude to adopt is that

price

expectations are actually described by a probability distribution
a

and that the information/household provides is its "best" guess of what
prices will do during the period of reference.2! Moreover, it also is
plausible to assume that the extent

to which price expectations actually

influence a household's decisions will

depend upon the confidence with

which the expectations are held. In particular, it is much more likely
that expectations will be a factor in decisions if they are held with

a great deal of ccnfidence rather than with much uncertainty.
To formalize this reasoning, let

us suppose that the household bases

its saving decisions on an assumed price level P*which it defines
as a
I enclose best in quotation marks
because the particular point
estimate given will probably vary depending on the shape of the
underlying distribution. The mean undoubtedly will be provided by
respondeits where the distribution is
symmetrical; however, if the
distribution is skewed, it will more likely
be the mode.

—7—

C

weighted average of its best—guess future price level p and he current
price level p, viz:

(1)

p*

g(2)pC + [1 — g(o2)]p

where g is an inverse function of a2, the variance of the

distribution

describing the expectations. In particular, we shall assume 0 <

with g'(o2) < 0, g(0) = 1, and g(co) = 0.

g(o2)

< 1

p* will thus be near pC for 2

Implementation of this model requires,

small, but near p for a2
of course, knowledge of o2 .

While neither of the micro data sets to be

analyzed provides Information about 2 dIrectly, some weak, though usable,
11/
Information can be adduced In both samples—

As was noted at the beginning of this section, we should expect the
impact of price expectations to be different depending upon the length
of the horizon over which the expectations are measured and depending upon
whether price increases are expected to be permanent or only teiaporary.

The traditional view ——

I.e.,

that expected inflation leads to a substitution

away from money —— seems most relevant to extended horizons and to price
changes that are expected to be permanent, whereas the K—J .view seems more

relevant to short—run expectations and to price changes that are expected

to be temporary. As has already been mentioned, the price expectations
•

in the CU sample pertain to horizons of 5, 10, and 20 years, while in the
This model can be rigorously derived from the adaptive expectations
framework of Nerlove (1958) and Muth (1961) on the assumption that

the distribution of price expectations is normal and the additional
assumption that the information provided by p is combined with that

provided by p in accordance with Bayes theorem. See Turnovsky (1969).

For attempts to infer

households, see

de

a2

from the variation of expectations across

Neniland Ehalla

(1973).

—8--

CAS sample they are confined, to a horizon of 12 months.

(The time—series

exoectations also refer to a horizon of 12 months.) This being the case,
it is tempting to view the results with the CU sample as testing the
traditional thesis and the results with the CAS sampleas testing the
K—J thesis.

III. A State Adjustment Model of Saving
The point of departure for the model that underlies the empirical
analysis is to assume that saving is determined by the interaction of the
tastes of the household, a collection of objective quantities (such as
income, prices, and the rate of interest) generated by the market,.and a
set of state variables!?! .

(2)

=

O(Xie••xm

in

symo1s, we can write

w1,... ,w).

where s denotes saving,

X1,...,x m objective market quantities, and

w 1,...,wn n state variables. It is assumed for now that the tastes of
the household are reflected in the parameters of 6.
The state variable encompass a variety of. phenomena, some objective

and some subjective. Represented in the former will be items from the
household's balance sheet ——

stocks of durable goods and housing, saving

accounts, level of consumer debt, etc.'-" These quantities are all
concrete in interpretation, cardinally measurable (at least in principle),
and in general are determined by saving decisions in the past, current

Th model aboutto be described 'takes its roots in the state—
adjustment model of Houthakker and Taylor (1970) as applied to aggregate
consumption and saving (see especially Chapter 7).
13/

.
The objective state variables
will also include demographic characteristics which for now are put to the side.

—9—

market

conditions, and possibly the mere passage of time. The

subjective

state variables, on the other hand, will also reflect decisions in the
past, but in addition will collate the household's evaluation of the
future as characterized (say) in expectations of income and prices and

the confidence with which the future is approached. The past makes its
appearance

in these state variables in the form of inertia (or habit

formation) which is well—known to characterize

important segments of

consumption, particularly expenditures on services.--'
The objective state variables will change:

a). In response to current saving as assets are bought and sold
and liabilities are increased or decreased;

b). With the passage of time through depreciation and technological obsolescence; and

c). In response to inflation, changes in the market rate of
interest, and changes in the earning capacity of physical
assets.

The

subjective

state variables that reflect habit formation, In contrast,

will alter in response to:

a). Current consumption of nondurables and
services;

b). Current depreciation of physical assets; and
c).

The dissipation of habits.

How the remaining subjective state variables (i.e., those representing

the household's evaluation of the future) vary through time, however, is
clearly much more speculative.

That objective state variables and the

subjective

state variables

See Duesenberry (1949), Brown (1952), and Houthakker and

Taylor

(1970).

-

—II)—

that do

not

incorporate expectations summarize the

influence of the

past

and the objective present on the household's saving decisions, while the

state variables reflecting expectations provide links to the fuLurc.'
The household is assumed to adjust its saving in such a way as to bring its
state variables, all except those reflecting expectations,-" into desired
relationships with its current and prospective income. As yields and
expectations change, the household will not only adjust the amount it
saves, but also will alter the composition of its portfolio.

In order to illustrate the ideas involved, let us consider a model
in which saving (s) is linearly related to the existing level of wealth (w),
a state variable representing ti accuniulated effects of past consumption
(h), income (x), the rate of interest (r), income expectations (Xe)

price

expectations (p*), and general consumer confidence (q).

(3)

S

a

+ 2h + y1x + y2r + e + X2p* +
X3q.

In terms of our earlier classification of variables, x and r represent
objective market quantities, w represents an objective state variable,
*
while I-i, xe , p , and q denote subjective state variables. The state

variables wand h represent legacies from past saving and consumption

decisions,

*
e
respectively, while the expectational quantities, x , p , and

q embody subjective evaluations of the future. (It is assumed, of course,

that e *

and q pertain to some definite horizon.) We, naturally expect

to be negative, and

and

to be Positive. The parameters

and

can be of either sign, and, as we have already noted, the same is true of

Depending upon one's theoretical predilections, the "future" in this
context can be made as precise, or left as vague, as desired.
The state variables incorporating expectations are excluded because
it does not make any sense to speak of desired
relationships connecting
them with income. On the
contrary, they, along with income and other
market quantities, must be considered movers of the
system.

—11—

A

depending on (1) the

are expected to be
between

length

permanent

of the horizon, (2) whether

or temporary, and (3)

price

changes

the relationship

p* and q.-' Finally, because consumption, on balance, is subject

to habit formation42' and because saving is the complement of consumption

we

:\

expect 2 to be negative.
Assunie, next, that at any point in time w and s change according to

(4) W8_lWd

0•

(5)

h"c—2h,

where wdrepresents the portion of wsubject to depreciation, c denotes
consumption (x — s),and

depreciation

and

represent the (constant exponentia])

rates for Wd and h, respectively. The determinants of the

rates of change for e and q are of little interest for present purposes.
Finally, in line with the preceding section, p* will be

determined

(6)

p*

assumed to be

according to

g(a2)pe + [1 —

—

--

g(o2))p,

where e g and a2 are

as defiied in equation (1).

Long—run equilibrium in this model, corresponding to steady—state

values of x, r, e *

and q, is defined by the conditions w

s -

0.

In long—run equilibrium, the state variables w and s will be in desired
relationships with income, and y and c, from (4) and (5), will be given by

in line with

the view of Katona and Juster, price expectations
should only affect saving through their inpact on consumer confidence,
then
wil]. be equal to zero. However, this is an extreme (and to mc
implasuible) reading of Katona and Juster.
If,

.UJ

Sec Houthakker and Taylor (1970, Chapter 7) and Browu (1952).

—12—

'6ld

(7)

=

(8)

where the "hats" denote long—run equilibrium values. Expectations are
seen to affect the steady—state values of saving and

consumption

through their effects on the equilibrium relationships of
Wd

only

and s

to

income. Changes in expectations cause these equilibrium relationship to
alter, and this in turn leads to changes in saving. This result is of some
importance, because it means that the effects of changes in expectations
are in fact reflected in the levels of expectations taken in conjuction
with the levels of the state variables Wd and h.
Let us now turn to the model that has been estimated in the empirical

work. In general form,

S =

(9)

cx

this

can be written as

+ 'Y + y'A + X'E + D + c,

where S denotes saving (or one of its components), Y, A, and E are vectors
representing income from different sources (or from prior years), components
of the household's balance sheet, and expectations, respectively, D is a

vector of demographic characteristics, c is a random error term, and cx, ,

y,

A, and

are parameters (or vectors of parameters) to be estimated.

The major difference between this model and the one represented in

expression (3) involves the disaggregation of wealth and income. The

disaggregation

of wealth follows from the desire to analyze adjustment in

the composition of thehousehold's balance sheet as well as saving in toto,
while the disaggregation of income is inspired by the findings reported in
Taylor

(1971). However, the extent to which these disaggrcgat:-ion1; can be

—13--

effected varies with the data set. For

the CAS sample, income is reported

by type —— wages and salaries, business income,
rent, interest and

dividend, gifts and inheritance, social security, and pensions ——
and for
households with multiple members in the labor force, there is a further
disaggregation of wages and salaries by recipient. The cu sample does not

provide a decompositjon of income by

type, but does distinguish between the

earnings of husband and wife, and unlike the

CAS sample, it includes data

on family income, both before and after taxes, for several years prior to

the year of reference!".

Capital gains also are treated separately. The

CU sample contains very detailed information on the composition of the
household's balance sheet,

Particularly with regard to holdings of financial

assets. The CAS sample, on the other hand, is much less detailed and
complete in this respect and,

apart from housing, provides only indirect

information on stocks of real assets.
Moving on to price expectations, respondents in both the CU and CAS

samples were presented with intervals of
the one within which their

price changes and asked to indicate

expectations fell. Should they be too uncertain

to guess, this, too, was an option. Because they were obtained
only in
terms of Intervals, the price

expectations have been Included in the models

for both data sets through a set of dummy variables

Introducing

the

price expectations data into the model in this manner makes it
unneessary to

The majority of equations
tabulated, however, include income of the
current year only.

One such set for the 5—year

expectations in the CU sample is as follows:

prices expected to fall

d2: prices expected to increase 0 to 5%

d3: prices expected to incrcase,5 to 15%
d4: prices expected to increase 15 to 40%
d5: prices expected to increase more than 40%
d6: too uncertain to say

—1 4—

assume explicit and essentially arbitrary values for the open—en1cd
classes; an added benefit is that it automatically allows for the effect

of price expectations to be nonlinear.-Since neither of the micro data sets contains direct information$2'
on the variance of a household's price expectations, it has not been
possible to employ the mechanism for p* specified in.expressjon (6).

However, in addition to being asked about price expectations, respondents
in the CU survey also were invited to assess their financial prospects

"over

the

next few years." A possible response to this question was

uncertain to say". Not unreasonably,

"too

tainty regarding price
these

it might

be argued that uncer—

expectations share some common causes (whatever

are), so that the answer "too 'uncertain to say"

about financial

prospects provides some proxy information on the variance of the household's

price expectations. This information has been introduced into the model
for the CU

23/
sample by defining a dummy variable,—

However, the use of dummy variables is not without cost. For in
estimation, one of the dummy variables must be excluded, requiring
the coefficients on the dummy variables remaining to be interpreted
as deviations from the coefficient of the dummy variable that is
left out. Ordinarily, this last coefficient, which is asorbed
into the equation's constant term, is recovered through the assumption
that the coefficients for the entire group of dummy variables sum to
zero. In the present context, however, such an assumption is clearly
unwarranted, whence the excluded coefficient cannot be recovered.
Thus while the overall effect of price expectations can be tested
(through an analysis of covariance), the effects of individual
Intervals of expectations can only be tested relative to one
another.

Except for that implicit in the response "too uncertain to say" in
both samples.

requires, of course, that households
answering "too uncertain to guess" for price expectations and
financial prospects do not form identical sets.
The validity of this procedure

.

—15—

(1

if (regarding its financial prospects, the household was)
tG uncertain to say

lo

otherwise,

which was then incorporated into the coefficient on price expectations
(A*, say) according to

A*=X*+X*d
0
1

(10)

In line with the reasoning leading

to expression (6), the sign of

should be opposite to that of A

For the two micro data sets, the

demographic characteristics in D are

all represented by dummy variables, which is tantamount to assuming that
demographic factors affect intercepts, but not slopes. While these factors

—— age,
education, and family size, in particular ——
interest in their own right, their Inclusion

are

frequent'y of

in the present context is

primarily for purposes of control..-Y

IV.

Description

of the Micro Data Sets

1. CAS sample
The Consumer Anticipations

Survey is a relatively recent panel survey
of some 3300 middle—to—high income
households that was conducted by the U.S.
Bureau of the Census in close

co11aration with the National Bureau of

Economic Research--'. The first of the five waves of interviews that

comprise

24/
—
This

25/
—

being the case, it can be argued that I would have been better
advised to group households by the characteristics involved and then
estimating separate equations for each group. However, this would
have (1) put distressingly severe demands on my limited computer
budget and (2) resulted in many cells with a meager count of households.

For a description of the survey, see
Juster, McNeil, and Stoterau (1969).

—1 b—

the

survey was begun in mid—May 1968 and reinterviews were held in November

1968, May

is a nonrandom
1969, November 1969, and October 1970. The survey

chunk sample in design, and was conducted

in three cities: Boston, Minneapolis,

and San Jose, California. The census tracts
the

within which the households in

survey reside are all middle—to—high rent, which means that householdS

as a group are in the upper halves of the

distributions

of ior, wealth,

for the analysis of
and educdtion. The sample is thus especially appropriate
saving.,
My

intent at the outset was to use all five waves of intcrviews.

However, the second, fourth, and

fifth interview were not as extensive as

the first and third, especially with regard to

as I was partic1arly interested

the receipt of income, and,

in employing a model in which income

i

disaggregated as to source, I reluctantly decided to base the analysis on
the first interview a1one.—'

The period of reference for the dependent

variables is the calendar

year 1967. Stocks of assets refer to the beginning of the period, as

measured

at the end of 196&- For some

were provided a list of do11ar

categories of assets, households

intervals and asked to indicate the interval

within which they fell. In these cases, geometric means of
interval end points were used for point estimates.

With respect to the

period of reference, the only serious problem unfortunately
involves the data for price expectations,

for the period of reference for

these is the 12 months beginning in May (June in some cases) 1968. This
and subsequent waves of interviews
This is not to imply that second
but
the model employed must be simpler
cannot be analyzed. They can,
than the one used here.,

which has been computed on

The only exception is the stock of housing,
Unrealized
the basis of original purchase price.

capital gains
then
included
as
a separate
losses) through the end of 1967 are
predictor.

(or

—.11—

the cSc, it has been necessary to assume that the price
expectations for this period stand as a good proxy for those held a year
earlier.
being

The particular data set that is u.tilized contains 2876 households. The
households Included all consist of a married couple residing in an urban
area (no farm families arcincluded) with husband and wife both present.
Equations have

been estimated for the sample as a whole and with the

2876 households grouped into three asset categories as follows:
Croup
1
2
3

Assets

}1ousehols

under $25,000

1537

$25,000—$75,000

1072

over $75,000

206

Since for this sample data on household net worth are not available, the.
grouping has been based on total assets defined as the sum of savings accouct.

goverrment bonds, the market value of housing (including vacation homes)
less mortgage debt outstanding, and the market value of common

price expectatjois of the households i.n the CAS sample are
broken down as follows:
The

After the

equations with the entire sample were estrnatd, I
found that some households had
missing data for son'.e \'ar;b1es nd
that a missing obE;ervi Lions correl.;jtjon

had been used in the
calculatjon. In the equations for the :atrix
separate grouns, all house-

holds with missing data ierc e:':c]udcd altogether. This reduced the
number of households in the separate group equations to 2815.

—18—

Table 1

Distribution of Price Expectations

One—Year Horizon
CAS Sample

Proportion of Households
Entire
Sample

Asset
Class 1

To increase less than 2%

.084

.086

.078

.107

To increase 2—4%

.451

.449

.461

.403

To increase 5—10%

.226

.221

.232

.238

To increase more than 10%

.101

.101

.096

.112

Too uncertain to say

.138

.143

.133

.140

Prices Expected:

Asset
Class 2

Asset
Class 3

The "typical" household is seen to have had expectations, correctly
as it turned out, of rates of inflation approximating 2—4% per year.
However, it is to be noted that a fair proportion of the households, 14%,

was unprepared to express any expectations at all. It also is of Darticuaar
interest that the distribution of expectations is, for all practical

purposes, invariant across asset classes.

2. Consumers Union Sample
Like the CAS sample, the CU sample is nonrandom in design and is
based on the extensive survey of some 15,000 of its members by the Consumers

Union in the late l950's.-21 The particular data set analyzed here contain
4227 households, all residing In an urban area, with both husband and wife

present. Since members of Consumers Union tend to be above average with
respect to income, wealth, and education, the households included in this
For a description of charcteristjcs and a discussion of the quality of
Information of this survey, see Cagan (1965).

—19—

data set are similar in their circumstances to those in the CAS data set.
The period of reference for the dependent variables in this data

set is the calendar year 1959. All stocks, both real and financial, are
measured at the end of 1958. As with the CAS sample, equations have been
extimated for the sample as a whole and with the households grouped

according to three asset classes. The grouping is on the basis of the
household's net worth at the end of 1959 as follows:
Group
______

Net Worth

Households

1

under $25,000

2074

2

$25,000 — $75,000

1614

3

over $75,000

539

As with the CAS sample, it is useful to provide for the CU sample as

well a breakdown of price expectations across households. This is done for
5—year expectations in Table 2.

Table 2

Distribution of Price ExpectaUons
Five—Year Horizon
CU Sample
Proportion of Households

Entire
Sample

Asset
Class 1

Asset
Class 2

Asset
Class 3

To fall

.023

.021

.025

.028

To remain the same

.041

.370

.336

.334

To increase less than 5%

.311
.500

.536

.525

.059

.058

069

Prices Expected:

To increase 5—10%
.3851>

To increase 10—15%

.130J

To increase 15—25%

.0491

To increase 25—40%

.ObJ

To increase more than 40%

.001

.001

.001

.002

Too uncertain to say

.050

.039

.044

.042

—20—

As with the CAS sample, the "typical" household is seen to have had

expectations that
occured

correctly anticipated the inflation that axtually

over the period involved,-Q''

is

What

more, we again find the dis-

tribution of price expectations to be invariant with respect to wealth.

V. Empirical Results I: CAS and CU Data Sets
Equations have been estimated for the

following categories of

household saving and investment:
CAS data set

1). SA: additions to savings accounts
2). GB: net purchases of government bonds

3). CS: net purchases of 'common stock

4).

IP: investment in property

5). Si: iSA + GB

6). S2: SA + GB + CS
7). S3: SA ÷ GB
CS + IP.
CU data set
1).

t.DD: additions to demand deposits

2).

LSA: additions to savings accounts

3).

FA: net purchases of financial assets

4:). NW: change in net worth.
Because of the large number of predictors in the equations, the majority
of which are dummy variables

representing demographic characteristics,

the equations are tabulated in full in Appendix A and only the

for

coefficients

the price expectations variables are presented here in the text.

Let me begin with the predictors other

30 Between
—

than price expectations.

1958 and 1963, the horizon covered by the expectations in
Table 2, the CPI increased 5.6%.

However, to

S

—21—

comment in detail on the importance of these other variables would
inject a detracting digression, and I shall simply list their main

features:'
1). The strongest variables statistically are almost invariably
existing holdings of assets, savings accounts and government
bonds in the CAS equations2?I and various categories of

financial assets in the CU equations. The effect of existing
assets on household investment, especially financial investment, is for the most part strongly negative, thus indicating

the presence of substantial stock adjustment. Finding this to be
the case is, of course, hardly surprising.

2). Income aiqo is uswtllv a qtron redictor, csccially in th
CAS equations where family income is disaggregated as to type
and wage and salary income is further disaggregated according

to recinient. Realized caDital gains show up fairly strongly

The CAS equations are listed in Tables Al and A2 in Appendix A,
while the CU equations are given in Tables A3 and A4.
The reader will note that the R2 s for the equations for savings
accounts (SA) and government bonds (GB) in Tables Al and A2 are
extremely high given that the observations refer to households.
These high R'S result primarily from the presence of SA(t—l) and
CB(t—l) as predictors, as is evident from the t—ratios for these
variables. The rationale for including SA(t—l) and GB(t—l) as
regressors in these equations is that these variables allow for
the dynamic effects of stock adjustment. However, in the present
context, it is clear that these variables also are reflecting
idiubyncracies of individual households. Households vary in how
they structure their portfolios, not just because of differences in
expectations and objective circumstances, but also because of
factors unique to themselves. In the absence of variables that
allow directly for these unique factors, they will tend to be
reflected in SA(t—l) inthe equation for SA and GB(t—l) in the
equation for GB. This being the case, the inclusion of the5e
two quantities serves to clarify the estimates of the coefficients
would be
of the other variables. However, it is clear that
misleading (indeed, incorrect) to interpret the coefficients of SA(t—l)
and CB(t—l) as reflecting purely dynamic phenomena.

it

—22--

in the equations for both data sets, as do unrealized capital

gains on real estate in the CAS equations. In particular,
the latter appear to substitute quite strongly for other forms
of saving.
3).

Of the demographic factors analyzed, family size showsup
strongly in the CAS equations and age of head of household

in the CU equations. Education is of some importance in the
CU equations, but its contribution is relatively minor in the

CAS equations. Finally, for neither data set is occupation
of much consequence.

The coefficients for the price expectations variables for the CAS

equations are tabulated in Tables 3 and 4. The coefficients in Table 3
are from the equations estimated from the entire sample of 2876 households,
while the coefficients in Table 4 are from the equations estimated for
each of three asset classes, where the asset classes are those defined

near th end of Section IV.
Since price expectations are represented in the equations as
dummy variables, the coefficients of these variables, as ndted in footnote

21, can only be estimated in terms of deviations from one another. The
equations have been estimated with PE5, too uncertain to guess, as the
excluded category, but the coefficients in Tables 3 and 4

are expressed as

deviations from the coefficient of PE2—'. This makes for easier inter—
pretation of the results since the expectaions of the households in
this category (inflation of 2—4%) were in fact realized.

33/ The entry for SA under PE1 in Table 3, for example, indicates that,
ceteris paribus, households expecting prices to increase by less

than 2% added, on the average $348.63 more in savings accounts

households expecting prices to increase 2—4%.

than

—23—

Table 3
Coefficients for Price Expectations Variables*
CAS Data Set

Dependent
variable

PES

PE4

PE1

PE3

SA

348.63

98.66

336.62

36.42

tGB

14.42

13.89

43.83

13.76

CS

—494.18

75.07

234.66

—107.97

iP

—311.14

—300.83

—181.52

261.32

Si

366.26

69.71

262.70

12.92

S2

—133.19

133.95

490.66

—102.07

S3

413.68

—144.48

355.31

259.96

Definitions of variables:

SA: holdings of savings accounts

PE1: Prices expected to change

GB: holdings of government bonds

PE3:

CS: net purchases of common stock PE4:
IP: investment in property

U

II

II

"

2%

59%
10%

PE5: Too uncertain to say.

Si: tSA + 1GB
S2: tSA + LGB + ECS
S3: tSA + tGB + 1CS + IP

*

Numbers in the table represent deviations from the
PE2.

coefficient

for

The results in Table 3 can only be said to present a mixed picture.
On the one hand:
1).

The coefficients for PE1, PE3, and PE4
LCS

——

being

in

the equation for

negative, positivc, and positive, respectively,

and increasing in magnitude — imply that higher expected

inflation leads to increased investment in common stock,

which is in keeping with the traditional notion that common

stock is a good hedge against inflation.
.2).

The coefficients for PE5, being positive in the equations

•

for SA, GB, IP, Si, and S3, are consistent with

Juster view

the Katona—

34/
that uncertainty leads to increased saving.—

On the other hand, it seems implausible ever to have the coefficients for
PE1, PE3, and PE4 all with the same sign, since this implies a marked
and unusual nonlinearity in the effect

this

of price.expectations. However,

is seen tO be the case in the equations for SA, GB, IP., Si, and S3.

The central message of the results in Table 4, which has the CAS
household

grouped according to wealth, is that the effects of price

expectations

are not uniform with respect to wealth. For there is seen

to be substantial differences, not only in magnitude, but in sign as well,

in the coefficients for each component of investment across the three

wealth ciasses,1 Moreover, even within wealth classes, grouping does
The negative coefficient in the equation for CS might seem an
anomaly; however, to fice the stock market in the face of
uncertainty seems perfectly sensible behavior.
Among

-

-

other things, this casts doubt on the assumption, implicit

in the equations in Table Al in Appendix A and which undcriy Table
3, that the structure being estimated is liomogenous across wealth.

The proper procedure would

be to test this assumption as a hypothesis
in an analysj of covaricuce. IJowever, the dispariLy of standard
errors of the estimate (see the bottom of Table 42 in Appendix A) sigests
that the error variance is it:sclf not Cons tant
across now;enolds, arid
in view of this, I have refrained from undurtakjn'
a formal analysi S
of coviriance. At a minimum, it would appear t:hat the equations in

Table Al. for the sample as a whole may be plagued by heterosccdasticjtv.

—25—

Table 4
Coefficients for Price Expectations Variables
CAS Data Set*
Households Grouped By Asset Class
(t—ratlos in parentheses)

Dependent
variable

tSA

tCB

tICS

IP

Si

S2

Asset
class

PE1

PE3

PE4

PE5

1

—77.00

28.73

—38.73

51.46

2

550.06

264.69

320.65

—321.82

3

1754.31

327.38

1505.62

1113.65

1

5.36

3.49

40.10

5.86

2

—25.57

—31.90

—48.42

—40.77

88.64

—63.65

437.50

3

136.86

1

—105.41

—35.84

—24.81

—37.38

2

—631.67

142.00

1008.05

—283.69

3

4205.31

1221.02

—1896.17

—3089.25

1

—19.41

—363.96

271.92

—95.08

2

103.93

81.14

—140.50

—166.99

3

—6917.61

—2095.08

—3434.69

1

186.35

32.23

—70.63

57.34

2

524.36

232.77

272.33

—362.58

3

1890.11

415.92

1660.27

1551.09

1

—177.08

—3.61

—95.43

20.96

2

—107.31

375.01

1280.39

—646.27

3

—2314.21

1637.00.

—454.27

—1538.16

—196.48

—367.57

176.49

—75.11

2

—3.37

356.15

1139.89

—813.26

3

9231.82

—458.15

—3888.95

1043.74

•

1

S3

*

"

•

•

2581.90

Numbers in the table represent deviations from the coefficient for PE2.
Variables are as defined in Table 1.

—26—

not lead to much, if any, clarification of the results. There remain
many instances where PE1, PE3, and PE4 all have the same sign, and the

sign of PE5 is now seen to vary with the level of wealth. Indeed, the
view that uncertainty and saving are positively related receives unequivocal
support only in the equations for households with assets in excess of
$75,000.

As mentioned in footnote 20, the significance of the price expectations
dummy variables (taken as a group) can be tested through an analysis of

covariance. Equations are estimated with the dummy variables excluded and

with them included. An F—test is then undertaken on the resulting
reduction in the unexplained sum of squares. The results from this test
for the 7 CAS equations, with households grouped according to wealth, are

presented in Table 5. The numbers in this table are the observed F—ratios

testing the hypothesis that the coefficients of the price expectations

for

dummy variables listed in Table 4
as

are

significantly different from zero

a group
The

level

only equations with observed F—ratios significant at the 0.05

are seen to be for tiCS and S2 for households having assets between

$25,000 and $75,000. Price expectations are totally devoid of consequence
for households having assets under $25,000 (not one equation for these
households has an F—ratio exceeding 1) and are of only mild importance for
households with assets in excess of $75,000 (the F—ratio for IP for these

households

is significant at the 0.10

level).

For reasons that I

will

go

into in the concluding section, I find none of these results especially
implausible. Indeed,. the significant F—ratio in the equation for tiCS

strikes me

as quite an encouraging result.

—27—

Table 5

F—Ratios Associated With Test of Hypothesis
That Price Expectations Are A Significant
Predictor In CAS Equations

Asset

Equation

class

lISA

AGE

ACS

under $25,000

0.25

0.95

$25,000 — $75,000

1.50

0.68

over $75,000

0.66

0.72 . 1.24

Notes:

IP

Si

S2

S3

0.38

0.65

0.09

0.28

0.48

2.73*

0.10

1.42

2.91*

1.78

2.00

0.73

0.56

1.40

1). Equation headings are as defined in Table 3.
2). An asterisk denotes significance at 0.05.
3). Degrees of freedom as;ociated with the tests are (4, 1479),
(4, 1013), and (4, 150), respectively.

Let us now turn to the CU data set. The tabulation of the results
for this sample follows that for the CAS sample in that the coefficients
for only the price expectations variables are given here in the test and
results are presented for households grouped according to net worth as

well as for the entire sample. The relevant tables are Tables 6 and 7
and Tables A3 and A4 in Appendix A. Tables 6 and 7 follow Table 3 and
4, while Tables A3 and A4 contain the estimated equations in full and

•

thus parallel Tables Al and A2.

As already noted, the important conceptual difference (with regards
to the price expectations data) between the CU and CAS samples is

that,

—28—

whereas price expectations in the CAS sample refer to a single horizon
of 12 months, the data in this sample refer to multiple horizons of 5, 10,

and 20 years, respectively. However, equations utilizing the data for all
three horizons simultaneously have been estimated only for the entire sample;
only data for the 5—year horizon are used in the equations with the households
grouped according to wea1th.--' Like the CAS equations, the CU equations

have

been estimated with "too uncertain to guess" as the excluded price

expectations category, but the coefficients in Tables 6 and 7
expressed

are

as deviations from the coefficient of the category that contains

the modal expectations. Thus, in Table 6, the numbers listed represent
deviations from the coefficients of PE4, PEL2, and PELR2 for the 5, 10,

and 20 year horizons, respectively, hile in Table 7 they represent deviations from PE11 and PEF11.

Once agains, the results present a very mixed picture. Indeed,
the results in Table 6 for the sample as a whole present very little that

is positive. For the 5—year expectations, the signs and magnitudes of
the coefficients for PE1—PE8 imply price expectation effects that are

sufficiently non—linear to defy any plausible interpretation. The situation
is somewhat better for the 10—year expectations (cf. the coefficients for

PEL1, PEL3, and PEL4 in the equation for NW, which decrease in magnitude
with signs, +, —, and —), and best for the 20—year expectations, where PELR1

and PELR3 have opposite signs in all equations except the one for additions

to net worth. The signs of the coefficients for PE1 are positive for all
four equations, implying that households expecting prices to fall save more

The decision to forego exploration of the 10 and 20 year horizons in
the equations with households grouped by wealth was prompted str:ictly

by budgetary considerations.

—29—

than

those households expecting inflation of 1—2% per year. This Is

consistent with the

traditional

view discussed in Section II. Finally,

with regard to the category "too uncertain to guess" (PE9, PEL5, and
PELR4 for the 5, 10, and 20—year horizons, respectively), the coefficients
are of both signs, and there is no particular pattern one way or another.
The poor results for the sample as a whole may reflect in part
a breakdown of expectations into too many subintervals, and in the
equations with households grouped according to wealth, the number of
(5—year horizon) price expectations categories has been reduced to four.

However, as Table 7 shows, neither this procedure, the elimination of
the 10 and 20—year expectations, nor grouping all taken in combination,

leads to any marked clarification in 'the results. From a comparison of
coefficients across wealth classes in Table 7 (see also Table A4 in Appendix

A), it is clear that we once again have strong prima fade evidence of

nonhomogeneity of structure with respect to wealth. And

as

with the CAS

sample, the substantial variation in standard errors of the estimate,
seen at the bottom of Table A4, suggests that nonhomogeneity also extends
to error variances.

The variables PEF1, PEF1O, and PEF12 in Table 7 are interaction dummy
variables defined as the product of the price expectations dummy variables
with a dummy variable denoting whether a household was too uncertain to
guess

about its financial prospects over the next several yearsu1. As

discussed in Section IV, this represents an attempt to make the coefficients
for
.2i

the price expectations variables a function of the uncertainty with
See the end of Table 7 for precise definitions of these variables.
will be noticed that there is no PEF8 corresponding to PE8. This
because there were no households in the sample with expectations
of more than 40% inflation (over the next five years) and too
uncrtain to assess their financial prospects.

It
is

—30—

which the expectations are held. Consistency with the hypothesis that
requires the coefficients of PEi and PEFI
motivates this procedure

(i = 1, 10, 12) to have opposite signs. Of the 36 pairs of PEi and PEFi
in the table, 20 have this disparity in sign, while 16 do not. The hypotheses
thus receives little support.

VI. Empirical Results II: Evidence From the Quarterly Flow—of—Funds
In this section, we turn our, attention to an analysis of aggregate

time—series data from the quarterly flow—of—funds accounts that are published by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
While our primary interest here will still be in price expectations and
their effects on saving and its composition, the reduced size of the
time—series equations makes it feasible to include the predictors other
than price expectations in the discussion.

1. The Model, Data, and Methods of Estimation
The model underlying the time—series analysis is as follows:

•

•y-a0.+ lSHt_l + 2SDti +
+ a7CC_i + a8LP + a9TPt +

+ a4SBt_i + a5DDi + a6SA1

÷

+ ai2PE + a13PA1

+ cLl4R + ai5LC + u,

See the discussions surrounding expression (6) and (10) above.
Other analyses of the flow—of—funds data include Houthakker and Taylor
(1970), Motley (1970), and Wachtel (1972).

—31—

where:

y =

a measure of saving to be defined below

SH

depreciated stock of residential housing less the mortgage debt
on the stock

SD

depreciated stock of durable goods

SB market value of stocks and bonds owned by households (hereafter
referred to as corporate wealth)

DD = demand deposits and currency owned by households
SA =

savings and time deposits owned by households

CC = consumer debt owed by households
LP =

labor

TP =

transfer

SI

personal contributions to social insurance

T =

and property income

personal

payments made to individuals

tax and nontax payments

PE = a measure of price expectations

PA = percentage increase in the implicit deflator for personal
consumption expenditure during the preceding 4 quarters
R ='

market rate of interest

-

LC = a vector of points on the age distribution of the population

u = random error term.
Detailed definitions of all variables and their sources are given in

Appendix B. Like the models used with the micro data sets, the model in
(11) is based on the model discussed in Section III. The quantities
comprising net worth, Sil, SD, SB, DD, SA, and CC, represent objective

state variables, PE represents a subjective state variable and the

•

— No attempt has been made to include state variables representing the

psychological stocks arising from habit formation in consumption. To
do so would require formulating a model in which saving and coisumption
are determined jointly and is beyond the scope of the present effort.

—32—

income variables LP, TP, SI, and T, PA, and R represent objective market

Finally, LC represents

quantities.

a vector of demographic characteristics,

in this case is confihed to points on the age distribution of the

which

population.

The price expectations variable employed is based on data

collected

quarterly by the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan
and is

defined as the difference between the proportion of surveyed

households

expecting prices in the year ahead to increase minus the

proportion expecting prices to decrease divided by the sum of these two
proportions.

Thus defined, PE is a quantity that necessarily lies

between —l and 1, being positive when more households expect prices
to rise than to fall and negative when the reverse is true.
Personal disposable income, it will be noticed, is disag—
gregated to four components ——

the

sum of labor and property income,

transfer payments, personal contributions to social insurance, and

personal taxes. This disaggregation, which is motivated by the findings
in Taylor (l97l),-" is based on the breakdown appearing in Table 2.1 of
the National Income Accounts, but with two modifications. The first
is minor and involves the addition to labor and property income of

government insurance payments and capital gains distributions. The
purpose of this simply is to bring the NIA data into line with FOF

definitions. The seóond modification is more substantive and involves
The question asked respondents is whether they expect the prices
of things they buy in the next 12 months to go up, go down, or

remain the same. Prior to 1959, the ttthingstt in question referred
to household goods, appliances, and clothing. Beginning in 1959
reference wa to the things that the houshold buys in general. For
discussion of theeUect of this change, see Juster and Wachtel (1972a).
Beginning in 1966, households were asked to provide point estimates

of their expectations. Prior to this, they just were asked whether
they expected prices to decrease a lot, decrease a little, remain the
same, increase a
(1972a,

convert

little, or increase a lot. Unlike Juster and Wachtel
1972b) or DeNenil and Bhalla (1973), I have not attempted to
the pre—1966 data to point estimates.

—33—

eliminating from disposable income components based on imputation. Details
are given in Appendix B. Since housholds may view changes in the market
value of their holdings of stocks and bonds as income, even though only
a part of the gains (or losses) may be realized, the current change

in SI,

as well as its beginning of period level, is also included as a predictor.
Finally, depending upon the variable being explained, two different series
have been used for the interest rate, namely, the yield on Baa bonds and
the yield on savings accounts.

The analysis is quarterly and covers a sample period beginning with
the first quarter of 1954 and ending with the fourth quarter of 1970.

The data on savings and income are all taken from either the Flow—of—Funds

or else from the National Income Accounts. All flows are seasonally
adjusted and are expressed at annual rates in billions of current dollars.
The asset variables are also based upon data from the Flow—of—Funds,
and are measured at the end of the preceding period in billions of current

dollars. These, too, are seasonally adjusted where appropriate. Estiration
has been by ordinary least squares, excepj for four equations which have
been estimated using the Cochrane—Orcutt transformation as a correction

for apparent autocore1ation in the error term. Finally, there are several
equations which involve a distributed lag, and these have been estimated
on the assumption that the parameters of the distributed lag lie on a
third degrca polynomial, using the LaGrangian method of interpolation
developed by Almon (1965).

2. Summary and Evaluation of Time—Series Results
Equations have been estimated for 14 different items appearing in the

—34--

household sector of the quarterly Flow—of—Funds, and are tabulated in

Table 8. The

variabes

involving a distributed lag are denoted by an

asterisk, and the coefficient given in Table 8 in these cases represents
the

sum of the lag coefficients. The lag coefficients themselves are

presented in Table 9. Finally, the coefficients for just t'he

variables

inflation

are tabulated in Table 10.

Brief definitions of the dependent variables are as follows

PS

personal saving

NS =

net

CS

gross saving

CI =

gross investment

CE

capital expenditures

saving

NFI= net financial investment
CD =

expenditures for durable goods

uN =

investment

in housing

NAF =

net

acquisition of financial assets

NIL =

net

increase in liabilities

DD holdings of demand deposits and currency
SA =

holdings

CC

change in consumer debt

of savings and time deposits

ID = change in installment debt.

For the independent variables not already defined:

42/

Rl =

yield

on Baa bonds

R2 =

yield

on savings accounts

Al =

percentage of population of age 20 to 30

Complete definitions are given in Appendix B.

—35—

percentage

AA1

of population of age 20 to 25

A2

percentage of population of age 30 to 40

AA2

= percentage of population of age 25 to 40

A3 =

percentage of population of age 40 to 50

A4

percentage of population of age 50 to 65.

The first three equations in Table 8 refer to concepts of saving of
varying comprehensiveness, while the last eleven refer to household invest—

mentand its most important components. The first equation (PS) refers to
personal saving as defined in the National Income Accounts, which is
composed of net purchases of owner—occupied dwellings and buildings of
non—profit organizations, less depreciation, plus net investment in

financial assets. For present purposes, however, the NIA definition of
personal saving has been augmented with two quantities from the Flow—of—
Funds, namely, credits from government insurance and capital gains

dividends. The second equation is for net saving (NS), which consists of
personal saving (as just defined) plus expenditures for durable goods

net of depreciation. This definition of saving is of interest because of
its

close correspondence (ai least in principle) with the definition of

saving implicit in the permanent income and life—cycle models. Gross
saving

(CS) is the most comprehensive concept analyzed and consists of

net saving plus depreciation on residential housing, durable goods, and

the capital stock of nonprofit organizations. Study of this quantity is
of importance because, in relation to personal and net saving, it best
represents the full impact of the household sector's saving and investment
decisions on the economy.,

On the investment side of the household ledger, the most comprehensive
concept analyzed is gross investment (Cl), which consists of capital

—36--

Table

8

Equations

Quarterly Flow—of—Funds
(t—ratios in parenthcses)
qt1Ition
Ld cp c nd

ri1e -

cut

Dnstant

PS

—372.46
(—3.18)

—331.99

—215.65
(—2.01)

(—3.06)
(1.5')

—0.32

—0.20

(—3.52)

(—5.46)

(—2.45)

—0.014

—0.021

—0.014

(—1.53)

(—2.72)

(—1. 7Q)

—0.23

SB

1'

CE

C'

Cs

NS

(—1.79)

0.16*
(5.11)
—0.034
(—2 .

—0.11

—0.10

(—1.24)

(—1.04)

—0.43

—0.35

—0.84

(—2.64)

(—2.18)

I

0.80*
(3.15)

0.35
(4.72)
•

1.•01

(5.72)

—2.23

0.58

(9.22)

0.60.
(10.54)

0.74
(5.63)

0.89
(6.67)

1.12

—1.28 -

—1.30

—1.53

0.52

•
•

(—4.14)

(—2.86)

(—2.74)

—0.72

—0.85

—0.90

—0.78

(—13.07)

•

0.16
(7.83)
'

—0 21

(—1.59)

(—1.54)

(—7.94)

—0.47

(—1.66)

5.83

5.05

(2.98)

(3.59)

(3.13

11.83
(3.20)

0.70

0.63

2.30

(4.24)
1.44

(5.8a)

—1.03

(—5.35)

(—11.23)

6.38

0.2

2.99
(1.20)

'I . 35
(1.

7J)

.

3.76
(3.95)

Table 8 continued
S

—37—

S

1Ud.'p&'LidCflt

'-riab1c

PS

— NS

CS

CT

Ri

Ci:

—4.40

(—2.02)
R2

(-3.39)

S

-

Al

2.20

(1.70)

6.46

7.61

4.58

(6.07)

(5.16)

(2.12)

AA1

1.86
(2.88)

A2

A3

A4

10.70
(4.46)

(—1.43)

31.89

27.55

(2.77)

(2.65)

—19.10
(—3.72)

—2.78

—14.83
(—3.17)

-

7.00
(—1.60)

—4.82
(—2.97)

48.65
(4.31)'

—23.36
(—4.46)
-.

K

0.989

0.995

0.999

0.990

0.994

0.889

0.52
Se

1.52

Dw

DF

/

Notes:

1.29

3.34

1.63

2.29

2.04

2.08

2.68

1.85

32.41

40.34

95.04

98.17

81.90

49

54

1). An asterisk indicates that

52

56

53

this variable

19.20
59

has been estimated with a ditri—
presented represents the sum of tLc lag
coefficients; the lag coefficients themselves are given in Table .

buted lag. The

2).

.

1.32

coefficient

The equations with an entry for
Cochrane—Orcutt transformation.

have been estimated using the

—38—

Table

8 continued

equation
independent
v.riah1c

— CD

constant

—215.87
•

UN

NAF

NIL

Dl)

SA

736.23

(—3.06)

(5.15)

S 1{

0.21
(2.47)

SB

0.085*
(3.14)

0.052*
(3.56)

0.038

0.048*
(3.51)

(1.77)

SB

(3.47)

—0.017
(—1.02)

0.62
(7.74)
SA

cc

Li'

0.10
(2.17)
—0.24

—0.60*

—2.03

(—1.49)

(—3.44)

(—4.85)

0.15
(5.17)

0.049
-

(1.67)

TP

—1.98
(—6.56)

0.56

012

0.11

0.16

(3.42)

(1.70)

(3.69)

(3.00)

1.00

0.72
(4.89)

(3.76)

SI

—1.61
(—1.69)

T

PE

•

3.02
(1.48)

1.35
(1.19)

—1.015
(—3.65)

—0.70

0.14

(—3.98)

(2.55)

10.53
(2.34)

5.40
(1.88)

—39-.

S

Table 8 continued

equation
.ndcpcndeflt

jriable

NAF

HN

CD

2.73
(2.97)

NIL

SA

DD

—0.95
(—1.45)

—6.88
(—3.53)

—4.51

4.35

(—3.23)

(1.24)

12.22

6.51

.

(2.99)

—22.32
(—6.43)

(—1].19)

19.53

—17.61

(6.37)

(—2.31)

(2.17)

2.07
(1.50)

-2.20

—5.46

(—2.85)

(—3.58)

(3.00)

(4.06)

15.33

7.63

16.86

(3.80)

—8.56
(—2.88)

6.74
(2.68)

0.996

0.894

0.952

0.853

0.39

0.998

0.999

0.46

0.66
1.82

1.31

0.74

3.86

2.91

0.99

1.70

1.74

2.55

2.22

1.88

59.12

22.78

41.02

22.21

78.04

50

49

56

56

55

225:15
53

—40-

Table

equation

indepndcnt
variable

CC

8 continued

.
Eaut ion

0

ID

independent

variable

constant

A2

Si!

AA2

CC

ID

—3.04

—2.44

(—7.90)

(—7.52)

0.887

0.895

1.17

1.00

1.96

1.86

5.89

4.85

54

55

SD

A3
SB
A4.

R2

_0.93*

—0.81

(—6.94)

(—7.04)

Se

0.20

0.20

DW

(5.63)

(7.55)

—0.23
(—3.56)

0.270
(—5.30)

—0.93
(—3.33)

—0.94
(—4.91)

0

1, l
(1.38)

R2

8.15

(5.48)

5.54
(5.11)

DF

—41—

Table 9
Distributed Lag Coefficients
For Equations In Table 1
(t—ratios in parentheses)

oqua—
lion

var—

______

______

Libie

t

CC

CE

CD

EN

SB
SB

SB

t—l

t—2

t—3

t—5

—0.25

0.07

0.30

0.38

0..ltO

(—0.57)

(0.30)

(1.]8)

(4.22)

(1.21)

0.031

0.038

0.037

0.030

0.020

0.0:1)

(2.28)

(4.44)

(5.33)

(5.10)

(3.86)

(2.57)

(1.. G3)

—0.010

0.001

0.010

0.015

0.017

0.018

0.016

0.012

0.0

(—1.57)

(0.36)

(2.22)

(3.38)

(4.25)

(4.26)

(3.43)

(2.57)

(1..

—0.003

0.006

0.012

0.015

0.014

(—0.72)

(1.63)

(3.37)

(4.40)

(3.68)

0.009
(2.72)

—0.14

—0.12

—0.12

CC

—0.092

—0.022

1.23

—2.41

—0.061
(—0.80)

—0.11

(—3.95) (—2.41) (—1.5)

—0.79

(1.62) (—2.18) (—1.24)

LSB

CC

CC

0.018

0.012

0.008

0.006

0.004

(3.50)

(2.57)

(2.10)

(1.50)

(0.86)

0.044

0.016

0.014

0.021

0.022

(4.54)

(1.73)

(1.5.8)

(2.26)

(2.33)

—0.64

—0.69

—0.25

0.48

(1.52) (—3.58) (—3.68) (—5.22)
CC

i—i

0.014

(—0.61) (—0.66) (—0.23)

JSB

t—6

—0.015
(—1.87)

CC

NIL

t—4

—0.61
—0.70
—0.26
(2.19) (—3.99) (—4.33) (—6.37)
0.59

0.17
(1.07)

0.17
(1.22)

—42—

expenditures (CE) and net financial investment (NFl). In principle,
gross investment and gross saving should always be equal, but, like
National Income and Net National Product in the

National

Income Accounts,

they are separated by a statistical discrepancy which frequently reaches

$5 billion or more. Further disaggregation takes capital expenditures
into expenditures for durable goods (CD) and gross investment in housing
(FIN), while net financial investment is decomposed into net acquisition

of financial assets (NAF) and net increase in liabilities (NIL). Finally,
equations have also been estimated for demand deposits and currency held
by households (DD), savings and time deposits (SA), the net increase in
consumer credit (AID).

Price expectations. Of particular interest to the present under—
taking is the importance of the variable representing price expectations.
Indeed, the results (see Table 10), especially for the equations for personal,

net, and gross saving and gross investment, in all of which the t—rat
for PE is 2.9 or higher, leave little question but what expectations of

inflation lead housholds to increase the amount they save. This corroborates
the recent results of Juster and Wachtel (1972a) and the earlier findings of
Mueller (1959) and, of course, is consistent wi.th the Katona—Juster thesis

that inflation increases the uncertainty with which households view the

future and leads them to increase their saving. Moreover, the equations
f or capital expenditures, expenditures for durable goods, the net

acquisition of financial assets, and the acquisition of consumer debt
all point to the positive effect of expected inflation on saving as being
uniform across asset categories

While PE is absent from the equation explaining the level of demand
deposits, the variable's impact, when included as a predictor, was

negative but with a t—ratio less than one. In contrast, whcn PE
was included in he cquation for savings accounts, its coefficients
was positive, but again with a t—ratio less than one.

-.43—

Table

S

10

Coefficients On Expected And Actual
Price Changes
Time—Series Equations
(t—ratios in parentheses)

Decident
Var

able

PS

Dependent
PE
6.38

PA

—

Variable
uN

(2.98)

NS

Cs

CI

0.70

5.83
(3.59)

(1.72)

5.05

0.63

(3. 13)

(1.54)

11.83

—

NAP

PE
1.35
(1.19)

10.53
(2.34)

NIL

(1.88)

(—1.45)

DD

(1.20)

—

NFl
cn

4.38
(1.75)

3.76
(3.95)

£CC

3.02

-—

41D

(1.48)

(2.97)
—0.95

SA

2.99

)£.. I.7..J

5.40

(3.20)

CE

PA

1.71
(1.38)

—44—

Inflation in the recent past. Although it does not do so with the
frequency and gusto of PE, inflation in the recent past, as represented
in the variable PA, is seen to appear in several equations.

My idea for

including this variable in the model was that it would capture a real—

balance effect on money—denominated financial assets. Inflation reduces
the real value of such assets and, to the extent that inflation was not
anticipated, my hypothesis was that households will increase current saving

so as to make up the loss. I originally set out to incorporate this into
the model directly through a distributed lag on the real change in households' holdings of demand deposits and savings accounts. However, the
lag coefficients were very unstable, and the approach was abandoned in
favor of a four—quarter moving

average of the percentage change in the PCE

deflator.

PA appears with a positive sign in the equations for NS, CS, CI, NFl,
and NAF and with a negative sign in the equation for NIL ——
is in keeping with the hypothesized real—balance effect.

all

of which

Still, the

hypothesis would have received more impressive support had PA also
appeared (with positive sign) in the equation for savings accounts.

Effect of wealth. It is a well—established implication of the

Modigljanj—Brberg life—cycle model that saving will be negatively related
to the level of wealth. Existing studies, however, have tended to
concentrate on wealth as a whole and have not paid much attention to
the possibility that the effect of wealth on saving is different

depending upon the type of wealth involved. The results presented in
Table 8 suggest that differential effects

are definitely present, not only

on total saving, but 'on Its disposition as well. Iideed, the only item

analyzed

for which wealth in some form is absent altogether is savings

—45—

44/
accounts.—

Of the components of wealth that have been considered, the ones that
appear with greatest frequency are corporate wealth, often as a distributed
lag on capital gains, and the existing level of consumer debt, the latter,

of course, being a liability rather than an asset. The stock of durable
goods appears in the three equations for saving (PS, NS, and GS), but
rather surprisingly not in the equations for gross investment, capital

expenditures, or expenditures for durable goods. The housing stock shows
up in the equations for gross saving (although with what would appear to
be the wrong sign) and gross investment, but not, as would be expected,
in the equations for capital expenditures and residential construction.

Surprisingly, in fact, in the equation for capital expenditures, no real
components of wealth appear as predictors at all.

With regard to corporate wealth, the results clearly support the thesis

that the stock market, through generation of capital gains and losses,

has an influence on saving and consumption. However, because of the fact
that realized capital gains are not included in disposable income, care
must be taken in interpreting the quantitative strength of this influence.
We can derive the effect of a capital gain on consumption, but paradoxically

we cannot do this for saving, properly measured. From the equation for
gross saving, a dollar áf capital gain is seen to lead to about a two cents
increase in consumption, the latter being defined as the sum of expenditures

or nondurables and services. That this is so follows from the fact that
GS, consumption, and disposable income are connected by an identity.
However, since realized capital gains do not appear in disposable income,
the true effect on saving will not be given by the.decrease in CS, but will
44/

However

this absence may be more apparent than real because of an
extremely strong trend underlying the dependent variable, which led to
the exclusion of the beginning—of—period level of savings accounts
from the equation finally estimated.

—46—

in fact be an increase in consumption. To

illustrate, if there is a

capital gain of $1 of which $.50 is realized, then, again from the equation

for gross saving, consumption will increase by $.02 and true saving by
$.48, although gross saving in the

of $.02. Two

conclusions

Flow—of—FundS would indicate a decrease

thus emerge:

1). The impact of capital gains appears to fall much more on saving
than on consumption; and

2). Because of the fact that realized capital gains arenot included
in disposable income, the measures of saving based on NIA definitions
will considerably understate changes in saving, properly defined,
in periods of marked realization of capital gains or losses.I'
The rather small effect on consumption that has just been noted is

counter to the substantial wealth effects that Nodigliani and hi
associates are currently finding in the consumption sector of the NIT—Penn
—SSRC (MPS)

However, the

following

should be kept in mind in

assessing this apparent contradiction:

1). Although the two models have many elements in common, they also
have points of divergence. Wealth is treated as an aggregate in
the MPS mOdel, but is disaggregated here; disposable income is

disaggregated here; the NPS

model contains no terms embodying

expectations; and, interestingly enough, the present model,
through the inclusion of points on the age structure of the
population, contains life—cycle features that the MPS

model

does

not.

There is one other important implication of the way that capital ga:Lns
realized capital
are treated in the National Income Accounts. \hile the
capital gains
fains arc not included in personal income, taxes on

therefore NIA
are included in personal taxes. Disposable income——and
This
can
account for
saving——is thus reduced by the amount of the tax.
which
is larger
the coefficient on T in the equations for total saving
absolute value) than the one on LP.
46/ (in
(1971).
Sec
Modigliani

—47—

2).

There is also a difference, which may possibly be of consequence,
in the corporate wealth series used in the two models. The
procedure here has been to take FOP year—end levels and interpolate
them to quarterly

Stock

Prices.

levels using the

Standard and Poor Index of

The MPS model, in contrast, uses a corporate wealth

series constructed by capitalizing net dividends from the
National Income Accounts by the Standard and Poor Index of
Dividend Yields±.ZJ

Although there are numerous instances of absence of components of
wealth from the equations in Table 8, cases of perverse sign on those

included are rather few. The housing stock has a positive coefficient
in the equation for gross aving, but in view of the fact that this sign
is reversed in the equation for gross investment, this may reflect mainly

on the quality of the underlying data for saving. The stock of durable
goods has a positive sign in the equation explaining the net increase in
liabilities, which seems somewhat strange, but the most puzzling sign is

the one on CC. Frequently, the level of consumer debt appears with a
distributed lag, which is reasonable given that much of consumer debt

is subject t well—defined schedules of repayment, and coefficients
on CC beginning two quarters in the past almost invariably have

the expected sign (see Table 9)•/ But this is usually not the case
for the sign on CC1. While a negative sign in t—l can be rationalized

For a discussion of the MPS methodology, see Modigliani (1971, p. 13).

—

48/

For a model of aggregate consumption and saving that takes the
extension of consumer credit as its point of departure, see Burress
(1972).

—48—

somewhat in those equations in which expenditures for durable goods form
part of the dependent variable, the positive sign in t—l in the equations
involving liabilities as the dependent variable seems a genuine anomaly.--"
Saving out of different types of income. The results presented in
Table 8 corroborate in every major detail the findings reported in my BPEA

paper with respect to the disaggregation of personal income.-' In partic—
ular, they continue to show a very high short—run marginal propensity to
save out of transfer payments and very substantial negative coeficients on
personal contributions to social insurace and personal taxes.
results obtained here offer no insight as to

While the

the short—run marginal

propensity to save out of transfer income is higher than out of labor and

property Income, they do throw some light on where households channel this

higher saving. The equations for NAP and SA Indicate that it is into
financial assets and into savings accounts in particular'
Finally, it is worthy to note that the results do offer some insight into
the fact that the coefficient on personal taxes is larger (in absolute value)

than the one on labor and property income. For, as indicated in footnote 44,

—

50/

One extenuating circumstance may be the use of a fixed—weight distributed lag when one of variable weights is in order.

The differences between the model used here and the one in the BPEA
paper are as follows: (1) only NIA personal saving was analyzed there;
(2) wealth is disaggregated here and the components introduced explicitly
as predictors; (3) capital gains were ignored in the BPEA paper; (4)
the BPEA model also ignored expectations and the age structure of the
population; (5) the saving and income data used here are free of mput—
ations; and (6) the data used in the BPEA data were expressed in 1958
dollars.

Needless to say, It cannot be deduced from aggregate time—series data
alone whether the higher observed short—run marginal propensity to
save out of transfer income is intricsic to transfer income, or whether
it is a phenomenon arising from aggregation across households with
different marginal propensities to save. The negative coefficient on
TP in the equation for capital expenditures, though, suggests that
it might be the latter. It was hoped at the outset that the results
from the CAS data set would shed some light on this question, but
this has not been the case.

—49—

it would appear to be accounted for, at least in part, by the inclusion in
personal taxes of the taxes paid on capital gains.

Age structure of the population. The discussion of the results with
respect to the age distribution of the population will be facilitated by
the summary of the impact of age on saving and portfolio coiiposition that

is set out in Table 10. This table provides the signs of the several age—
distribution variables in each of the equations. A blank indicates that
the variable in question is absent.

Table 10

Signs of Age Structure Variables
In Time—Series Equations
Age Group'

Equation

20—25

20—30

PS

+

NS

+

CS

+

CI

+

CE

25—40

30—40

40—50

+

+

+

+

NFl
CD

+

+

HN
NAP

+

NIL
DD
(

+

SA
CC

+

ID

+

50—65

—50-•

The features of note are as follows:

1). Households whose heads are very young——age 20 to 30—-- save more
than average. This would appear to corroborate the point made
by Tobin and Dolde (1971) that young households are forced to
save more than would be expected by strict life—cycle considerations because of imperfections in the capital market.

2). Households in the age group 30—40 are indicated to save,, less than
average. Interestingly, the "dissaving" appears especially to
surface in the holding of financial assets, particularly savings

accounts. That the saving of this age group tends to be les
than average conforms wjth general observation, but it is not
in keeping with the life—cycle model in which only age is taken
into account.

52/

3). Considerably greater than average saving is exhibited by the
40—50 age group. This, too, accords with general observation,

in

and also with the fact that peak of earning potential, is ,
general, reached in the forties.

4). The 50—65 age group, on the other hand, is indicated to be
relative dissavers. While this is in keeping with the life—
cycle model, I nevertheless find it somewhat unexpected, since
casual
65

observation suggests that the 10

to 15 years before age

are years of conscious saving for retirement.

5). Finally, it is to be noticed that the equations for which
appears

—

age

to be of no consequence at all are net investment in

this result is in keeping with an extended version of the
life—cycle model in which family composition as well as age is taken

However,

into

account. See Stafford and Dunkelberg (1969).

—51—

financial assets and the holdings of demand deposits. However,
neither of these results seems particularly surprising.

VII. Conclusions and General Discussion
The findings with respect to price expectations cluster at two extremes.

The time—series results unambiguously point to price expectations having an
impact on the amount that households save and on the way that they structure

their portfolios. In particular, the time—series results show that
expectations of inflation lead households to save more. The results from
the two micro dat sets, in contrast, are weak and mixed. The CAS results provide
mild support for the Katona—Juster hypothesis and, in addition, suggest
that price expectations are of most consequence to households of moderate

wealth. On the other hand, nothing conclusive at all emerges from the CU
sample.

The relationship between the saving and portfolio decisions of a
household and its expectations regarding inflation obviously involves a set
of issues that is too complex to come fully to grips with in a study as

limited as that reported hered Many of these issues have been ignored
altogether——such as whether higher (or lower) prices anticipated by a
household are expected to be permanent or only temporary——while others,
such as a]1owing for the confidence with which a household holds its
expectations, have been taken into account only cErudely and indirectly. Yet,

the present undertaking has, in my opinion, led to positive results. First,
and foremost, it provides fairly convincing evidence that individual price
expectations are a factor to be taken seriously no matter how ill—founded

the expectations 2se may appear to an outsider.
Secondly, and of no less importance, I find in Table 5 that price

—52—

expectations are of greater importance to households of moderate wealth,
as

opposed to poor or very wealthy households, on the whole, to Iflake sense.

For the most part, households with little wealth lack the scope to he niuch

affected by expectations of inflation. Imperfect capital markets preclude
their undertaking many transactions, and high transactions costs limit their
interest in undertaking others. Consequently, these households arc much
more likely

inflation
hand,

to react to inflation that

has already occurred as opposed to

that they expect to occur. Wealthy households, on the

other

can either afford to ignore price expectations altogether or, what is

more likely, can place their portfolio decisions in the hands of
professionals whose expectations, rather than their own, are the ones that

are relevant. Finally, for householdswith moderate wealth, their portfolio
is sufficiently large to provide a return to its active management, but not

large enough to be placed in the hands of professionals.
Finally, it has become increasingly clear through the course of the
study that the price expectations data that have been analyzed are

markedly deficient. I do not mean this as criticism of the surveys from
which the tiata were obtained——these surveys were designed for purposes other

than the analysis of price expectations——but only in tens of lessons for

the future. In particular:
1). Analysis of the price expectations data in both the CAS and CU
samples indicates that the distribution of price expectations
data vàriës markedly depending upon which member of the house-

hold was queried." Clearly, the expectations that are relevant
are those of the one responsible for the decisions that are made.
Future endeavors in collecting price expectations data must
53/

I

am grateful to Donald Heckerman of the University of Arizona
for being sufficiently curious to undertake this analysis purely
the interest of science.

in

—53—

accordingly make certain that the expectations obtained are
those of the decision—maker(s).

2). Efforts should also focus on obtaining estimates of the

with

confideace

which price expectations are held. The iinpotance of

obtaining this additional information in a usable form cannot
be overestimated.

3). Finally, future endeavors should also elicit inforxnation on
whether near—term price changes are expected to be permanent:
or only temporary.

•

References

Almon, S. (1965), "The Distributed Lag Between Capital Appropriations and
Expenditures", Econometrica, Vol. 33, January 1965.
Brown, T.M. (1952), "Habit Persistence and Lags in Consumer )3ehavior,
Econometrica, January 1952.
Burress, G.E. (1972), "A Contribution to Forecasting Personal Saving: 1967—
1974", School of Commerce and Finance, St. Louis University.

Cagan, P. (1965), The Effect of Pension Plans on Agrcgate Saving:
Evidence From A Sample Survey, Occasional Paper No. 95, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
deMenil, G. and Bhalla, 5. (1973), "Popular Price Expectations",
Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Duesenberry, J.S. (1949), Income, Saving, and the Theory of Consumer
Behavior, Harvard University Press.
Fair, R.C. (1971), "Consumer Sentiment, The Stock Market, and Consumption
Function", Econometric Research Program Research Memorandum No. 119,
Princeton University, January 1971.
Gibson, W.E. (1970), "Price Expectations Effects on Interest Rates",
Journal of Finance, March (1970).

—54—

Gordon,

R.J. (1970), "The Recent Acceleration of Inflation and Its
Lessons for the Future", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

No. 1, 1970.

Gordon, R.J. (1971a), "Inflation in Recession and Recovery", Brookin
Papers

on Economic Activy, No. 1, 1971.

Houthakker, U.S. and Taylor, L.D. (1970), Cbnsumcr Demand In The Unitcr1 States,
Second Edition, Harvard University Press.
Explanation and Predictions",
Hymans, S.H. (1970), "Cpnsumer Durable Spending:
1970.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2,

J., and Stoterau, T. (1969), "Ex—Ante ]iousehold
savings Data: Some Preliminary Results", American Statistical
Association, 1969 Proceedings of the Business and Economic Stati;—
Section.

Juster, T.F., McNeil,

tical

Juster, T., and Wachtel, P. (1972a), "Inflation and the Consumer",
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1972.

Juster, T.F. and Wachtel, P. (l972b), "A Note on Inflation and the Saving
Rate", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, 1972.
Katona, G. (1960), The Powerful Consumer, McGraw—Hill Publishing Co.
Leland, H.E. (1968), "Saving and Uncertainty: The Precautionary
Demand for Money", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Augusc 1968.
D. and Srinivasan, T.N. (1969), "Optimal Savings Under Uncertainty",
Review of Economic Studies, April 1969.

Levhari,

Mirman, L.J. (1971), "Uncertainty and Optimal Consumption Decisions",
Econometrica, January 1971.
Modigliani, F. (1971), "Monetary Policy and COnsumptiOn", in Consumer
Spending and Monetary Policy: The Linkages, Conference Series No.
5, The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Motley, B. (1970), "Household Demand for Assets: A Model of Short—Run
Adjustment", Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LII, No.

August

3,

1970.

Mueller, E. (1959), "Consumer Reactions to Inflation", Quarterly Journal
of Economics, Vol. LXXII, May 1959.
Muth, J.F. (1961), "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements",
Econometrica, May 1961.
M. (1958), Distributed Lags and Demand AnyiS, Agricultural
Handbook No. 141, u.s. Government Printing Office.

Nerlove,

.

-55-

Peterson,

R.L. and Dunkelberg, W.C. (1971), "Short—Run Fluctuations in
Aggregate Savings Rates," Graduate School of Business, Stanford
University.

Pyle, D.H. (1972), "Observed Price Expectations and Interest Rates", Revicw
of Economics and Statistics, August 1972.

Sandmo, A. (1970), "The Effect of Uncertainty on Saving Decisions", Rcvew
of Economic Studies, July 1970.
Sargent, T. (1972), "Anticipated Infiat:[on and the Nominal Rate of Intercst",
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Nay 1972.

Sargent, T. (1973a), "What do Regressions of Interest on Inflation Show",
Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, July 1973.

Stafford, F. and Dunkelberg, W.C. (1969), "The Cost of Financing Autoobile
Purchases", Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LI, November 1969.

Taylor, L.D. (1971), "Saving Out of Different Types of Income," Brookin
Papers on Economic Activity, No. 1, 1972.
Tob"in, J. and Dolde, W.C. (1971), "Wealth, Liquidity, and Consumption' in
Consumer Spending and Monetary Policy: The Linkages, Conference Series
No. 5, The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.

Turnovsky, S.J. (1969), "A Bayesian Approach to
Journal of Economic Theory, August 1969.

the THeory

of Expectations',

Turnovsky, S.J. (1972a), "The Expectations Hypothesis and the Aggregate Vage
Equation: Some Empirical Evidence for Canada", Economicn,

February

1972.

Turnovsky, S.J. and Wachter, M.L. (l972b), "A Test of the 'Expectations
Hypothesis' Using Directly Observed Wage and Price Expectations",
Review of Economics and Statistics, February 1972.
Wachtel, P. (1972), "A Model of Interrelated Demand for Assets by Households",
Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, Vol. 1, No.2, 1972.

—56—

Appendix A
Estimated Equations For CAS and CU Data Sets

.
Glossary For
Tables Al and A2

SA:

Holdings of savings accounts

GB:

Holdings of government bonds

tCS:

Net purchases of common stock

IF:

Investment in property

Si:

tSA + tB

S2:

tSA + CB +

S3:

LISA +

CS:

Market value of common stock holdings

OVH:

Original purchase price of home

UND:

Mortgage debt on home

NCO:

Number of cars owned

Sd:

(1

(investment in fixed claims)

ACS (investment in financial assets)

AGB + 1S +

IF (change in total assets)

if first car needs repair

(0 otherwise

(i if second car needs repair
SC2:

10

otherwise.

(i if family owns stove, refrigerator, washing machine and
black and white TV

uDi:

f

0 otherwise

(i

if family owns clothes dryer or dishwaaher or room

air conditioner

HD2:

O otherwise
11
111)3:

S

(0

if family. owns color TV or hi—f i or musical
instrument
otherwise

—b,—

.
WS1:

Wage and salary income of first income receiver

"
"

"

"

WS2:

WS3:

"

" second income receiver

" third

ID:

Interest and dividend income

RI:

Rental income

CI:

Gifts and inheritances

BI:

Business income

SS:

Social security

P1:

Pension income

01:

Other income

CCII:

Unrealized capita], gains on home

"

"

CCVII:

f if

f

"

vacation home

household holds a life insurance policy with surrender value

LI:

La otherwise
DY:

Change in

IID:

Installment

Al:

family

income expected in 1968

debt payments

during 1967

Ii if household head's age is less than 30
(0

otherwise

Ii if household head's age is between 30 and 39
A2:

A3:

(0

otherwise

fi

if household head's age is between

10

otherwise

40 and 54

(1 if household head's age is between 55 and 64

A4:

(0

otherwise

—58-

.
(1
Eli:

E12:

(a

otherwise

(i

If head's education is 1—3 years of high school

:

10

otherwise

11

if head's

0

otherwise

fi

If head's

E113:

E114:

if head's education is 8 years or less

(

¶)

EH5:

education is 4

years

of high school

education is 1—3 years of college

1O

otherwise

(1

if head's education is 4 or more years of college

4

10 otherwIse
[i.

Cl:

if 1 child in household

•

10

otherwise

(1 if 2 children in household
C2:

S

to otherwise
(1

if 3 children in household

I.O

otherwise

C3;

(1 if 4 children in household
C4:

5

to' otherwise

fi if 5 children in household

CS:

C6:

tO

otherwise

Ii

If

6 or more children in household

¶

LO otherwise
CC1:

(1

if 1. child in college

O otherwise

fi if 2 children In college

CC2:

'

I0 otherwise

—59—

..
CC3:

DMC:

(i

if 3 or more children in college

10

otherwise

(i if

family desires more children

•'

otherwise

(1 if 0—2% inflation expected during next 12 months
PE1:
10

otherwise

(i

if 2—4% inflation expected

to

otherwise

Ii.

if 5—9% inflation expected

PE2:

.
.

0
(1

PE4:

otherwise
if greater than 9% inflation expected

j

to otherwise
OCC1:

proprietor

(1

if farm

I
10

otherwise

(i

if service worker

10

otherwise

(i

if blue collar worker

10

otherwise

(i

if manager

OCC2:

OCC3:

\

OCC4:

0
(1

OCC5:

otherwise

if technician or in a profession

I
10

otherwise

f].

if

(o

otherwise

(1

if head desires second ob

to

otherwise

TrW:

head

worked full. time during 1967

D23:

—60—

S
PP:

pension payments in 1967.

S

—61—

Table Al
Equn U. 0fl8

CAS

Data Set

Ct—ratios in parentheses)

Independent
VRriable
constant
SA(t—1)

SA

404.81

Dependent Variable
GB
72.62

tICS

IP

—282.69

—2423.26

—0.0541

0.00569

.962
(127.53)

1.015

CB(t—1)

(324.82)

CS(t—l)

—0.0151
(—3.39)

OVFI

0.00208

NCO

liDi

1102

11D3

—0.0171
(—1.37)

(—1.27)

.00144
(1.46)

—0.0240
(—2.35)

53.67

—5.63

—13.63

—48.80

(—0.11)

(—0.33)

—0.00919

—282.41
(—1.29)

SC2

0.0314

(0.74)

(—1.27)

(0.69)

Sd

—.00124

(—3.76)

(3.08)

(0.29)

IND

—.00073-.
(—1.21)

74.50
(0.37)

93.28

(—0.48)

0.627
(0.02)

(—0.83)

67.61

477.06

(2.50)

7.13

(0.67)

(0.38)

—51.65
(—0.24)

—13,99
(—0.48)

—184.37
(—1.17)

0.0466
(5.05)

—253.66

(1.69)

—294.45
(—1.50)
86.21
(0.28)

—0.00293
(—0.23)

—12.57
(—0.03)

68.44
(0.19)

473.07
(1.97)

133.32
(0.36)

27.02

—51.08

39.53

(1.28)

(—0.23)

(0.11+)

.0.00201
(1.64)

0.133
(10.31)

(7.42)

0.117

—62—

Table Al (continued)

Independent
Variable

WS2

Dependent Variable

SA
0.00650
(0.22)

WS3

—0.135
(—1.75)

—0.0421
(—1.33)

0.0925

(0.81)

(1.25)

0.386

—0.00596

(8.78)

(—1.39)

—0.00477
(—0.12)

—0.00398

0.0235

0.182

0.135

(0.90)

0.139

(4.81)

(—5.76)

0.0141

(—0.73)

0.0490

—0.240

0.00050
(0.12)

(2.30)

(5.31)

CS

CB

0.397

(6.66)

•

0.00088
(6.64)-.

0.0239
(0.79)

IP
0.114
(2.23)

0.0086
(0.07)

0.00104
(0.02)

0.308
(4.45)

0.0987

(10.80)

(2.20)

0.0842

0.118

(5.87)

(6.69)

—0.355
(—1.14)

—0.157
(—0.41)

0.0595

0.130

.

0.0802
(1.04)

0.135
(2.90)

0.0779
(3.55)

—0.00365
(—0.35)

0.00367
(0.58)

0.0134
(4.54)

—0.00594
(—0.86)

-.0.00129

—0.00271
(—0.12)

—0.00397
(—1.35)

—181.58
(—1.21)

—0.00052
(—0.04)

0.165
(1.39)

(—1.38)

(0.55)

0.114
(1.74)

(0.99)

—0.0565
(—0.71)

—0.103
(—3.35

0.277

0.00523

0.0293

(0.54)

0.0333
(1.09)

(7.38)

(2.48)

0.0273
(0.73)

316.75

26.95

—51.98

(1.33)

(—0.24)

(1.23)

0.105

0.0214

0.00522
(3.14)

—0.0154
(—0.95)

(6.08)

—0.0118
(—0.07)

(1.01)

—0.527
(—2.57)

—63—

Table Al (continued)

Independent
Variable

A2

Dependent Variable
SA

GB

—36.44
(—0.47)

—564.80

—261.76
(—0.50)

—34.15

—805.60

(—0.48)

(—1.09)

—402.48

—25.65
(—0.37)

—1078.05
(—1.49)

743.66

19.67

—942.52
(—1.27)

1345.43

476.97

883.81

223.93
(0.42)

98.19

—70.12

(0.22)

(—1.17)

299.03

640.76

(—0.29)

(1.37)

0.730

(1.07)

(0.03)

—1.04

16.21

(—0.01)

(0.67)

—83.34
(—0.52)

742.07
(2.81)

284.16
(1.14)

—15.30

622.50

(—0.71)

—1527.40

(2.79)

53.08

(—3.67)

C3

(0.76)

—13.06

200.68

—1458.63
(—2.94)

(1.54)

963.14
(1.06)

(0.84)

(1.40)

(1.16)

650.75
(1.14)

114.04
(0.35)

218.26
(0.72)

—96.36
(—0.35)
656.45

—1494.93
(—2.42)

1080.72

(0.41)
29.46

—2382.19

1919.45

24.33
•

1535.12

—1282.33
(—2.19)

(0.94)

—1498.52
(—3.42)

(—0.70)

(0.27)

• (0.90)

C2

IP

—503.99
(—0.87)

(—0.78)

A4

CS

(0.44)

(—3.41)

(0.91)

(1.43)

(2.25)

•

C4

—2075.14
(—2.86)

—1698.85
(—1.68)

—14.93

•

•

(0.93)

(—0.15)

48.36
(0.35)

950.90

•

•

—2403.63

(—1.70)

1498.77
(1.20)

—16.21
(—0.01)

—64—

Table Al (continued)

Independent
Variable

C6

Dependent Variable

SA

—1419.07
(—1.58)

CC2

—27.71
(—1.18)

—908.53

1646.32

1498.89

OCC3

OCC4

-. OCC5

(—0.38)

—35.34
:

695.81

—3129.85
(—2.24)

—1579.83

1499.39

—543.83

(1.18)

(0.92)

—13.76
(—0.60)

107.97

—261.32

—27.65
(—1.08)

183.04

—57.59
(—1.85)

342.63

—35.74
(—0.09)

841.82

—j433

46353

(—1.02)

(—0.30)

(—0:78)

(—0.22)

—441.26
(—1.37)

(0.10)

—513.92
(—1.13)

—213.32
(—0.38)

—394.87

—17.66

—36.42

62.24

300.20

—318.78
(—0.11)

OCC2

—50.59

—528.71
(—1.10)

—572.46

(1.31)

OCC1

(—0.89)

—386.21
(—1.13)

(0.33)

PE4

—41.48

—283.85
(—0.95)

0.703

312.21

(—0.21)

PE3

(0.43)

(0.31)

(2.81)

(1.29)

PE2

105.06

474.72

(—0.69)

(3.95)

PE1

—1862.59
(—1.47)

(0.36)

(0.49)

(1.65)

DMC

44.13

84.53

(—2.66)

CC3

GB

—432.31

—9.77
(—0.02)

—176.83
(—0.62)

(0.02)

(0.45)

(0.69)

(1.06)

(0.20)

2.03
:

—53.31

(—0.83)

(—1.11)
—35.95
(—0.93)

—867.42
:

(—2.15)

(—0.83)

(—1.37)

(—0.89)

—562.15
(—1.72)

—442.84
(—1.17)
—1152.20
(—0.22)

—164d8

(—0.03)
—229.49
(—0.46)

—65—

Table Al (continued)

Dependent Variable
md ependert
Variable

OCC6

GB

SA

—84.44
(—0.31)

56.08
(0.20)

D32

(—0.15)

WS1/WS2

—4.40
(—1.42)
0.0356

S

—30.80
(—0.83)

—541.45

—30.90
(—0.81)

—268.52

—4.89
(—0.18)

—30.64

—0.0203
,

CS

(—0.10)
0.00068

(—1.41)

(—0.68)

—98.62
(—0.39)

IF

—181.73
(—0.39)

384.57

(0.79)
235.02
(0.68)

10.76

7.95

(2.47)

(1.69)

0.0176

0.00026
(0.004)

(1.10)

(0.11)

(0.38)

0.885

0.975

0.148

0.104

2910.15

393.84

4092.78

5010.61

2773

2773

2772

4636.34

2772

534.54

657.4

686.28

—66—
Table Al (continued)

S

Dependent Variable

Independent
Variable

S2

S3

345.45

—155.45

—2374.27

—0.0248

—.00052

0.0360

Si

constant

SA(t—l)

(2.17)

(—0.62)

(—3.46)

CB(t—l)

(—3.50)

0.00262

OVR

0.0318

0.00686
(0.40)

(2.45)

(0.35)

—0.0226
(—1.29)

—0.0304

—0.0103

IIHD

(—9.05)

—0.0687
(—6.47)

—0.0717

—0.0160

CS(t—l)

•

(2.32)

(—1.37)

NCO

75.64

53.48

(0.87,)

(0.35)

SC2

(—1.20)

(—1.31)

113.66

594.37

(0.55)

45.14

HD].

(0.31)
11D2

(0.20)

—166.99
(—0.65)

(10.63)

0.295
(13.35)

—0.245
(—4.62)

(—1.81)

0.175

(0.03)

—0.128
,

0.0172

0.00440

—0.127
(—1.60)
—0.0625
(—1.90)

102.32

—223.48
(—0.84)

0.00085

ID

276.04
(0.83)

(0.04)

(4.64) '

WS3

'—266.48
(—1.07)

(—0.27)

0.0442

WS2

(1.26)

16.46

(—1.04)

WS1

603.39

(1.66)

—60.10

—168.71

HD3

—484.81
(—0.92)

—514.96

—273.14

Sd

—68.05
(—0.33)

'

(0.03)

(0.09)

0.301

0.289

(5.28)

,

(3.76)

'

RI

0.0752
(1.81)

0.0674
(0.94)

0.3S0
(3.95)

—67—

Table A.l (continued)

Independent
Variable

Dependent Variable
Si

CI

BI

0.147

0.542

(5.45)

(11.64)

0.0497

SS

0.247
(10.08)

0.153

—0.317
(—0.79)

—0.606
(—1.14)

(0.82)

.0.118
(0.86)

(1.12)

0.140

0.254

0.193

(2.91)

(3.07)

(1.73)

0.135

CCII

DY

IND

Al

A2

A3

.

—0.00581

—0.00182

0.232

(—0.82)

(—0.15)

(1.41)

—157.12

.

A4

0.0232
(0.60)

(—1.01)

—218.27
(—0.81)

—0.00753

0.0968

(5.07)

0.0569
(1.10)

91.42
(0.25)

0.132

('-0.59)

(4.41)

(4.49)

0.149

0.160

—0.335

(1.21)

(0.75)

(1.17)

—520.00
(—0.87)

—989.54
(—0.96)

663.74

—259,51
(—0.48)

—966.98

141.03

—375.81
(—0.71)

S

0.266

(0.95)

(—0.49)

LI

0.0371

0.207

(5.98)

—0.0109

CGVH

0.657
(10.53)

(0.74)

0.0657

CC

0.131

S3

(4.71)

(0.66)

P1

S2

337.50
(0.62)

(—1.03)

—1364.63

(—1.48)
—583.36
(—0.62)

(0.48)

(0.11)

—461.37
(—0.37)

702.31
(0.56)

—68—

Table A.1 (continued)

Dependent Variable

Independent
Variable

ER].

EH2

Si

S2

S3

—81.37
(—0.18)

423.55

1436.73

248.82

931.47

(1.28)

EH3

171.74
(0.89)

E114

11.20
(0.06)

EII3

Cl

—1453.52

—1490.75

—1440.09

—2111.85

—1697.22
(—1.63)

C6

—1386.47
(—1.49)

CC].

CC2

599.07
(0.56)

—991.62
(—2.81)

CC3

323.06
(1.02)

-(2.10)

(—2.82),,

C5

(2.75)

(—0.24)

(—2.81)

C4

921.26

592.84

(—3.29)

C3

(1.57)

—39.27

(—3.38)

C2

(0.54)

1644.73
(1.60)

—2752.60
(—3.70)

(1.36)

1667.14
(2.10)

1038.69
(2.31)

582.05
(1.38)

475.90
(1.26)

—2115.44
(—2.12)

—2999.24
(—3.83)

—1933.52

—3817.27

—1945.54

(—4.31)

—1170.24
(—0.90)

—4131.19
(—2.30)

(—1.84)

(—1.64)

292.39
(0.17)

—4229.30
(—1.76)

—3276.63
(—2.04)

2868.40

1328.08

—711.01

(0.72)

(—1.34)

(—0.29)

(—2.48)

—746.30
(—0.91)

—1478.18
(—0.83)

—3117.92
(—1.31)

—1509.19

—69—

Table

Independent
Variable

Dependent Variable

Si
DMC

1478.96
(3.77)

PE1

PEZ

PE3

353.34

OCC5

OCC6

FIW

(2.70)

—259.96

56.79

236.02
(0.70)

—404.44
(—0.89)

249.78
—235.26

—412.17
—366.62

—20.92

592.73

(1.44)
649.41
(0.12)

—842.50
(—1.11)

—854.78
(—1.49)

—394.35

(—1.16)

(—0.64.)

95.35

(0.17)
—693.20

(—0.10)
—1133.28
(—1.12)

—1069.21
(—1.39)

—433.82

(—0.06)

(—0.66)

—187.16
(—0.63)

—1042 .08
(—2.03)

1302.39

• —70.85
(—0.25)

—586.53

—811.91

48.52
(0.17)

D32

(4.41)

102.07
(0.34)

(—1.10)
OCC4

2453.61

—12 • 92
(—0.07)

(—0.94)

OCC3

2987.83

(1.41)

(—0.08)

OCC2

S3

—673.63

(1.06)
.0ccl

52

—31.12
(—0.07)

(0.29)
PE4

A.l (continued)

—48.79

(—0.24)

(—1.20)

—232.76
(—0.47)

—135.87

(—0.38)

(—0.54)

(—1.89)

(—1.24)

151.29

(0.22)
138.23
(0.29)

—70—

Table A.l (continued)

Dependent Variable

Independent
Variable
Si

WS1/WS2

PP

S2

S3

—4.81

6.14

14.55

(—1.50)

(1.11)

(1.97)

0.0335

0.0447

0.0357

(1.00)

(0.77)

(0.46)

R2

0.071

0.145

0.177

Se

3029.84

5232.29

7011.81

df
—

2816

2816

2816

300.32

957.76

1629.74

S

—71-•

S

Table A2
Equations

Data

CAS

Set

Households Grouped By Wealth Class*
(t—ratioe in parentheses)

Holdings of
Independent
Variable
constant

1

Savings Accounts
Wealth Class
2

761.33

3498.57

0.691

SA(t—l)

0.894
(58.43)

(46.06)

0.177

GB(t—1)

—0.0353

(2.37)
—0.021].

CS(t—1)

(—1.34)

—0.0122
(—1.99)

OVE

HMD

64.21
.

•

(0.68)

0.0307
(3.48)

•

WS2

0.0593
(2.70)

•

(—0.81)

0.111
(2.42)

—1888.42
(—0.91)

—1229.57
(—0.72)

(1.05)

—777.79
(—0.66)

—433.31
(—1.01)

—116.46
(—0.05)

—599.33

—797.15
(—6.20)

248.58

—135.68
(—1.13)

11D3

WS1

(—0.48)

37.49
(0.42)

11D2

—0.0331

—169.47

(—0.04)
HD1

—0.0524

(—0.45)

—5.13

SC2

—0.0369
(—1.87)

—189.69

(—0.45)

0.0365

—0.0627
(—6.57)

(2.49)

—57.50

SC1

1.000
(38.45)

(0.68)

0.0333

(1.19)

2002.91

(—0.49)

(—3.64)

0.00785

3

(—1.97)

0.0249
(1.71)

0.0154
(0.33)

0.0586
(1.63)

0.102
(0.40)

* Wealth classes are defined as follows:
1: assets less than $25,000
2: assets between $25,000 and $75,000
3: assets greater than $75,000

—72—

.
Table A2 (continued)
Holdings of
Savings Accounts

Independent
Variable

WS3

ID

BI

1

Wcjt1.Cjis s
2

—0.0303
(—0.54)

(—1.50)

—0.154
(—0.37)

—0.183

0.154

0.135

—0.119

(2.77)

(1.05)

(—1.55)

—0.00924
(—0.18)

0.0600
(0.91)

0.108
(0.91)

0.0864
(2.36)

0.0813

0.132
(1.41)

(2.07)

0.0248

0.333

(2.36)

Ss

3

(1.94)

0.0109
(0.30)

0.017,

0.0495
(1.47)

—0.447

0.277

(8.31)

(—0.34)

0.0977

—0.150

(0.30)

(8.31)

0.102

0.237

0.290

(3.43)

(3.21)

(0.51)

—0.0923

0.0453

(—0.34)

0.116

(—1.64)

(0.79)

—0.0215
(—3.36)

—0.0598
(—4.42)

—0.0405

—0.0270

—0.0392

—0.0604

(—0.39)

(—0.81)

52.64

—634.13
(—2.33

(0.59)

0.0146
(1.64)

—0.154
(—2.41)

'

(1.96)

(—1.26)

(—1.02)

—110.92
(—0.09)

—0.0167
(—0.76)

—0.0405

0.0779

—0.0604
(—1.02)

(0.24)

(—1.26)

S

—73—

Table A2 (continued)

Independent
Variable

Al

Holdings of
Savings Accounts
Wealth Class
1

—159.95
(—0.33)

A2

—173.93
(—0.37)

A3

—145.88
(—0.31)

A4

156.33
(0.32)

ER].

—273.05
(0,97)

EH2

E1i3

ER4

—78.31

64.83
(0.08)

435.27
(0.55)

420.92
(0.56)
774. 21

(0.31)

468.70
(1.98)

—1846.23
(—0.91)

37.12
(0.02)

5211.69
(1.47)

—2917.81

—129.47
(—0.40)

172.81

—206.13
(—0.68)

332.31

—44.33
(—0.17)

—232.97

—113.15

—30 • 49

—655.00

—714.97
(—3.09)

C3

—110.54
(—0.13)

1108.84

—66.37
(—0.55)

(—3.09)

C2

(—0.01)

(1.25)

(—0.29)
'ii

—11.23

3

(—0.40)

(—1.00)

EH5

2

—639.09
(—2.45)

—862,01
(—1.98)

—893.52
(—1.51)

—673.21
(—0.55)

(—0.94)

(0.31)

(0.27)

(0.22)
—58 ,721.95
(—8.77)

—607.68
(0.52)

—60,158.29

28.72
(0.02)

—59,568.73

—1162.77
(—0.82)

137.75
(0.07)

(—9.25)

(—8.10)

—74—

Table A2 (continued)
Holdings of
Savings Accounts
Wealth Class

Independent
Variable

1

2

—141.27
(—0.28)

—275.59
(—0.13)

116.16

—218.51
(—0.81)

(1.39)

CC2

—1764.60
(—6.88)
614.83

CC3

(0.44)

DMC

664.83
(3.38)

—328.46

PE1

(—0.86)

—51.46

PE2

(—0.48)

—22.73

PE3

(—0.19)

—90.19

PE4

(—0.63)

—214.01
(—0.91)

OCC2

—326.90

OCC3

(—1.74)

OCC4

OCC5

•

(0.16)

1367.34
(0.97)

343.78
(3.11)

871.88
(2.02)

321.82
(1.08)

586.51
(1.77)

642.47
(1.57)

674.54
(0.62)

—737.72
(—0.42)
6557.24
(1.45)

58,538.80
(9.87)

640.66
(0.39)

—1113.65
(—0.88)
—786.27
(—0.59)
391.97
(0.25)

(—1.34)

—621.13
(—0.98)
276.02

—227.23

—254.49

—227.54
(—1.37)

—60,091.77
(—7.49)

—1254.58

—145.96
(—0.72)

(—1.29)
OCC6

85.98

3

(0.44)

(—0.47)

—85.29
(—0.16)

—3472.90
(—0.93)
—17.87
(—0.01)

2628.27
(1.34)

3047.63
(1.58)

.

—75—

Independent
Variable

DJ2

WS1/WS2

R2
S

e

df

—

1

Holdings of
Savings Accounts
Wealth Class
2

—114.33

569.91

(—0.67)

(1.00)

—9.11

75.73

3

2161.62
(1.17)

409.71

(—0.08)

(0.19)

-2.75
(—1.16)

—7.74

0.0243

(—1.57)

(0.002)

0.170

—0.0752

1.334

(1.51)

(—0.28)

(1.41)

0.649

0.824

0.953

(0.19)

3041.46

4935.56

1479

1013

150

1567.25

6208.15

1333.16

18,660.43

—76—

Table A2 (continued)

Holdings

of

Government Bonds

Independent

Wealth Class

Variable

1

constant

—16.83

65.52

—0.00285
(—1.21)

—0.0049

GB(t—l)

1.023
(87.55)

1.011
(118.08)

CS(t—l)

0.00028
(1.14)

—0.00025
(—0.22)

—0.0237
(—0.84)

JVH

0.0190
(1.98)

—0.00148
(—0.14)

—0.0787
(—1.26)

HMD

—0.00124
(—1.20)

0.00066

0.0191
(0.27)

SA(t—l)

SC].

SC2

9D2;
HD3

WS1

WS2

WS3

'\

RI

3
—2483.24

(—0.27)

(0.41)

0.544
(0.03)

27.44

57.72

—40.70

(3.07)

(—0.97)

(0.55)

—1633.16
(—0.51)
—641.41
(—0.24)

—13.22

18.35

(—0.96)

(0.65)

—515.00
(—0.28)

—25.77

39.17.

4444.58

(—1.37)

(0.76)

(1.34)

26.91

25.31

(1.82)

(0.75)

0.00178
(1.29)

0.00047

0.00173

0.00114

2.068

(0.50)

(0.21)

(5.83)

0.00797

0.00176
(0.12)

0.149
(1.60)

—0.00345
(—0.40)

0.00820

(0.53)

—0.0121
(—0.71)

—0.00347
(—0.44)

—0.00129
(—0.16)

—0.00102
(—0.04)

(0.91)
ID

2

(0.27)

—356.25

(—0.18)
—0.00631
(—0.11)

—77--

Table A2 (continued)

Independent
Variable

Holdings of
Government Bonds
Wealth Class
1

—0.00128

SS

3

0.00978

0.0747

(—0.22)

(2.08)

0.00128

—0.00092

(0.78)

(—0.45)

—0.00897
(—0.29)

—0.0260

—0.00971

CGVH

2

(—0.58)

0.00677

(3.59)

0.00353

(0.47)
0.0582
(0.35)

0.0115

(—1.06)

(0.48)

0.00405

0.00235

(0.87)

(0.27)

(—0.32)

—0.00220

—0.00377
(—0.55)

0.00283

(—0.25)

0.00187

—0.00112

(1.87)

(—0.70)

(—1.77)

—0.00360

—0.00447
(—0.07)

—0.00433
(—0.33)

(—0.33)

6.90
(0.49)

—0.00081
(—0.58)
—0.00918
(—0.92
17.41.

(0.)

(0.12)

—0.0401

(0.22)

—0.0126

—2.22
(—0.07)

487.24

0.00338

0.0292

(1.28)

—0.0159
(—0.41)

—103.52
(—0.77)

(1.72)

(2.31)

—0.212
(—1.11)

88.51
(0.11)

—9.53
(—0.58)

—46.31

(—0.47)

(—0.40)

—16.18
(—0.22)

—14.73
(—0.16)

—45.05
(—0.10)

38.19
(0.50)

—43.55
(—0.99)

7.31
(0.08)

—45.36
(—0.50)

—212.30

176.95
(0.39)

—886.41
(—1.13)

—78—

Table A2 (continued)

Holdings of
Goverrunent Bonds

Independent
Variable

E114

C2

Wealth Class
1

-

—1.78
(—0.06)

39.16

5.80

48.76

22.28

41.79

—148.61

(1.26)

(1.15)

17.55

13.88

(1.08)

(0.44)

CC2

CC3

.PE1

PE2

(—0.54)

—400.63
(—1.74)

58.86

—44.47

(1.78)

(—0.30)

40.72

—22.35
(—0.16)

149.52

—6.03
(—0.38)

—176.31

89.03
(1.31)

Ccl

(—0.47)

—221.71
(—0.76)

(0.75)

,1'

—324.72

(1.25)

30.80

C5

(0.53)

3

(0.31)

(1.12)

C4

2

92.30

(1.00)

204.32
(0.14)

(0.10)

(—0.11)

—123.30
(—0.73)

—5.74
(—0.03)

43.87

39.89

86.58

(0.54)

(0.16)

(0.05)

—15.61

—6.51

—361.70

(—0.83)

(—0.20)

(—1.49)

—47.19

416.51

(—1.18)

—48.06
(—0.73)

92.79

90.60

(0.43)

(0.54)

—703.70
(—0.70)

(1.06)

—47.16
(—1.53)

34.07

17.90

(.0.26)

(0.01)

—0.504
(—0.02)

15.20
(0.30)

—300.64
(—0.83)

—5.86
(—0.35)

40.77

—437.50

(1.14)

(—1.55)

—79—

'IsIp

Ip

(iuiii. I

IloitIllIgH of
Government Bonds

Independent
Variable
PE3

PE4

1
-.2.37

8.87

(.0.13)

(0.22)

—37.73
(-1.68)

OCC2

14.70
(0.40)

OCC3

OCC4

OCCS

OCC6

FTW

D32

WS1/WS2

PP

Wealth Class
2

—7.65
(—0.16)

7.12

(0.27)

(0.09)

—25.18

—105.63

(O7)

(1,4fl)

—501.15
(—1.46)

—105.80

900.61
(1.08)

289.70

50.55
(0.12)

(0.16)

(—1.40)

24.05

—82.18

(0.92)

(—1.31)

(—0.40)

—68.02

150.05

—14.41
(—0.54)

4.57

(—1.00)

—170.98

(0.36)

—29.64

(0.26)

—58.67
(—1.21)

0.288

—0.306

2.42

(0.77)

(—0.52)

(0.69)

(—0.62)

(1.21)

(1.78)

—0.119
(—0.57)

0.845

0.935

0.987

0.0213

0.0568

362.85

df

1479

1013

i

218.80

573.95

e

(1e17)

(—1.05)

208.62

S

—348.86

—117.13

7.89

4.52

3

1095.17
150
2586.63

—80—

Table

Independent
Variable

A2 (continued)

Net Investment in
Common Stock
Wealth Class
1

Investment
in Property
Wealth Class

2

3

constant

—60.64

3251.67

4500.08

SA(t—1)

0.0197

—0.0367
(—2.02)

—0.0933
(—1.74)

—0.0109
(—0.27)

—0.00639

—0.148
(—1.35)

—0.00877

—0.107

(2.39)

GB(t—1)

CS(t—1.

(—1.02)

—0.00152

0.00052

0.0866

—37.80

15.08
(0.23)

10.87
(0.22)

(5.47)

—312.94
(0.63)

679.59
(1.63)

—256.39
(—0.91)

—0.222

(2.62)

—0.0213
(—0.95)

—0.0471
(—0.23)

—0.0824

0.00832

0.0122

(—0.79)

13,724.47
0.137

(2.27)
—0.0554
(—0.45)

0.0148

(0.88)

(0.32)

0.00375

—0.00695

(0.04)

(—0.41)

—0.00820
(—0.39)

—0.0633
(—0.66)

—0.0315

—0.0386
(—0.36)

0.0385
(0.41)

—0.00007
(—0.004)

—1851.69
(—0.43)

—212.72

—548.15
(—0.15)

344.50

—6635.38
(—2.74)

13.34
(0.03)

—20.83

20.47

(—0.40)

(0.06)

0.00817

0.124

0.201

(7.19)

(2.70)

(2.05)

0.109

—3624.09

3

(0.19)

(—0.62)

0.0248

—1915.80

2

(—5.47)

—40.82

(1.69)

WS2

—0.0873
(—5.12)

(—0.43)

WS1

(—9.50)

(—0.45)

(0.14)

Sd

(—0.08)

1

1025.67
(0.22)

—105.83

(—0.04)

—0.464

0.134

(—8.48)

(0.26)

(—0.48)

(1.03)

275.57
(1.12)

9.31
(0.03)

197.72

(0.75)
0.0687
(2.80)

—0.0739
(—1.21)

(—1.62)

958.43
(1.57)

—273.96
(—0.54)

474.71
(1.37)

864.01
(1.38)

—110.63

—1809.75
(—0.38)

245.00
(0.06)

2210.11
(0.81)

—486.39
(—0.10)
—1493.36

(—0.27)

(—0.50)

0.151

0.158

(7.13)

(1.89)

0.224
(3.32)

—0,144
(—0.24)

.

—81—

Table A2 (continued)

Independent
Variable

WS3

1

—0.00760

2

0.0735

in Prwcrty
Wealth Class
3

—0.591

(—0.25)

(0.51)

(—0.69)

0.0117

0.261

0.451

(1.70)

(2.84)

(0.38)

0.0458
(1.64)

0.00357
(0.17)

0.0287
(4.97)

SS

Investment

Net Investment in
Common Stock
Wealth Class

0.0889
(0.08)

—0,0183

—0.0385
(—0.49)

0.0568

(—0.26)

0.233

(—1.01)

(2.27)

(4.99)

(0.43)

—0.0226
(—0.22)

0.00360

(0.06)

0.129

0.106

0.168

(1.86)

(3.62)

(6.76)

—0.743
(—0.48)

0.177
(0.32)

0.291

(3.21)

—0.176
(—1.64)

—1.111

—0.0581

(1.45)

(0.38)

0.0619
(2.00)

0.0195

—0.154
(—1.26)

1.860
(11.87)

0.508

0.00185

-0.112
(—6.99)

—0,00914

0.0439

(—0.07)

—0.0602
(—1.72)
60.90
(0.23)

96.81
(0.37)

—0.0651
(—0.98)

—0.0613
(—1.07)

—0.249

—523.79
(—1.69)

4596.01

0.158
(6.05)

—0.0925
(0.24)

448.12
(0.34)

—688.40
(—0.71)

(—0.31)

—0.00707
(—0.04)

—0.00268
(—0.03)

—0.00036

(0.67)

0.521

0.443

(0.70)

0.0523

1.083

0.127

34.44

(1.81)

—0.534

—0.0117
(—0.71)

(—0.12)

0.394

—0.164
(—0.30)

(1.18)

—0.00441

0.0563
(0.32)

(0.41)

(0.53)

(—0.52)

(1.23)

(—0.57)

(0.29)

—0.504

0.119

(3.35)

(—0.67)

—0.0912
(—0.59)

—0.0463

0.480

(3.00)

—0.296

(0.44)

3

0.321

0.647

(1.48)

0.0693

2

—0.247

0.140

0.0300

1

(—2.05)

(1.75)

0.201
(1.71)

—1.708
(—0.96)

15,637.56
(2.15)

5928.93
(1.21)

(—0.51)

(6.12)

(2.23)

—0.124
(—0.64)

0.0435

205.68

—162.69
(—0.41)

(0.82)

0.0331
(1.34)

—0.0104
(—0.59)

634.29
(0.46)

232.19
(0.18)

(0.62)

(0.28)

(—0.85)

(—0.42)

0.0628
(0.84)

0.0315
(0.23)

4791.14
(1.62)

—0.118

0.368

(—3.67)

(2.79)

—0.349
(—0.73)

—5.17
(—2.59)

—23.69
(—0.01)

—194.34
(—0.16)

10,921.39

(1,33)
11,879.81
(2.16)

—82—
Table A2 (continued)

Independent
Variable

Net Investment in
Common Stock
Wealth Class
1
17.59
(0.07)

A4

156.85
(0.58)

—78.51
(—0.51)

(—0.41)

804.75
(0.90)

—372.46
(0.09)

3032.59
(0.42)

997.75

2953.80

39.27
(0.69)

97.02
(0.83)

—128.61
(—1.01)

—155.26
(—1.08)

161.81
(0.68)

CC2

—391.40

(0.37)

8.34

(1.05)

Ccl

1560.49

(0.95)

(0.19)

64.92

C3

—893.01

3977.38

(0.13)

C2

3

522.39
(0.71)

21.04

E115

2

(2.59)

553.14
(1.54)

443.25
(1.40)

(—1.08)

—987.68
(—0.71)

—2377.43
(—1.53)

—1757.65
(—0.71)

3118.29
(1.46)

(—3.21)

51.90

(—0.64)

(0.16)
—1931.05
(—2.97)

1325.03
(0.79)

85.16
(0.06)

875.56

247.10

—249.40

(0.32)

1201.37
(2.20)
78.73
(0.24)

434.22
(0.74)

(0.73)

(1.17)

(0.07)

—1069.18
(—0.65)

1157.54
(0.32)

—5390.44
(—0.58)

(0.16)

183.79
(0.39)

133.12

(0.08)

87.55

(0.81)

147.01

23.52

848.18

1829.24

(—0.23)

(1.22)

—61,349.29

—51,428.34
(—3.11)

(0.75)

310.63
(0.70)

382.70

471.24

(—4.05),

—372.14
(—0.32)

—249.10
(—0.18)

—54,379.43
(—4.06)

(—1.08)

—42,03

(0.19)

(0.07)

(2.96)

—371.84
(—1.31)

146.14

192.36

4980.83

—2416.46

(0.31)

(1.09)

—1569.45 —44,15.95

—401.38
(—1.24)

44.08

(0.62)

1

Investment
in Property.
Wealth Class
2

—319.38
(—0.22)

393.57

(1.18)
418.99
(0.59)

—1421.69
(—0.37)

(0.34)

201.65
(0.11)

1608.58
(0.94)

4186.53
(2.18)

3

10,827.17
(2.30)

8327.93
(1.73)

18,391.90
(2.24)

5272.58
(0.73)

4014.66
(1.32)

—22.62
(—0.01)

—341.66
(—0.14)

—2443.41
(—0.16)

—562.68
(—0.04)

—7106.84
(—0.42)

2922.65
(1.41)

—48.14
(—0.02)

914.01
(0.30)

—351.22

(—0.89)
413.36
(0.52)

—934.98
(—0.45)

—2794.65
(—0.15)

—2817.89

(—1.07)
4707.38
(1.14)

—9725.7•
(—0.93)

—83—

Table A2 (continued)

Independent
Variable

DMC

Net Investment in
Common Stock
Wealth Class
1
175.26
(1.63)

PE2

PE4

OCC3

OCC4

OCC5

OCC6

37.38
(0.64)

283.69

1.54
(0.02)

425.93

12.57

(—0.68)

(0.80)

(1.09)

1291.74
(2.67)

3

48,994.91
(4.01)

—1116.06
(—0.33)

3089.25
(1.18)

4310.27
(1.56)

1193.08
(0.37)

1

—278.31
(—0.51)
75.67
(0.18)

95.08
(0.32)

—268.88
(—0.51)
367.00
(0.92)

—215.23
(—1.67)

—830.50

—79.29
(—0.77)

—903.92

—1965.03
(—0.25)

318.49

(—1.21)

—67.91
(—0.61)

—591.27
(—0.79)

—758.98
(—0.16)

731.81

—22.64

—2127.88
(—0.53)

356.32

(—0.23)

—529.32
(—0.82)

—8.77
(—0.10)

—391.48
(—0.63)

1394.68

—500.26
(—0.74)

2435.44

(—1.20)

df

(0.45)

—347.98

—111.83

WS1/WS2

592.26

—68.03
(—0.83)

(0.16)

OCC2

2

Investment
in Property
Wealth Class

302.12
(0.46)

(—0.75)

(0.35)

(0.64)

—4651.30

—65.54
(—1.06)

72.60
(0.15)

(—1.05)

—1.90
(—1.46)

26.41
(4.53)

—32.92
(—1.00)

0.0768
(1.25)

0.518

—1.292

(1.64)

0.063

(0.61)

(1.29)

(0.73)

1.94
(0.004)
339.52
(0.72)

412.60
(1.33)

6.83

_2
—56.75
(—0.04)
270.92
(0.43)

166.99
(0.39)

3

1158.47
(0.08)

—9499.51
(—2.50)

—2581.90
(—0.87)

(0.51)

—4676.98
(—1.50)

26.49
(0.04)

—6016.59
(—1.65)

248.13

151.35
(0.11)

833.25
(0.91)

202.53
(0.22)

32.87
(0.04)

813.03
(1.06)

—7171.22
(—0.82)
—471.93
(—0.09)
368.27
(0.08)

—1665.15
(—0.37)

—184.24
(—0.22)

3485.85

124.1.0

—2057.25

(0.21)

•11.93

(0.82)

(—0.41)

26.17
(0.71)

(1.03)

(1.66)

—0.409
(—1.05)

3.010

(—0.66)

—0.158
(—0.51)

0.270

0.532

0.135

0.225

0.293

731.74

3600.72

10,170.79

3707.36

4431.02

11,459.51

1479

1013

132.41

725.46

150
3926.45

1479

1013

388.98

671.97

(1.37)

150
3091.93

—84—

Table A2 (continued)
Investment in Fixed Claims
_______
Wealth Class
2
______
3

Ifldependent

Variable
coflstaflt

746.28

SA(t-1)

GB(t—l)

0.00336

-0.292

(—6.88)

(0.12)

(—17.29)

(—1.31)

—0.0103
(—2.13)

0.00662
(0.99)

SC1

SC2

HD1

—71.11
(—0.44)
52.60

0.0590

—0.0630
(—6.54)

—0.0361

—0.0539
(—3.71)

—0.0402

0.0340
(2.52)

—162.22
(—0.38)

—210.17
(—0.59)

24.28

266.94

—161.76
(—1.32)

91.12
(0.95)

0.0325
(3.62)

WS2

—0.0246
(—0.34)

(0.43)

(0.27)

WS1

685.65

0.107

—0.0208

•

1

-.0.311

(2.63)

OVa

2560.42

__________

(—20.45)

0.199

CS(t—1)

3564.06

Investment in

Financi1 Asstg

0.0611
(2.73)

(1.11)

—394.14
(—0.91)

—533.96

(1.05)

(—1.74)

(—0.93)

0.129
(2.66)

-1648.97
(—0.76)
—1.64
(—.001)

(—1.68)

—0.0119
(—1.71)

0.00714
(0.96)

—0.0310
(—0.29)
—0.170
(—12.17)

—0.141
(—6.69)

0.121
(6.15)

—108.91
(—0.60)

-475.16

67.68

469.42

(—0.50)

(—0.77)

(0.91)

10.55

(0.35)

(0.03)

—978.36
(—0.46)

—202.58

—758.06

0.0254

0.0696

(0.35)

—0.0296

-0.143
(—6.38)

35.15

(—0.56)

0.0165

(2.24)

6815.70

—617.17
(—0.50)

(—1.86)

(1.?3)

0.188

Rai-h
CJ
2

(1.84)

0.0592
(0.22)

(—1.49)

70.28
(0.66)

0.0406
(4.09)

0.0860
(3.46)

—380.80
(—0.60)

—513.49

3

7060.52
-0.0899
(—1.65)

—0.0893
(—0.80)

—0.258
(—6.25)
—0.0364
(—0.42)
0.167
(1.74)

-3500.66
(—0.81)

—549.78
(—1.52)
—7252.55
(—2.94)

47.32
(0.01)

(—1.23)

—863.88
(—0.32)

0.150

0.270

(7.00)

(3.58)

—0.448

0.193

(—6.61)

(0.36)

.

—85—
Table A2 (continued)

Investment in Fixed Claims
Wealth Class
2
3
1

Independent
Variable

—0.0223
(—0.39)

WS3

—0.181
(—1.47)

0.151

0.144

(2.67)

(1.10)

—0.0127

(—0.01)

—0.131
(—1.62)

0.0587
(0.88)

0.107

(—0.25)

0.0851

0.0911

0.207

(2.24)

0.0261

(2.29)

0.0323

(0.86)

(2.09)

0.0530

2

—0.108

3

(—0.60)

—0.596
(—0.68)

0.163

0.405

0.319

(2.59)

(2.14)

(1.98)

—0.0299
(—0.47)

0.0331
(0.58)

0.0887
(2.10)

0.0548
(4.62)

0.0202
(0.21)

—0.140
(—0.57)

0.231

0.853

(4.00)

(4.34)

0.0623

0.182

(2.48)

(2.58)

—0.769
(—1.40)

—0.407
(—0.26)

(1.87)

0.00192

—0.473
(—1.25)

0.336
(0.42)

(0.41)

0.104

—0.138
(—0.30)

—0.0103
(—0.16)

0.161

0.945

(0.94)

(1.01)

0.0943

0.367

0.693

(3.39)

(0.59)

0.00798
•

(1.50)

1

(2.44)

(0.01)

(0.13)

(0.88)

0.106

0.240

0.250

(3.21)

(1.41)

(3.50)

cCH

—0.00547

Investment in
Financial Assets
Wealth Class

—0.0945
(—1.65)

0.0416

—0.0196

—0.0609

(—3.02)

—0.0306
(—0.43)
59.61
(0.65)

0.0138
(1.53)
—0.163
(—2.51)

—142.52
(—0.29)

—183.51
(—0.38)

—162.11
(—0.34)

(0.72)

(—4.46)

—0.0436
(—0.89)

—636.34
(—2.32)

—0.0134

0.119
(1.91)

0.0908

(2.81)

—0.0326
(—0.51)

—0.0532
(—1.58)

—0.0178

—0.0648
(—1.04)

—0.0350

376.36
(0.28)

—0.0176

(—2.47)

(—0.44)

94.05
(0.93)

0.0135
(1.34)

0.0611
(0.73)

—0.173
(—8.73)

—0.105
(—1.48)

—1160.13
(—2.91)

—0.224

(—0.78)

(—3.10)

(—0.06)

—81.64

333.33

—156.85

256.41

(—0,19)

50.10
(0.06)

(0.10)

—1891.16
(—0.89)

(—0.15)

—86.72
(—0.16)
-.144.54

(—0.27)

(1.86)

(1.53)

—0.708

(0.32)

4972.37

(4.48)

0.0620

1197.55

—0.314
(—2.54)

0.183

(—0.29)

—114.79
(—0.10)

—0.118
(—1.76)

0.145

(—0.60)

(0.19)

—0.0348
(—0.28)

—0.0306

(0.20)

—2.416

(—1.34)
16,835.09
(2.27)

—845.24
(—0.71)

6185.32

—842.90
(—0.73)

—330.69
(—0.08)

(1.24)

—86—

Table A2 (continued)

Independent
Variable

A4

194.49
•

Eli

Investment in Fixed Claims
Wealth Class
3
1
2

(0.39)

—316.67
(—1.11)

EH2

E13

EH4

E115

—80.61

C2

C4

C6

Cci

(0.04)

—395.17
(—1.25)

1180.44

1335.88

(1.06)

—48.90
(—0.04)

—52.24
(—0.39)

917.05

183.68

—25.94

388.82

—90.86

813.48

—164.32

(—0.79)

(—0.53)

—12.94

—30.46
(—0.11)

—596.19
(—2.77)

—717.53

—674.13

—630.07

—608.27
(—2.29)

—773.36

—800.93

(—0.58)

(—0.53)

22.69
(0.02)

—97.37
(—0.19)

—235.49
(—0.11)

100.79

—225.01
(—0.82)

707.82

617.75

—129.01
(—0.84)

(0.14)

—633.59
(—0.58)

—58,511.52
(—8.31)

—60,018.80
(—8.78)

—59,740.30
(—7.72)

37.92
(0.07)

1458.69
(1.02)

377.82
(0.34)

886.94
(2.04)

(—0.20)

26.33

(1.06)

376.05
(0.14)

2484.70

—763.53
(—2.59)

—2354.77
(—1.22)

—121,089

—611.55

369505

'-469.22

—321.17
(—0.17)

—1768.06

(0.20)

2904.89

—114,398

58.76

340.02

(0.11)

—1617.78
(—0,90)

312.83
(2.71)

(9.39)

734.30

(—3.08)

—802.74

(—0.81)

58,549.79

412.80

(0.99)

—102,827
(—7.33)

(-2.09)

(—7.11)

(1.23)

(0.87)

7358.62

—2287.00
(—1.27)

—499.17

(—1.81)

5853.09

(1.92)

—158.42
(—0.04)

(1.14)

—1202.31

—59,982.15

(1.67)

3

(1.06)

(0.23)

(—1.25)

132.01
(0.07)

—1812.15

—3243.07

—1285.76
(—0.90)

(—1.34)

(3.09)

PE1

51.66

—80.70
(—0.25)

(0.50)

DMC

(1.16)

(0.64)

—60.58
(—0.50)

(—6.95)

CC3

4326.02

351.32

(—1.00)

(0.83)

CC2

(0.49)

(0.98)

(1.30)

(—1.75)

C5

375.69

214.05

2

(—0.40)

(—2.89)

C3

(0.55)

Wealth C1ss
1

—59.57
(—0.27)

(-.0.12)

Cl

442.55

Investment in
Financial Assets

(0.43)

(—6.11)

853.96
(0.55)

793.01
(3.58)

—197.04
(—1.16)

(—8.40)

(—7.86)

(1,77)

—2284.48

(0.33)
—1993.16
(—0.65)

—173.11
(—0.44)

—1893.13
(—2.36)

2783.72
(1.35)

970.10
(0.60)

538.96
(0.85)

—111,411
(—6.63)
2142.06
(0.93)

836.37
(0.22)

462.65

(0.
107,545
(8.65)

—776.05
(—0.23)

—87—

Table

'
ependent
Variable

Wealth C1ss

2

3

________

362.58
(1.20)

—1551.09
(—1.16)

—19.96

(—0.53)
—25.11

595.35

—1135.17
(—0.80)

—23.57

—109.18

—115.39
(—0.71)

—57.34

—127.97
(—0.88)
—199.33
(—0.83)

(1.78)
634.91
(1.54)

in

Financial Assets

Waith Class

1

(—0.21)

OCC2

Investment

Investment in Fixed Claims

In

PE2

A2 (continued)

(—0.07)

—1371.55

(—0.17)
(—0.18)

—414.56

(—1.56)

(—1.45)

2

666.27

(1.48)
-1021.28

(2.11)
1926.66
(3.22)

3

1538.16

(0.58)
3175.09

(1.13)
1083.89
(0.33)

—2202.04
(—1.60)

0

OCC3

—319.01
(—1.67)

OCC4

—171.16
(—0.83)

OCC5

—222.74
(—1.24)

OCC6

—203.55
(—1.20)

FTW

WS1/Ws2

—128.73

—614.00
(—0.96)
170.40
(0.27)

—2572.73
(—0.65)

271.80
(0.11)

—360.29
(—0.65)

2678.80

—167.47

2876.42

(—0.31)

501.94

(—0.74)

(0.87)

—4.545

17.06

(—0.04)

(0.04)

—2.47
(—1.02)

—8.04
(—1.62)

(1.30)

—398.30
(—1.88)

—1517.91

—4537.77

(—1.64)

(—0.58)

—239.08
(—1.04)

—420.87
(—0.46)

—487.19
(—0.10)

—245.38

—889.60

550.91

(—1.23)

(—1.11)

(0.13)

—558.94
(—0.72)

4271.09

(—1.13)

—240.57
(—1.25)

1.69
(0.002)

4746.99

—70.09

89..66

—4271.21

(0.17)

(—0.56)

(0.15)

(—0.95)

245

—4.37
(—1.63)

18,37

—30.47

(2..55)

(—0.91)

(1.41)

2311.56
(1.19)

380.07

(0.15)

—212.32

(1.05)

(0.95)

(1.68)

(—0.07)

(1.22)

0.268
(2.12)

0.500
(1.28)

R2

0.278

0.123

0.604

0.236

0.281

0.685

Se

1355.77

3069.78

5190.81

1503.31

4456.09

10,343.16

df

1479

1013

1479

1013

73.20

453.13

0.191

—0.0184

1.215

150

1091.03

205.61

1178.59

—0.0772

(—0.04)

150

5017.48

—88--

Table

Independent
Variable

constant
SA(t—1)

GB(t—i)

CS(t—1)

OVH

A2 (continued)

Change in Total Assets
Wealth Class
1

SC2

—6663.98

—0.183

—0.164

0.0475

(—4.21)

(—5.54)

0.141

—0.113

(0.65)

(—0.81)

—0.145
(—0.85)

—0.0213
(—0.67)

—0.158

—0.243

(—8.54)

(—3.85)

—0.0188

—0.149

(—0.76)

Ô.00707

0.0891
(3.43)

0.129

—321.63
(—0.69)

483.26

412.18

195.45

310.72
—193.27

268.00
(0.98)

WS1

0.109
(4.28)

WS2

RI

485.27
(1.05)

(—0.80)

—304.77
(—0.06)

—5042.43
(—1.34)

(0.58)

—439.07
(—0.06)

—624.12
(—1.13)

—2357.25
(—0.57)

483.21

0.301
(10.64)

0.428
(3.71)

—0.154
(—0.65)

—1.100
(—0.82)

0.637

0.375

(0.44)

(2.54)

(1.52)

0.354

0.500

0.0394

0.0716

(2.41)
CI

(0.29)

—5310.40

0.0495

(0.24)

ID

(0.59)

(0.87)

—0.224
(—2.49)

0.0121
(0.19)

WS3

—0.0997

(—1.06)

(—0.56)
11D3

(0.57)

(—5.35)

(1.22)

HD2

3

3191.64

(1.18)
IID1

2

—1230.14

(0.37)

Sd

.

0.0661
(0.61)

(4.28)

—0.0214

(3.90)

(—0.06)

0.234

1.248

(3.07)

(4.15)

S

—89—

Table

A2 (continued)

Change in Total Assets
Wealth Class

Independent
Variable

1

BI

P1

01

0.231

0.235

(5.28)

(6.95)

(2.18)

CGH

(0.47)
0.511

0.1:54

1.236

(3.01)

(0.68)

(0.86)

0.190

—0.618
(—0.23)

(1.07)

(1.33)

1.828

0.569

(11.21)

(5.14)

—0.0269
(—1.45)

—0.129
(—4.90)

—0.0159

CCVII

(—0.79)
299.73

LI

(1.16)

0.0466

DY

(1.81)

IND

Al

A4

/

—0.282
(—1.49)

9763.51

(—2.51)

(2.39)

0.0269

0.551

(0.63)

(3.02)

(—2.75)

552.65

309.63

59•39

(0.14)

—1039.60
(—0.65)

—1215.06

(—0.04)

(—0.79)

102.22

926.69

—148.08

1141.80
(2.01)

E113

(—0.54)

(—1.77)

(—0.18)

EH2

—0.0554

—7.588

(0.07)

Eli

—1.322.83

(—0.49)

(—0.60)

(0.11)
S

(—0.65)

—0.0930

—0.380

145.47

A3

—0.0614

(—0.39)

—0.328

(0.39)

A2

—0.941

—0.933
(—1.28)

0.0917

CG

3

0.160

0.268

SS

2

26.49
(0.08)

(0.60)

931.03
(0.63)

1482.89
(1.23)

1100.83
(1.74)

27,756.53
(2.45)

18,065.16
(2.38)

10,496.53
(1.62)

8169.54
(1.23)

25,750.50
(2.27)

6006.89
(0.61)

6919.55
(1.64)

—90—

Table A2 (continued)

.

in

Independent
Variable
ER!.

1

Total Assets
Change
Wealth Class
2

356.76

699.45

(1.09)

EH5

49.85
(0.17)

Cl

C2

C3

—64.95
(—0.11)
—331.49
(—0.50)

84.66
(0.11)

C4

CS

—523.99
(—0.42)

—2271.49
(—1.33)

C6

Ccl

CCZ

—788.59

DMC

PE2

OCC2

(—0.88)

—9.18
(—0.004)
1831.79
(0.72)

(0.64)

—105,271
(—4.90)

—114,961
(—5.51)

—128,197
(—5.44)

6617.72
(2.40)

—2332.60
(—0.64)

—1079.13

—114,205
(—4.44)

—524.33
(—1.00)

—675.83

—1479.77
(—1.39)

5543.77

1848.73

—9263.11
(—0.64)

-.1349.07

—567.72
(—0.14)
514.69

—121.37
(—0.28)

75.11

—292.46
(—0.85)

PE4

—2085.33

2143.04

452.33
(1.30)

(0.24)

PE3

(1.05)

(0.09)

(—0.27)

(0.91)

P81

545.91

353•43

(—0.53)

(—1.82)

CC3

(1.18)

3

251.60
(0.6l)

—112.44
(—0.17)

(0.67)

913.33
(0.43)

809.89
(0.97)

813.26
(1.40)

1269.41
(1.98)

1953.15
(2.47)

—2050.69
(—1.13)

(—0.19)

(0.97)

108,703
(5.72)

—10,276
(—1.95)
—1043.74
(—0.26)

—1501.89
(—0.35)

—4932.69
(—0.98)

—91—

Table A2 (continued)
Change in Total Asset8
Wealth Class

Independent
Variable

1

2

3

OCC3

—79.81
(—0.15)

—684.67
(—0.56)

—11,709
(—0.97)

OCC4

492.73

—218.34
(—0.18)

—959.13
(—0.13)

—856.74
(—0.81)

919.17
(0.15)

(0.84)

0C5

110.94
(0.22)

OCC6

—210.38

254.08

(—0.44)

(0.25)

98.95

FTW

—182.56

(0.20)

D2J

(—0.16)

342.51

213.76

(1.06)

2605.92
(0.42)

8232.83
(1.39)

—6328.46

(0.27)

(—0.92)

30.30

—4.30
(—0.08)

S.

WS1/WS2

.

2.46
(0.36)

PP

0.110

(3.21)

0.0908

2.933

(0.34)

(0.17)

(0.96)

R2

0.i46

0.256

0.549

Se

3857.45

5902.57

15,825.08

1479

1013

594.59

1850.55

df

.

150

8109.41

—92—

.
Glossary For
Tables A3 and A4

DD:

Holdings of demand deposits

SA:

Holdings of savings accounts

FA:

Holdings of financial assets

NW:

Net worth

NMFA:

Nonmarket financial assets

OFA;

Cash surrender of life insurance + holdings of mortgages and
notes of others + personal loans + trust funds

TD:

Total debt of household

ATY:

After—tax family income

DY:

Expected change in permanent income in 1960

GI:

Gifts and

CG:

Realized capital gains

irheritances

Al
A2

Same as

in Tables Al and A2

A3
A4
(i if youngest child is 2 or under
Cl:

(0 otherwise
(1 if youngest child is 3 or 4
C2:

0 otherwise
[1 if youngest child is 5 to 9
C3:

(0 otherwise
11.

if youngest child is 10 to 14

C4:

0 otherwise

