NBER WOEXINC PAPER SERIES

Estimation of a Stochastic Model of Reproduction:
An Econometric Approach

James J. Heckman
Robert J. Willis

Working Paper No.

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OP IILTMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

National Bureau of Economic Researéh. Inc.
261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016

-

February 1974

Preliminary; Not for Quotation
NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
not be quoted without written
permission.

number for cotmuents only. They should

This report has not undergone the review accorded official NEER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.

Estimation of a Stochastic Model of Reproduction:

An Econometric Approach

by

James J. }Ieckman
University •of Chicago and NBER

Robert 3. Willis
City University of New York—Graduate Center and NBER*

*Thjs gaper will be published in Household Production and Consumption
edited by Nestor E. Terleckvl, Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 139,
by the Conference on Income and Wealth, New York, Columbia University Press
for the National Bureau of Economic Research.
•

Research for this paper was supnorted by grants to the National Bureau
of Economic Research in population economics from the National Institute of
Child Pealth and Human Development, P115, Department of HEW and from the Ford
Foundation.
This paner is not an official NEER publication since it has not

been reviewed by the NBER Board of Directors, tIe want to thank C. Ates Da1i
and Ralph Shnelvar for exceptionally canable computer proraxnming.. We also
wish to thank participants in seminars at the NBER, the University of Chicago,
and Yale University for helpful coimnents on an earlier draft of this paper.
The final draft benefitted from suggestions by Lee Lillard and Robert
Michael.

—1—

Introduction

In the past few years, there has been substantial progress in the
application of the economic theory of household decisiortmalcing to human

fertility behavior.' As yet, however, the theoretical and empirical
scope

of the

economic theory of fertility has been quite limited.

served fertility

ob-

behavior is regarded as the outcome of utility maxi—

nizinr choices by couples in which the costs and satisfactions associated
with the number and "ciuality" of children are balanced against the costs

and satisfactions of other activities unrelated to children. Theoretical
emphasis has been given to the effects of the costs of parental tine and
money resources devoted to rearing children on the demand for the total
number of children in a static framework under conditions of certainty.
Empirical work has focused on explaining variation in the number of children ever born to women, who have completed their childbearing, as a
function of measures of the household's total resources and the opportunity

cost of time, especially the value of the wife's time. Empirical results

have been of mixed quality. The value of the wife's tine, as measured by
her potential market wane or her education, is almost always found to have
a significantly negative impact on completed fertility, hut measures of
husband's lifetime income are not always significant or consistent in sigh.2

'For a recent collection of papers-on the economic analysis of fertility, and citations to earlier work, see T. W. Schultz, ed. (1973).
number of explanations for the puzzling inconsistency of the
"income effect" on fertility has - been advanced, hut it is probably
accurate to say that none has been universally accepted. See Becker (1960),
Becker and Lewis (1973), Ben—Porath (1973), Sanderson and Willis (1971),
Simon (1973) and Willis (1973).

One important objection to static theories of fertility is their
failure to deal with the implications of the simple fact that reproducjo
is a stochastic biological process in which the number and timing of births
and the traits of children (e.g.

sex, intelligence, health, etc.) are in—

certain and not subject to direct control.. To control fertility, a couple
can only attempt to influence the monthly probability of

conception and,

given conception, the prohability that pregnancy will terminate in live
birth by altering sexual behavior, contracepting or resorting to abortion.
As recent work by Ben—Porath and Welch (1972)

stresses, this implies that

family fertility decisions are inherently sequential and that decisions
about further children are made in light of experience with previous

children. Moreover, a modest extension of this argument suggests that
undertainty nay surround the valuation process itself: until a family has
had one child it does not know what the costs and rewards of having a

second one would be. Finally, it is evident that uncertainty concerning
fertility decisions and realizations adds to and interacts with uncertainty
surrounding other lointly determined household decisions about marriage and
divorce, consumption and saving, labor supply and investment in human capital.

In this paper, we report some initial results of a study in progress
whose goal is to develop an integrated theoretical and econometric model

of fertility behavior within a sequential stochastic framework.

The prin-

cipal contribution of the paper is to the development of an appropriate
econometric methodology for dealing with some new econometric problems

that arise in such models. However, we also present in more tentative
form the rudiments of a theoretical model of sequential fertility choice
and some empirical estimates of the determinants of the monthly probability

of conception in the first birth interval whih utilizes our econometric

—3—
methodology.

Recognizing the sequential and stochastic nature of family decisions,
Ben—Porath suggests that "The proper framework for dealing with all the
theoretical considerations [involved in the economic analysis of fertility]
is a dynamic programming utility maximizing model with:the various risks

explicitly included." (Ben—Porath, 1973, p. 187).

In Section I, we formu-

late a very simple model of this type to characterize the way in which a
couple's contraception strategy evolves over its life cycle as a function
of the cost of contraception, age, parity, the time paths of income and

the cost of children. In each month of the child bearing period (excluding
sterile periods following pregnancy), a couple's contraception decision
is assumed to reflect (expected) utility maximizing choices in which the
costs of contraception are balanced against the utility associated with
each vossible fertility outcome weighted by the probability of that out-

come. Unfortunately, analytic results are difficult to achiive in such
models, even with drastic simplification of the underlying structure of

family decisionmaking. At its present stage of development, our theoretical
model serves mainly to illustrate the stochastic structure in which fertility decisions are made and their consequences realized.
Even without a fully rigorous theory it is possible to utilize the
concentual framework of a stochastic theory of reproduction in order to
determine empirically at what stages of the family building process and
through which channels economic variables affect realized fertility out-

comes. The full reproductive history of a woman (i.e. the timing of
each birth and contracentive choices in each birth interval) can be used
together with the associated economic history of her family in order to
investigate the impact of economic variables and accumulated experience
on the seauence of contraception decisions. beginning with marriage which

—4—
determine the monthly probability of conception and, hence, the probability distribution of the timing, spacing and total number of births.
In Section II, we present methods to obtain consistent parameter
estimates of the effect of economic variables in modifying the monthly

nrobabllity of conception in the stochastic process. In order to obtain
consistent narameter estimates, a number of new econometric Droblems arise.
In particular, we demonstrate that it is important to account explicitly
for sources of sample variation, including variation among individuals

due to measured and unmeasured conm0nents. To avoid bias, it is especially
important to take into account persistent variations in the monthly probability of conception among individuals caused by unmeasured differences
in fecundity (i.e. the physiological capacity to reproduce), frequency
of coition or efficiency of contraception which, in turn, are related to

omitted economic variables and family characteristics which determine
health, the cost of contraception and the demand for children.
Bias arises when persistent variation is ignored because of a selection
mechanisn which confounds changes in the behavior of an "averageT' couple

in a sample caused bya change in an economic variable —— the relation—
shii we seek ——

with

changes in .the composition of the sample caused by

differential probabilities of conception. For example, the group of
women who begin a given birth interval may have an average monthly probability of conception of 0.2. If all women had identical probabilities,
the conditional probability of conception in the second month of women
who did not become pregnant in the first month would be O.2r

If they

are not identical, however, women who survive the first month without con-

ceiving are, on the average, those with the lowest probabilities. Hence,
the conditional nrohahility of conception would tend to decline over time
because of a change in sample composition, hot a èhange in behavior.

—5—
Further, we show that the mean probability of conception in the initial
group of women is downward biased if persistent variation is ignored.

Our econometric method enables us to estimate the fraction of persistent
variance in total variance at the same time that we obtain unbiased es—
tinates of the parameters of exogenous economic and demographic variables.

In Section III, we present parameter estimates of the model from data
on the interval between narriare and first oregnancy.fron the 1965 Princeton
National Fertility Study.

flur empirical results suggest that the econo-

metric problems discussed in Section III are of considerable practical
importance.

.6 —

I.

Contraception Strategies and Realized Fertility in Stochastic
Models of. Reproduction

Beginning with the seminalwork of Perrin and Sheps (1964), mathematical demographers have developed stochastic models of reproduction
in order to study the effects of variations in fecundity (i.e. the biological capacity to reproduce) and contraceptive practice on the number
and timing of births over a woman's reproductive life cycle.. In this

section, we ffrst describe the stochastic structure of these demographic
models and then show how choice—theoretic economic models of fertility
behavior can be embedded in it.

During any month a woman is in one of five possible states:
—

nonpregnant and fecundable

—

pregnant

— temporary sterile period due to anovulation following
an abortion or miscarriage
53 —

temporary sterile period following a still birth

54 —

temporary sterile periodfolLlowing a live birth

The woman's family building history (i.e., the number and timing of pregnancies and births) is completely described by the sequence of visits she
makes to these reproductive states and by the length of time spent in each

state at each visit. For instance, the total number of pregnancies she
has is equal to the number of transitions from

to S and the total

number of births to the number of transitions from

l to S4 Similarly,

the timing of the first conception for a woman who begins marriage in a
nonpregnant fecund state is equal to the length of her first stay in
while the length of her first birth interval is equal to the time from
marriage until the first ttansition from

to S4•

If it is assumed that the length of stay in each state and the outcote

—7—
Anovulatory
following abortion
or miscarriage

C
Nonpregnant
fecundable

L
>I

II

93

SO
I.

Anovulatory
following
stillbirth

Pregnant

S•

Nonpregnant
fecundable

94
Anovul a tory
following
live birth

Figure 1: States of the stochastic model of reproduction
(note: adapted from Perrin and Sheps, 1964, p. 33)

MONTH 1

MONTS 2

S..

a•S

SO

Not

.S—

pregnant

Si

•.S

Pregnant

S

Pregnant
Contracept

•S

.• S
Figure 2: States of contraception decisions and pregnancy outcomes
within one pregnancy interval

—8—

of

each pregnancy are random variables, reproduction may be viewed as a

stochastic process such as that. represented in Figure 1. Assume that
a woman begins marriage in a fecund nonpregnant state

Each month

(the approximate length of the ovulatory cycle) she has some probability.

of conception. This probability is called fecundability by demographers.

After a random length of time, she becomes pregnant, passin from
The length of time she stays in
and

to

is a random variable whose mean

variance dependr on the pregnancy outcrme. For example, pregnancy

lasts an average of perhaps less than three months when terminated by
abortion or miscarriage and, of course, about nine months when terminated

by a live birth. Finally, each type of pregnancy outéome has a given
probability
Si

(i =

which governs the likelihood that shewill pass

2,3,4).

from S

to

After spending sane random length of time in the post—

nartum sterile period, she reverts hack to her initial nonpregnant fecund

state

S0. Thus, the family building process nay he viewed as a sequence

of reproductive cycles such as the one represented in Figure 1, each of
which is Of random length and outcome.
It is clear in this model that a couple confronts considerable un-

certainty about the number and timing of births, It is also clear that
if fertility outcomes are sublect to choice, this choice must be exercised (excludinp abortion) through control of the monthly probability of
conception, p, by means of contraception or by variations in the frequency

and timing of coition over the menstrual cycle. The effect of contraception on the couple's chance of conception in any month may be expressed as

p*p (l—e)
where p is the couple's "natural fecundability" (i.e., the monthly probability of conception in the absence of arjy

deliberate

attempt to control

•

—9—

fertility)and (l—e) isthe proportional reductIon in
achieved by

fecundability

contracepting with efficiency e.3 The value of e depends on

both the technical characteristics of the method chosen and the care with
which it is used.

The nature of contraception decisions and pregnancy outcomes for a
"typical individual" may he examined in more detail with the aid of the

elementary branching process depicted in Figure 2. The process is assumed to begin in month 1 when the woman has first entered the nonnregnant
fectmd

her

state (S0)

at marriage or after a previous pregnancy

nassape into the nregnant state

period

in month t

and ends with

or at the end of the

of observation. Three types of contraception decisions are made

within each nregnancy interval.

(1) The counle Is assumed to decide

whether or not to contracept when the woman first enters S0.4 (2) If
the decision is to contracent, the counle selects a given level of contra—

centive efficiency, e, which determines the woman's monthly probability of
concention,

=

n(l_e),

(taO, 1...).

(3) If, at the end of month t,

3

Natural fecundability is a somewhat misleading term because it
depends not only on the physiological characteristics of a woman and her
snouse
of sexual activity. Variations

hut also on their "natural" natten

in sexual behavior ma'y arise from differences in sexual preferences of a
given

couple at different times in their marriage, from variations in preferences among couples or from deliberate attemnts to increase or decrease the
chance of conception for enunles with given preferences. In the latter case,
of èourse, the frequency and pattern of coition should he considered as
variation in contraceptive efficiency rather than natural fecundability. Apart
from reported use of "rhythm" as a contraceptive method, however, it is difficult
to distinguish these two sources of variation empirically.
4In Pigure 2, we assume that a woman who initially decides not to
contracept will never decide to contracept later in this pregnancy interval.
The main reason for this assumption is that our data record whether or not a
woman contracepted in a given interval ar.d when (and if) she discontinued
contracention hut do not record when she began contracepting. Since the nur—
nose of contraception is to delay or prevent pregnancy, it seems most plausible,
given our data, to assume that she begins contracention as soon as she is at
risk (i.e., enters S0).

—10-the woman remains nonpregnant, the couple decides whether or not to discontinue contracentlon.

Observed fertility outcmnes follow as a probabilistic

consequence of

the contraception strategy adopted by a couple. The length of each nreg—
nancy interval is a random variable whose mean and variance are determined

contraception decisions made within the interval. The sequence of these
decisions across intervals determines the probability distribution of the
total number of nrepnancies and births over a woman's reproductive span.
The contracention strategy chosen by a counle is assumed to reflect the
interaction of the couple's demand for children (including both number
and timing dimensions and embodying their attitude toward risk), the costs
of contraception and

their

past

childbearing experience.

The effect of costly contraception on strategy choices and realized
fertility can be made clearer with the aid of a simple economic model.

Let us assume that a couple receives a flow of c units of child services
ner

that

child ter year for as long as the child remains in the household and
it

also

receives a flow of s units of other satisfactions unrelated

to children. The couple's lifetime utility function is assumed to be:
(1) intertenporally additive, (2) of identical form

in

each year, and

(3) characterized by a constant rate of time preference. It is written
as
•

U=

N, s) —

(1)

— fl

—

where T is the family's time horizon in months from the date of marriage
at t =

0, d is the rate of tine preference, u(.) is the flow of utility

per month from its consumotion of c and a, Nt is the number of children
in the household in month t and

is the cost of contraception in month

t measured in utils.5 We assume that the monthly contraception cost
function takes the form

f=f(e)

(2)

where e is the efficiency of contraception, noncontraception is costless
[i.e. f(O)

cost (i.e.

0] and increases in efficiency are achieved at increasing

.L

' >0).

The couple is assumed to maximize expected lifetime utility subiect

to its lifetime resource constraint. For simplicity, we make the following
additional assumptions:
flow of

(4) that the household's full income is an exogenous

per month; (5) that ct and

the full resource (i.e. time and

money) costs per unit of c and s in period t, are exogenous and (6) that
no borrowing or lending is possible so that full monthly income is equal

to monthly expenditure on c and s. Thus, the flow budget constraint is

iT cN + iT5t5t .

(3)

Let us first examine the implications of the model under deterministic

conditions by assuming that contraception is costless (i.e. t aO) and
that there is no biological constraint on fertility (i.e. the couple may

choose with certainty to have a birth any time it wishes). At the beginning

5Th princinle, the costs of contraception may include both resource
costs (i.e. time and money) and psychic (i.e. util) costs. For simplicity,
we have assumed that all costs are nsychic. One inplication of this is
that variations in contraception costs shift the utility function, not the
budget constraint. Consequently, variations in these costs cause no income
effects.

— 12 —

of

marriage, the couple's constrained lifetime utility maximization

nrohlein is

max L

, + A (_I +

dt {u(cN

+

t=l

where the A's are lagrangjan

S)} (4)

multipliers. It is convenient to rewrite

this as an unconstrained maximization

problem by substituting the flow

budget constraint for s in the flow utility functions to obtain the

problem

T
max L =

dtv(N)

X

1

where

v(N) v(cN,

ct'gt = u[cNt.

u (cN ,

11tt — 'ct

cN)]

s)

is the couple's indirect flow utility function in period t and where the
number of units of child services per month, c, received from each child

is set equal to one. Once born, a child is assumed to remain in the
household permanently so that the stock of children can never be decreased (i.e. N0 < N1c ...< N)

The couple's utility flow in any montht

1, •.., T is determined by

the number of children, N, Uresent in the household during that month
according to the indirect flow utility function, v (N

t t

)
p

which Is a con—

cave function of the form illustrated in Figure 3.

VlL

F

Figure

I6
I

I

3

— 13 —

Let N; be the integer value of N that maximizes v.
(1) —

Given assumptions

of full
(6) above, the tine path of Nt depends on the tine paths

and the relative resource costs of child services,

income,

In the simplest case, for example, N; would be a

ctfirst

cycle if I and ii
t

constant over the life

were constant because the vt functions would be

identical over tine and, therefore, each would be maximized by the same

number of children. If

grew during the life cycle, and child services

have a positive income elasticity, the tine path of N; would tend to be
an increasing step function.6 Similarly, holding

constant, an Increas-

ing time path of iTct/TTst would generate a time path of N; which is a

decreasing step function.

In the absence of any biological constraint on obtaining children,
*
is equal to
a couple's optimal stock of children at any tine t,
V
0
*
increasing;
5f
provided that the future tine path of Nt is constant or
*
is decreasing, the optimal value of Nt is less than (or equal to) Nt
0
0
because the family cannot decrease its stock of children when that stock

it

becomes "too large." In the case of constant or decreasing N;, the
couple would optimally have all of its children simultaneously at the
beginning of marriage and, in the case of rising N;, births would be

spaced. These implications suggest that births are more likely to be
widely spaced, the more rapidly rising is the life cycle profile of full.

6Since N can take only integer values., income must grow by a
finite amount in order to increase the flow utility naximizing number
would.
of children by one. It should be noted that the time path of
market
because
be unrelated to the time path of I in a perfect capital
monthly resource expenditures woul be constrained by wealth rather than
current income. This argument also abstracts from any functional reoperating through the value of time
lationship between I and c
S
(see Willis, 1973).
.

—14—
income, and are more likely
is the tine path of relative

We now relax the

to he closely spaced the.

resource cost of child services.7

assumption that a couple

may costlessly choose any

number and timing. patten of births it wishes with
we assume that the couple

neriod

(excluding

more rapidly rising

certainty. Instead,

chooses in any month of the

woman's childbearing

sterile periods due to Pregnancy or postpartum anovu—

lation) a monthly probability
traception with efficiency
maximize expected lifetime

of conception, p

p (l_e) by using con-

e at a cost in utils of f =

f(e)

so as to

utility in the remaining T—t months of life.

The nature of the

decision_making problem may be illustrated by considering the couple's decision of whether or not to
contracept in the first
month after marriage on the assumption that the woman is

nonpregnant and fecund. At the

beginning o.f the month,. the couple selects

a value of contraceptive
efficiency, e1 ,

where, of course, the choice of
e1

(U

<

e1 <1) at a cost of f(e1)

U corresponds to a decision not to

contracept and noncontraception is costless (i.e.

woman's chance of conception

initially childless,

f(e1)

during the month is4

of remaining nonpregnant is 1—
p1 ,

f(O)

0). The

p(l—e1) and her chance

where p is her natural fecundability

(i.e. chance of conception in the absence of

contraception). For sim-

plicity, assume that all

conceptions result in live births and that all
children survive to the end of the couple's tine horizon,
t.

71t should he stressed again that the
present model is a ve simple
one which should be elaborated before
derived from it are taken
too seriously. As obvious

examples, allowance might be made for (1)
variations in child "quality"
(e.g. by letting the number of units of
child services per child he
scale and time intensity of a choice variable), (2) variation in the
resources devoted to children as a function
of their age (e.g.
plausibly, children become less time intensive as
they age) or (3) investment in human
capital by the husband and wife
and its interactions with the cost of children.

— 15 —

The couple's expected lifetime utility at the beginning of the second
month of marriage is conditional on which event, conception or noncon—

cention, occurs in the first month. If the woman conceives in the month 1,
let V2(h1) be the couple's expected lifetime utility at the beginning of
month 2 on the assumption that the couple follows an optimal, expected
utility maximizing contraception strategy in all subsequent time periods

conditional on beginning month 2 in a pregnant state. Similarly, let
V2(_b1) be expected lifetime utility at the beginning of month 2 conditional
on

entering that month in a nonpregnant state.8 The couple's expected life-

time utility

at the beginning of marriage may then be written as

V01

where, recall, 4

=

p {v2(b1) - f(e1)} (1-4) v2(-b1) -fte)} (6)

=p

(l—e1)

We may now examine the conditions under which a couple will contra—
cept in month 1 and, if so, how efficiently. If the couple chooses not
•to contracept (i.e. it selects e1 = 0 and, since f(0)

0, it incurs no

costs of contraception), its expected lifetime utility is

v01

The

' v2(b1) +

(l-p) v2

term AV2(-b1) = V2(-b1)

—

(-b1)

V2(b1)

a

is the expected lifetime utility

) to denote the exvected
coun'±e
that conceives in month
utility in the remaining portion of life of a

8Nore generally, we nay use the notation V(b

t and

whose parity (i.e. number of previous births) is n—l at the beginning
of month t—l and V(b ) for the corresponding case of nonconception. Later,
we shall illustrate th meaning of these terms more concretely.

9The general notation for expected utility over the remaining portion
of life for a couple with a stack of n children at the beginning of month
For expositlonal simplicity, the flow utility from zero children
t is Vnt
(6) since it does not
during month 1, v (0), is omitted from equation
depend on

whether1or not the woman conceives and., therefore, does not affect
is omitted in the more

the couple's decisions. Similarly, the term
general

expression for

in equation (9) below.

—1.6—
of nreventing a conception in month 1.

If AV2(h1) is positive, the

couple will choose to contracept (assuming that the marginal cost of contraception, f' =
,S Hjpnr

e

, Is

zero in the neighborhood of e — 0) and1 if it

is negative, the couple will choose not to contracept.

pm.
Assuming that V2(-b1) is positive, the couple selects the value
of contraceptive efficiency that maximizes V01 in equation (6). The
first order condition for a maximum is

-

de

= p

1

lnnoil.thrin3

{V2(b ).- V

(b

)

- f'

=

f' — 0

pAV2(b1)

.

(7)

1thesecond order condition is

dej2.

(

<0.

.

(8)

In tqords the first order condition states that the optinal value of

is such that the martinal cost of efficiency, f', is equal to the expected
dp1*
-margina1,benefi of efficiency, pAV2(-b1), where p
—
is the rate
—

ofcdecrease in the chance of concertion with respect to contraceptive
efficiency
a

of

and, as before, V2('h1) is the exnected utility of preventing

concention. The second order condition inplies that the marginal cost
efficiency must he rising if values of e1 strictly

less

greater than zero or

than one can he optimal.

rr?imt.ana1ysis is illustrated diagramatically in Figure 4 where the
horizontal

curves MB

a

NB

h

and

MB

c

corresnond to three nosthible values of

the expected marginal benefit of preventing a conception (i.e.

NB pAV2(b1))

Od is the marginal cost curve of contraceptive efficiency••
—

:wMch

1

reaches its upper limit of one at point d.

If the value of pre—

.rf):
venting a birth is sufficiently high (e.g. ), the

,)jL,J

cept rerfectly
LCTharc,inal

(e =

1), perhaps by nracticing abstinence. Given a lower

benefit such as MBb,

perfectly

couple will contra—

the couple will practice contraception im—

and confront the risk P] =

n(l_eb)

of having an "accidental"

__It

-17-

I

•

(t

(1

r

I

flo.rcCVu'.-k

/

Bet{d

U

•

Figure

I

; Cr1

0

4

La.ccpLCJt

—M6
conception in the first month of marriage. Finally, if the expected utility
of preventing a conceütion is negative (e.g. NB), the couple will not con—
tracept and will have a nrobability p of having a "desired" conception in
month 1.

The preceding analysis is easily extended to the contraception deciGeneral-

sions of a counle with n children at the beginning of month

izing eiuation (6), the couple's expected utility over the remaining portion of life is
=
=

where

tV41

(-b+1) =

fv.1 (hn+1)

v1
V1

(Th) —
Nbn+1) =

—

f(e) I + (1—p)
tv+1(

b+i) —

V÷i(h+i)

{v+i

(b÷i)

f(e)

_f(e)

(9)

is the expected utility

of preventing the conception of the n+l child in month t. As before, the

couñle's. optimal decision is not to contracept if AV+i(-b+1) is negative
and,

if

it is positive, to select e such that f' =

PAVt+i(bn+i)•

The

sequence of contraception decisions made by a couple depends on how the
sipn and magnitude of LVt+i(_hn+i) varies with time and parity and with
the probabilistic outcome of these decisions in ternis of the actual

101t is assumed, of course, that the woman is in a nonpregnant fecund
state at this time.

— 18 —

timing
In

and number of pregnancies and births the couple experiences.

the first birth interval (i.e. the interval between marriage and

first pregnancy),

parity remains constant at zero, hut time varies. As is

indicated schematically in Figure 2, a number of alternative sequences of

decisions within this interval are possible. If

AVt(_bi) is initially

negative and remains so over time, the couple will not

contracept during

the interval and, therefore, faces a constant monthly probability of con-

ception, p. The length of time it takes the woman to conceive is a random
variable, distributed geometrically with mean lip and variance (l—p)/p 211
If

is positive and remains roug1y constant over time, the couple

will contracept at some given level of efficiency such as e1, in Figure 4

an "accidental" pregnancy occurs. In this case, the monthly probability of conception is the constant p* = P(l—eb) and the mean and variance of waiting time to conception are increased to lfp.* and
until

respectively.

Mother possibility is that AV(_bi) is initially positive, but decreases over time until it becomes negative as would be indicated in

Figure 3 bya progressive decrease in the marginal benefit of contraceptive
efficiency from

to c In this case, according to Figure 4, the cou—

pie initially contracepts with efficiency eb and, assuming the woman re—
mains nonpregnant, continues to contracept, but with decreasing efficiency,
until NB becomes negative at which time the couple discontinues contracep-

tion. It follows that r continuously increases until it equals p at the
tine of discontinuation.'2
11
-

See, for exanole, Sheps (1964).

less plausible possibility is that tv(-bi)

12Another
Is initially
negative and increases over tine until it becomes positive. In this case,
of course, the couple would begin contracenting once Avt(-bi) became positive, provided that the woman did not become pregnant in the initial period
of

noncontraception.

— 19 —

To the extent that decreasing contraceptive efficiency involves a
switching of contraceptive techniques rather than using a given technique
with less care, the decline in efficiency may be substantially less than
would be indicated by following the marginal cost curve Od in Figure 3

as MB decreases. As an extreme example, suppose that a couple initially
chooses a technique such as the IUD which has a "technologically" fixed
Further suppose that the monthly

level of efficiency equal to eb.
cost

of wearing an IUD is zero once it has been insertedP The "supply"

of contraceptive efficiency, given the choice of an IUD, is then the
dotted

vertical line eg in Figure 4. As long as Av(_bi) is positive,

the couple contracepts with efficiency eb and faces the constant probability of conception 2*

(le) when Av(_b1) becomes negative, the

woman has the TUD removed.
The theory can easily be extended to deal with the choice of contraceptive techniques such as the IUD which involve fixed costs as well as

variable monthly "user" costs. To take the simplest example, suppose the
couple must choose either the 11Th or not contracept at all during the

first birth interval. The maximwn price (in utils) that the couple would
be willing to pay to have an 1111) inserted at the beginning of marriage is

equal to the discounted sum

t

of

expected utility

gains from wearing an IUD.

*

This "demand once" is E0 dt(l_p )t MBeb where MB eb
is the total expected
t

utility

t=O
gained from contracepting with

efficiency

eb in month t, t0

is

the

duration of contraception before voluntary di9continuation, d is the rate of

13This assumption abstracts from that possibility that the 11Th produces
unpleasant and"costly" side effects such as cramping. We also abstract from
the possibility that the device may be expelled involuntarily.

— 20
*

time discount, p =
P(l_eb) and (i—p )

is

the nrobability that the

woman goes t months without conceiving. If the demand price exceeds
the cost (in utils) of inserting an 11Th, the couple will contracept.
It is easy to see that the probability, of choosing the IUD is greater

the

more effective is the 11Th, the higher the marginal benefit of pre

venting a conception in each month, the lower is the rate of discount,
and the longer is the desired duration of use.

14

So far, we have discussed how the marginal (and fixed) costs of
contraception interact with various possible tine paths of the marginal
benefit of contraception within the first birth interval to generate the
sequence of decisions to contracept or not contracept, to select optimal
levels of contraceptive efficiency and to discontinue contraception which

are depicted schematically in Figure 2. Clearly, a similar analysis of
contraception decisions in subsequent birth intervals is possible. For
example, a decision to contracept in the first month — say t —

awonan enters the nonpregnant fecund state

t2

—

that

after the birth of her

first child would be optimal if the marginal benefit of contraception,

is positive. The sign and magnitude of Av2( b2) depends
both on the woman's parity — she now has one child — and on the timing
of her first birth which is
decisions

the

probabilistic outcome of contraception

in the first birth interval.

In general, our model suggests that the reproductive history of a
woman (i.e. the number and timing of pregnancies and births) may be

4The extension of this analysis to choice among many alternative
forms of contracention which have different fixed and variable costs is
straiczhtfoniard, but beyond the scope of this paper. For an analysis of
the choice of contraceptive technique in a static framework, see Michael'
and Willis (1973).

—21—

regarded

as the realization of a stochastic process whose parameters

are determined by the biological capacity of a couple to reproduce and

by the sequence of contraception decisions the couple makes. These
decisions, in turn, depend on the costs of contraception and the sign
and

magnitude of the marginal benefits of contraception (pvt(-b) as

it varies with time and parity.

It is apparent that any hypotheses that nay emerge from our model
the effect of economic variables on contraception decisions and
realized fertility depend crucially on our capacity to derive the rela-

tionship between these variables and the ev(-b). Formally, the model
of optimal decisiornuaking that we have specified requires a couple to

solve a stochastic dynamic programming problem at the beginning of each

month from marriage to menopause whose answer is summarized by the sign

and magnitude of AV

C-b).

Unfortunately, the rigorous analysis of

dynamics programming problems remains on our agenda of future

these

research. 15

l5

issues that may occur to the reader at this point deserve
brief comment. First, it is known that stochastic dynamic programming

problems

are difficult to solve and often do not yield.many predictions.
We are encouraged on this issue by the recent work of Mccabe and Sibley
(1973) who have obtained comparative static results using dynamic pro—
granmiing techniques in a model of sequential fertility behavior which
assumes perfect fertility control but allows for uncertainty about future
income and wage rates. Second, it may

strain the credibility of the read-

er to suppose that behavior is in fact governed by the complex calculations
implied by our model. Without attempting to add to or resolve the ancient
controversy concerning the realism or relevance of deriving hypotheses
by assuming optimizing behavior, we shall simply assert that it is plausible to imagine that "rules of thumb" or "behavioral- norms" which emerge
to guide decisionmaking in complex situations tend to be peroetuated to
the extent they anproximate optimal decisions. If this is the case,
optimizing models can be a fruitful source of empirical hypotheses
about behavior.

— 22 —

It

is possible, however, to use a simple two period dynamic pro-

gramming model to

illustrate

the meaning of MIt (ba) more concretely

than we have done so far and to shot.- how current contraception decisions

are influenced by a ,ositive probability of "accidental" pregnancies
in the future under conditions of costly and imperfect contraception.
Paradoxically, for example, we can show that a couple might find it op—
tinal to contracept when contraception is costly in situations in which

it would not contracept if contraception were perfect and costless.

This

implies that, under certain conditions, a decrease in the marginal cost of
contraception may decrease the probability that a couple. contracepts. A

motivation for such behavior is suggested by the demographer Nathan Keyfitz
(1971) who argues that the increase in the efficiency of modern birth con-

trol techniques ha allowed couples to concentrate their childbearing in
the early veers of marriage

instead

of spacing them widely to avoid the

chance .of ending up with "excess" fertility.

To examine the plausibility of Keyfitz's argument for "precautionary
contraceptiont', consider the following two period model. Let us suppose
that a couple has N* — 1 children at the beginning of period 1 and that

the per period flow of utility from children is such that v(N*_l) cv(N*)
*
*
> v(N +1) so that we may say that N is the desired stock of children. 16
The couple's decision problem is to decide whether or not to contracept
during period 1.

16ror ex-nositional simnlicity, we assume that children are conceived
at the beginning of a period and horn at the end of the period after which
they provide utility to their parents; that the rate of time preference is
zero and that there is no sterile period following birth. Under conditions
of certainty, the coule's maximum lifetime utility at the beginning of
period 1 would he v(N ) + v(N ).

— 23 —

The

*
*
couple hepins period 2 with either N or N —l children dependin

If it begins period 2 with

on whether or not it conceived in .neriod 1.
*
N

— 1 children, ft maximizes expected utility in the final period by not

contracenting. In this case, using the tiotation we defined for the general
T neriod model, its expected utility at the beginning of period 2 is
=

v(N*

—

1) + n v(N*) + (l_n)v(N* —1).

If the couple begins neriod 2 with N* children, it is optimal to contracept
in

order to reduce the chance

of "excess fertility".

Its expected utility

is
*
*
v(N ) + p v(N + 1) + (l—n)

.3.

where n =

n

(1—e2) is the probability of having the

*
v (N )

+ 1

— f(e2)

child, f(e2) is

the cost of contracention in period 2, and e2, the ontimal level of contraceptive efficiency, is chosen such that the marginal benefit ((i.e.
p[v(N*) _v(N* + 1)])]and marginal cost (i.e.
The

counle's decision about whether or not to contracept at the be—

ginning of
which,

f') of contraception are equated.

period

1 depends on the sign of AV2(—h) = V2(_h*)

—

V(h*)

as before, is internreted as the expected utility of nreventing a

conceotion in period 1 on the assumntion that the counle pursues optimal

(expected utility maximizing) decisions in future neriod(s). t'sthg the
expressions derived above, we see that
*
*
*
*
*
(2—p) {v(1 —1) — v(N )} + i,2 {v(N ) — v(N +1)} + f(e2).
(f contracention

tV2(.h*)

n=

is nerfect (i.e.

is negative since v(N — 1)

<

(1)

v(N*).

and costless (i.e. f(e2) O),
In this caSe, the counle

will not contracept in period 1. in order to maximize its chance of having
the

N* child. If, however, contraception is

nositive terms, p
tude

to make

(v(N)

—

v(N*

costly and imperfect, the

+ l)j +f(e2), nay he of sufficient magni-

tV (_b*) nositive and, as Keyfitz conjectured, lead the

—24—
couple to contracept before reaching its "desired" number of children.
These positive terms have a simple economic interpretation as the

total opportunity cost of imperfect contraception. Thu may be illus(page 17 above)
*
*
trated in Figure 4AOfl the assumption that e2 =
eb and p{ v(N ) — v(N +l)}

=

'

The total opportunity cost of imperfect contraception is

equal to the area Oije which,.in turn, is equal to the sum of the direct
cost of contraception, f(eb). given by the area Oi% under the marginal

cost

-

curve and the expected loss of potential utility from "excess" fer—
*
*
*
'2 {v(N ) — v(N +l)} =
which is equal to the area of

tility,

b—eb),

rectangle ebilea. The upper limit of the opportunity cost of imperfect
contraception is equal to the direct cost of perfect cntraception
(i.e. f(e2) =

f(l))

given by area ode in Figure 4

In our two period example, it

is

evident that a necessary condition

a couple to engage in precautionary contraception is that the loss of
potential utility from one child too many, v(N*) v(N *+1), is substantially
for

greater than-the loss from one child too few, v(N*)

*

— v(N —1). While this

be true, it need not be. Indeed, on grounds of svmetrv it might be
argued that, on the average, the losses from one too few children and one
might

too many children are about equal so that precautionary contraception would

occur in only a minority of cases. Possibly, the incentive to engage in pre—
cautionary contraception is greater in the general multi—period case because

of the chance of higher levels of excess fertility (i.e. the chance of having
*
births N + 2, N* + 3 and so on). Unfortunately, examination of this possibility must await rigorous analysis of the more general model.
We shall conclude this section by considering the effects of variations
in economic variables on the optimal path of contraception decisions a couple
would follow under the simplifying assumption that it may contracept perfectly

at zero cost. In this way, we eliminate consideration of the effect on current

—25—

decisions

of the risk of future contraception costs and risks of "ccci—
0
since f(e) 0 and p
is positive. The analysis is nearly

dental" pregnancies while contracepting

in

every month in which txV(-bn)

iden-

tical to our earlier discussion of fertility behavior in the absence of a
biological constraint on fertility, except that now the couple cannot obtain children as ranidly as it wishes.

Recall, for example, that we showed that if
and

the

the

flow of full income,

relative cost of child services, ii/ir, are constant over

the life cycle, the optimal stock of children, N, is also a constant —

say N —

in

even nonth. In this case, the couple will not contracept
*

until a rarity of N is reached and will

contracect perfectly thereafter.

Although sufficient changes in the levels of income or cost of child services nay change the optimal stock of children, they will have no effect
*
on behavior (e.g. the monthly probability of conception) until N is

reached.

*

For instance, if N is always greater than one child, variations

in income and the cost of children will not influence contraception decisions in the first birth interval.
[f the cost of child services follows a rising time path (e.g. because

of an increasing ware profile of the wife) and I is constant, our earlier
discussion implies that the optimal stock of children will tend to decrease

at discrete time intervals during the life cycle. Provided that the optimal
stock at the beginning of marriage exceeds one child, the couple will not

contracept during the first birth interval. Since the timing of the first
birth is a random variable, the optimal stock of children at the beginning
of the second birth interval will vary across individual households which
initially

had identical "fertility goals". Those couples who had their

first child quickly would have larger optimal stocks of children at the beginning of the second

interval than those who took longer to conceive the

— 26 —

first child. Consequently, the probability that a couple will go on
to

have a

second child

i.s negatively

related to the

length of the

fIrst birth interval. Extending the argmBent to subsequent birth in—
tervals, the probability that a couple terminates childbearing with the

nth child is positively related to the length of tine it has taken the
couple to achieve parity ii.

Thus,

in the case of an exogenousF,r rising

time path of the cost of child services, the connleted fertility of a
group of initially identical households is dependent on the realized
of births.

timing

17

A different nattern of behavior is implied by the assumption of a
rising time path of full income assuming constant r

ct

/

ir

gt

since, as

we showed earlier, the optimal stock of children, ,N, will tend to increase at discrete tines during the life cycle. If N: = 0 for a period
of time, the cOuPle will contracent at the beginning of marriage, then dis—
*

continue contraception when income has risen sufficiently to make

Nt

1.

18

If the first child is hon before N: increases to two, the couple will again
practice contracettion in the second interval, discontinue when N; = 2 and
so on until the highest value of N; is reached at the neak of the income

profile (assuming that I remain constant thereafter). Once actual parity
reaches this level (there is, of course, some probability that it will not),

17An interesting extension of this analysis would be to consider the
interaction between contraception strategy and the wife's accumulation of
human canital via labor force exnerience. See Mincer and Polachek (1974)
for evidence that female waae rates are quite resnonsive to labor force
experience which, in turn, is strongly related to the wife's reproductive
history.
18Assuming that a malor purpose of marriage is to have.children, a
(notential) couple may delay marriage until N = 1.. Anothernossibility,
of course, is that marriage may he delayed until an actual parity of one
is imminent. Despite these considerations, we treat the date of marriage
as an exoenous event in this naper.
-

— 27 —

the couple will contracept permanently. This analysts suggests that the
more steeply rising is the income profile, the more likely it is that

counles will contracent in order to space their births.'9 It also im-

plies that the probability that a couple will contracept for spacing purposes

in the second or higher

intervals

is greater, the faster its earlier

births occurred. Finally, an upward shift in the level of the income profile (or decrease in the cost of child services) will tend to increase

N: for all t=l,..., T, thus reducing the probability that a couple will
contracept at any given tine and increasing the maximum value of N:.

In this section, we have shown how a choice—theoretic economic model
of fertility behavior can be embedded in the stochastic structure of

demographic models of reproduction depicted in Figures 1 and 2. Our model
implies that the sequence of decisions to contracept, the choice of contraceptive efficiency and decisions to discontinue contraception that are made
as a couple proceeds through its reproductive life cycle may he internreted
as a contraception strategy in which decisions at each time and parity level
are based on current and future values of income, costs of child services

and costs of contraception. It also implies that a woman's actual reproductive history can be interpreted as the probabilistic consequence of this
strategy.

It is clear that much remains to be done before a complete economic
model of fertility behavior within a sequential stochastic framework is

achieved. The rather simple model specified in this paper has not yet been
fully analyzed in the general T period case under conditions of imperfect

we noted earlier, in a perfect caoital market the value of
depends only on the present value of the income profile and S independent
of its shape. In thiscase, the slope of the time pathof N is rising,
constant, or falling according to whether the rate of interek is greater
than, equal to, or less than the rate of time preference.

—28—

contraception.

Consequently, we are not yet certain what imolications

the model has for effects of variation in the levels and tine paths of
income and the cost

of

children on optimal contraception decisions when

there are risks of future "accidental" pregnancies.

It

is

also evident that the specification of the model abstracts

from a number of aspects of family decisionmaking and the environment in
which these decisions are made which probably have a substantial impact

on contraception strategy. For examvle, we have assumed that the flow of
child services from a given child and the costs of producing these services
are independent of the child's age, sex or other traits and the presence

and characteristics of other children. We have also assumed that the
flow of services from a child cannot be increased by the expenditure of

resources on child quality".

Obviously,

specification of a household

production function for child services which incorporated these factors
might considerably alter the implications of the model for desired spacing
patterns

under perfect contraception and attitudes toward the risk of

unwanted pregnancies under imperfect contraception. Other factors that
deserve consideration include the effect on fertility decisions of uncertainty about future income and wage rates; decisions concerning investments
in human capital and life cycle labor supply by husbands and wives; and

decisions about the timing of marriage and choice of spouse's characteristics.

While further theoretical progress is highly desirable, it is of equal
importance to design and implement empirical methods by which we nay determine the effect of economic variables on realized fertility as these effects
are channeled through the sequence of decisions we have cAlled a couple's

contraception strategy. Our ultimate empirical objective is to

use

data

on the full reproductive histories of women- to estimate the effect of

—29—
economic variables and prior experience with the fertility process on

contraception decisions in successive birth intervals. Ey directly
estimating the constituent probabilities of the fertility process (i.e.
the probability of contracepting, the monthly probability of contraception conditioned on contraception and the probability of discontinuing
contraception) as it evolves over the reproductive life cycle, we can

explain completed fertility as well as the timing, spacing and contraception decisions which lead to completed fertility. We can then use the
estimated probabilities to simulate the effects of economic variables on
the aggregate birth rate, and can determine at what stages and in what
decisions economic variables contribute to the explanation of observed
fertility outcomes.

It is obvious, however, that many additional, usually unmeasured and
frequently persistent factors influence contraception decisions and fertility

outcomes. Among these are variations among couples in natural fecundability
due to differences in health or taste for sexual activity and variations in
contraceptive efficiency caused by differences in the taste for children

or distaste for using contraceptives. As we demonstrate theoretically in
the next section and empirically in the final section, these unmeasured
components of persistent variation in p and e raise a serioSs statistical
problem in obtaining unbiased estimates of the effect of economic variables
on the monthly probability of conception of the representative or average

couple in a sample. We now turn to an examination of this problem and
present a method for resolving it as one step

toward

our longer run objec-

tive of estimating the stochastic structure of an economic model of reproduction.

30 —

II.

Serial Correlation Problems

In the previous section, we presented an economic model of fertility

behavior within a sequential stochastic framework. It is important to note
that this structure, as represented by the schema in Figures 1 and 2 of
the previous section, has been presented only for a typical individual.
Unless very strong statistical assumptions are made, the simple• semi—
Markov structure does not lead to a sample likelihood, function in which

estimated parameterized probabilities can be said to predict accurately

the probabilities of observed events for individuals. To see that this
is

so, it is

served

important to distinguish three sources of variation in ob-

birth intervals among individuals: (1) purely random factors

that arise independently in each time period, and are independent of random factors in other time periods, (2) random factors, including unobser-

variables, that are correlated across time periods, (3) deterministic

vable

variables such as income and education that can be measured, and which are

assumed to affectthe probabilities.
To fix ideas, suppose we are concerned solely with estimating the
probability process determining whether a woman has a first pregnancy.

Inherent in the model is the notion of a time series of events. A woman
has a first pregnancy in month I only if she has not had a first pregnancy
in months 1,... ,j—l. The most general way to model this probability is to
imagine a set of continuous random

variables

...,

thought of as index functions. The S1, i=l, ...,

, are

which may be
assumed to be

intercorrelated, The event Of a woman becoming pregnant in the first
interval

depends on what value the "wheel of chance" throws up for

Supnose that her education E is the only economic variable of interest.
We may then define

+

a1E

so that if

< a

+ a1E

a woman becomes pregnant

— 31 —

in

the first interval and leaves the samnie whiJ.e if the inequality is

reversed, the woman

the sample. The probability

is not nregnant and stays in

of a woman hecomine nrenant in the i th interval is thus

r ( >1 a o + ci1E,... ,

>

S.

i—i

E S.
a0 + a11
-i

ao + a1E)

<

.

(10)

If we assume that the S. are indenendentlv and identically distributed,
this nrohahility may he written as
i—I

tPr

If

(S >

ci+a1.)

Pr(S

<

a+a1E)

(11)

each S. is assured to he distributed normally

with mean zero, and

variance a, the probability statement may he written using the probit
function,

ol

cz+aF

1—1

a

2

_tf2dt
e
aIa1E
If

t1te S were

j

.1

dt

e

1

(12)

j--

assured robe logistically distributed, a sitiilar nrohahility

statement usin cumulative lovistics could easily he written.

we

If the S for all women are generated by the same random nrocess,
a
and a1
—
nay use the princinle of maximum likelihood to estimate
a
a

by taking a sannie
parameter

S

of women

with

S

different birth intervals, and choosing

values which maximize the probability of observing the-sample

distribution of birth intervals.
'1ote,

tine,

however, a crucial step in

the 5 were

the argument.

that over

independently dtstributed. This assunntion rules out

serial correlation in the S sentience. Such serial
arise

Ve assumed

correlation

may naturally

F there are unmeasured random variables which remain at, or near the

sane level, over tine

for a

buted among individuals.

given individual, hut which are randomly distri-

"or example, unmeasured components of fecundahility

— 32_

(e.g.

tastes

semen counts of husbni-jds,

for coital activity, and variations

in contraceptive efficiency) plausibly have a nersistent component for the
sane individual across time periods although these components ma', vary

widely among individuals.20 Similarly, imnortant. economic variables may
he missing in a given body of data.21
Following a convention in the analysis of covariance, we may decotnnoge
S. into two Components

s= u÷c

(13)

where U. is a random variable with mean zero and variance a2, and s is a
random variable with mean zero, and variance a

E(TJiUi)

= 0

,

0

,

E(U1c) =

C

i
I

Tie further assume that
(14)

=

1,...,

Then S. is a random variable with mean
1

E(Si)

= 0

(15)

and

E(SS.) =•
=

Thus,
p

the

correlation

a,

Jtj

a2+a,

(16)

in

,

coefficient between Si in any two neriods,

, may he defined as

PS

aC
(17)

Clearly, it is possible to imagine more general intercorrelation relationships

20 problem of heterogeneity is considered in a deriogranhjc
context by Sheps (1964), Potter and Parker (1964), Sheps and Nenken
(1972) and Sheps and erken (1973).
211n this namer, we abstract from the further nrohlem that the
unobserved components may he correlated with the included variables.

— 33 —

such as a first—order Markov process. These peneraljzatjons. are straiç'.ht—
forward and, since they are not of direct interest in this paper, are not

here.

nursued

If intercorrelation anplies because there are persistent
omitted variables, the probability of a woman becoming pre2nant in interval
i

can

no longer he ritten in the si'-.nle form of enu:ttion (10) (or if S is

assumed nox-nal, as in equation (12)).

To see what the appropriate probability

statement becomes, note that in general we may write the probability of the

event conditional on a given value of c
Pr(51

>

as

a+a11,... ,S> a+1E, S C ct+rt1F1c) .

But note that if

held fixed, the distribution of
must satisfy the following pronerties:

E(S.)

e is

(18)

conditional on

=

2.
v(s.51 16) =

and,since the F1

2

011+6) i=1

are indenendent,the conditional values of S are

independent. Then we

see

?r(51

SI_i >c+a1r, i < a+c1E)
>

a0+a1EI ')Pr(S2

so that conditional on c ,

as

also

that

Pr(S1 >
-

(19)

fls2

we

.

(20)

..Pr(S. ca0+a1Ej

)

reach precisely the same functional form

in equation (11) here norsistent omitted variables are ignored. How-

ever, to solve had: to the
perriitted

nrohabilitv statement of interest, where

to var't between plus and minus

infinity,

c is

we note that the

tional probability nay he written as

f

Pr(51

>

n+1EI c) Pr(S2

>

c).. .Pr(51

c

a+aiEI c)h(c)de

(21)

— 34 —
where 'iCc) is the

narrinsi density function of c

.vnn' over all Possible
In the special

variance aC2 +

2

a ,
u

f

is

nermitted to

case with S nornaljy distributed

"tth zero mean and

enriation
(21) becomes

1

e

0+ cx1E)

(ti—c)2

2 2?

, and

1

e-ï

1

/?du

du

—

£

values, as before.

-_

Letting

and

,

— £2/2?

U
C

'U

£

• and using the definition of o in equation

q —

(17), this-integral may be written as

I

31
1

o 1/2q
_U2

I

a*+a*E
0 1
/

L

where

=

If no serial correlation
nronortjon
cormonents.

I

01

(1 —p) 1/2

1

e

,Jj

t

1

2,2

dt

dq

L

dtJ

221/2 and a'1
(a+a)

to equation (12).

r ct*+C*E+pU2q

-t2f2

a1

(2÷21/2
is

nresent (pfl),

In the more .eneral case,

p

this

allows

expression collapses

us to measure the

of total variance in the index e,mlajned by sYstematic correlated

(22)

-34aNotice that there is an alternative "incidental parameters" argument
that

leads directly to equation (22). Sunnose it is

dinary

argued that in an or—

prohit model a disturbance "c" appears. This may he viewed as an

incidental parameter with density function h(c). Following a suggestion
of Kiefer and t'olfovjtz (1956), the nrohlem of incidental parameters has

precisely the solution written in equation (21) and for the normal case

this solution becomes eouatton (22). In a simple one period nrobit model,
such

as

section,

one designed to

explain the purchase of

refrigerators in a cross

the "incidental narayneters" 'troblern becomes irrelevant as long
It,

— 35 —
as the. incidental naralneter is normally
enuation (22) may

he written

distributed. Thus, if 'j—i,

as

*

a*+a E

.1

ol

at

so that correlated and tennorally random

components cannot have separate

effects, as is intuitively obvious.
-

Yet another interpretation of these results
is possible. An individual
may

he imagined as having a geometrj
nrohabilit process characterizing the

probabilities of Pregnancy

at

each interval for a Riven value of t.

in fact, a random variable governed

"C" is,

by a density function h(c). Then the

true probability of oregnancy at month j is a continuous mixture of geometric

processes and is given 1w equation (21).22

Tnnlicatjons of Serial Correlation

The

In

this section we demonstrate that estimates of the coefficients cz*

0.

and

defined in the nrevious section that

ignore serial correlation will, in

are based on techniques which
general, be biased, although it is not

nossjhle to sign the bias. To see this, we first consider the ease of no
serial

correlation.

In
E

this case, the conditional probability of a woman of education level

becoming nregnant in interval 1 given

intervals is

nrevious

m

and

that she was not pregnant in the 1—1

=

[Pr(s > a+a1E)]1pr(s c
—.
—1
[Pr(5 >
a+1E)J1

is clearly the same for all intervals j=l,2

=Pr(S

(23)

However, in the ease

22For a discussion of mixtures, see Kendall and
Stuart, Vol. I, (1969)

Pearson (1894), Ouandt (1972) and Zeliner (1973).

— 36

of

—

serial correlation, this conditional probability becomes

JIPrS >a +a1EJc) ] 1Pr(S <a+a1EIc)h(c) d€
(24)
>

a+c1EIc) ] 1h() de

Using the fact that Pr(S <

probability

becomes

P Pr(S

>

La,

L Pr(S
It

a0+c1 Eje) l—Pr(S> a+a1EIc), the condItional

a +a Ejc)1h(c)dc
° 1

(25)

>

can be proved that the conditional monthly probability of conception

declines for successive months. Using the fact that

lnf(rr(s> a+a1EIc))1h(e)de
is a convex function of

(Hardy, Littlewood, and Polya, 1934 ) the dif-

ference between two successive conditional nrohahilities of becoming
pregnant is

f

J (Pr(S>a+cz1EIc)]1h(c)dc

- -:

= -:

+1-

f(Pr(S>a+a1E )]i h(c)dC /

[Pr(S>a-I-a1EIc)]1
(Pr(S>cz+cs1Pf

e)](c)de
(26)

2.

;r(s>a +a1E It)

Ic.) ]1h (c)dc] +f

:

[fi;r8>a0+a1E

fi;rs>aØ1EcIhcdc LPr>ao÷alE111

— 37

liT
5€Wwti\. P'tktA%t

&&fc cL.I'LA.

iP\_

\_ &.w

j1 Ger1Lotyej4j

t(o.t-fij

rC&Lj CarttLt&d Gunec

0
Njot±ks Ctcs Otset

.

.; M0cc

Figure 5

The èited convexity result implies that
in

ji;r(s>a+1Ejc)]1h(c)dc

1n fiPr(s>a+C1EIC]i+1h(c)ac

+
Multiplying

lnfrPrcs>ao+aiEIe)]1_1h(e)dc

both sides by 2, and exponentiating, the numerator of exnression

(26) Is seen to he negative, thus proving that successive conditional proba-

bilities decline.
This

phenomenon ig

depicted

in Figure 5.

The. slope of the curve for the

case of serial correlation is negative as shown, hut the precise shape of

the curve is only suggestive. A simple estimation method, such as

logit

or

— 38 —

probit,

anplied to data on fertility

outcomes imposes the constraint of

constancy on conditional probabilities, It
is intuitively obvious, and

formally correct, that if persistence

is important, but neglected i forming

parameter estimates, a time trend that

does not belong in the model night

nonetheless prove statistically significant,
Since serial correlation in

ordinary regression models does not lead

to bias in coefficient

estimates, it is imnortant to motivate why it leads
to bias En our case. To show
what is involved, consider
specializing the
simple model further so that there are only two education
classes. Suppose,
in particular, that E assumes the value of zero or 1

or high levels of education. For

each education class, we may estimate a

monthly probability of becoming pregnant P (I)
women and i—I.

for

corresponding to low

where

1—0

for low

education

high education women, Given a functional form for the

distribution of the

S, a , ,,, , we

may solve P(1)

uniquely

and a, so that a comparison of direct estimates of the
P(i)
education groups will give

for

for a*
the two

direct information on a and

Suppose estimates of PCI) are formed neglecting serial
correlation.
This may be done in several ways all of which lead
to the same estimate.

One way is to partition

the data on length of time to first pregnancy by

level, and estimate the Average interval for each education
class. The inverse of these two averages leads to estimates
of the
educationaj

monthly

absent.

probability of pregnancy assuming
A second, and equivalent

that serial correlation is

approach, is to maximize

the

sample

L

— 39

likelihood

.

—

for each education class.23

Note that these estimators. are the correct maximum likelihood

assuming no serial correlation. The procedure yields

estimators

con-'

sistent estimators Of mean lengths of duration to first pregnancy even
in samples with serial correlation since the population mean is the same
for all observations and IChinchine's theorem readily applies.24 However,
in the presence of serial correlation, the mean length.of duration is not

simply related to any measure of direct interest. In fact, the inverse of
the

mean duration est*aates the harmonic mean of the probabilities

Pr(S'ca +aiEit)
over

all value of c .

pregnancy

is simply

23Thus,

in

To see this, note that the mean duration to first
.

f

Pr(S c

+ a1Ejc)

constructing this function, if

a highly

educated woman

goes L—l months without pregnancy and becomes pregnant in the tth nth,
the probability of this event is
(1 —

p(l))t-'1pfl)

Similarly, if the sample period is T months, highly educated woman
never gets pregnant with probability (l-P(l)) . Producting these probabilities associated with observed events, we reach the probability of
the sample outcomes. Choosing value of P(l) which maximizes this probability yields maximum likelihood estimates of P(l). Defining N1 as
the number of women who become pregnant in month I
N
N
T
[P(l)] 1[(l-P(l)P(fl] 2[(l-P(l)2 P(l))

La)

... [(l-fll)J

where N is the number of women who do not become pregnant in the sample
observaTion period. Thus maximizing
(1), or equivalently in/ (1), the
çstimator for P(l)
P
P Ni
is clearly
P(l) — l/(Z -j—) , where N — E
N1
L—l
i—l
i.e. the inverse of the average interval.
24Por a aSatement and proof of Khinchine's theorem see C.R. Mo
(1965), p. 92.

1)

—40—
so that the inverse of this is the harmonic mean
—1

[Js

<Co + ciEle))(C)dc]

We seek estimates of the arithmetic mean

J'Pr(S <

a

+ cl1EIE)h(c)dc

for each group (E=1 or 0) to estimate the effect of education on the

probabilities of birth. Since in general the dthfference in arithmetic
means is different from the difference in harmonic means, estimators

based

on the harmonic means will be biased, although it is not possible.

in general to sign the bias. The same argument applies if
tory variables apart from education are included as well.

other

explana-

In addition to solv!ng problems of bias, direct estimation of the
probabilities allows us to solve the problem of open

intervals. If a

given sample covers only a portion of a woman's reproductive history,

it

is likely that some portion of the sample will not conceive. For such
women, the probability of this event is easily derived and such data may
be pooled in sample likelihood fashion with data from women who conteive.

Thus no arbitrary assignment of interval length to nonconceiving women

is necessary as would bay needed in an ad hoc regression study Ssiñg interval
length between marriage and first birth as the dependent variable.25

25Besides avoiding this ad hoc methodology, the procedure suggested

in the paper provides an explicit approach to a derivation of theoretically
appropriate test statistics, something
regression approxima—
.-. - in the
—-—. lacking
tion approach.

41

III.

Empirical Results

This section presents estimates
ception in the first

pregnancy interval following conception using the

econollietric model developed in the

of a sample of white

of the monthly probability of con-

preceding section. The data consist

non—Catholic women, married once with husband

present for 15—19 years from the 1965 Princeton National Fertility
26
Study.
The sample of all such. women was reduced by eliminating
women who reported
premarital conc!ptions or who had missing values for relevant variables.
The

sample was

ceptors,

then divided into two groups,

on the basis of the woman's

contraceptors and

noncontra

response to a question concErning

the contraceptive methods she used before her first
pregnancy (or in her
current interval if she had not had

a pregnancy). Summary statistics on

the two groups are presented in Table 1 including the
means and variances

of the three independent

variables (wife's education (ii), wife's

age (A),

and husband's predicted income at age 40 (0)) whose influence
on the monthly
probability of conception is estimated.

Women in each subsample were "followed"
beginning with their first month of

we estimate the monthly

for a tazimum of 120 months

marriage. Among the non—contraceptors

probability of conception in the first

interval by estiinatfng the

pregnancy

parameters of an equation 65 the form of

26The 1965
National Fertility Study, conducted
and Charles F. Westoff, is a cross—section national by Norman B. Ryder
probability sample
of 5617 U.s. married
women which is described in detail in Ryder and Westoff
(1971). For our purposes, its most important characteristics
are that it
records (retrosnectively) the date of marriage of the
woman, the dates of
each pregnancy termination, the use of contraception in each
pregnancy
interval, and the time of discontinuation of
contracepi
prior
to pregnancy in addition to a number of household characteristics
such
as
income
and education.

—42—

Table 1
Mean and Variance of Independent Variables for Contraceptors and
Non—Contraceptors in First Pregnancy Interval After Marriage*
(variance in parentheses)

Non—Contracep tore

177)

(N —

I:

W:

N:

Contraceptors
(N — 246)

Wife's Age at Marriage
(in months)

257.1

252.3

(2746)

(1687)

Wife's Education

11.2
(6.3)

12.2

7.58

8.17

(2.5)

(2.12)

Husband's Predicted Income
at Age 40 ($1000)**

'.

(4.6)

*

Sample: White, non—Catholic women, married once for 15—19 years, no
premarital conceptions and no missing values.
**
•

Husband's predicted income is based on an estimated regression re—
lationship between husband's income and his education, and experience (i.e.,
age minus years of schooling minus 6) from data on all white non—Catholic
men in the 1965 NFS sample for husbands. The variable H is then. imputed
for men in the current sample on the basis of the man's education, with
age set arbitrarily at 40. Thus, H may be interpreted as a transformation
of husband's education or as his permanent income, depending on the reader's
preference.

—43—
equation (22) in Section tI by maximum likelihood methods.27
using the functional form of the likelihood

That is,

function implied by equation

(22) we estimate parameters which maximize the likelihood of observing

the events that occurred in this subsample. These events are (1) that
a given woman conceived in month
went 120 months without conceiving.
in similar fashion the monthly

1,

(j —

...,

120) or (2) that she

Among the contraceto, we estimate

probability of conception given that the

woman is contracepting. In this case, the events we observe are (1)
that a woman conceives in month j while

using a contraceptive; (2) that

the woman uses a contraceptive for k months

without conceiving, at which

time she discontinues contraception (this decision is treated as an
exogenous event); or (3) she continues using contraception for 120 months
and does not conceive. 28
I

Parameter estimates for the non—contraceptors are
presented in
Table 2A and for contraceptors in Table 2B.

In each group, we estimated

six models which differ in the number of parameters estimated in order to
determine the statistical significance of

individual parameters or sets

27The methods used are described in (oldfeld and Quandt (1972, Ch. 1).
Two algorithms, Powell and GRADX, were used in tandem to ensure that the
estimates are stable. That is, in the first stage the parameters of the
likelihood function were estimated by the Powell method. These parameters
were then given as initial values in a GR.ADX optimization procedure whose
final parameter values are reported in this paper. The computer program,
written by C. Ates Dagli and Ralph Shnelvar, is available from the authors
on request.

we noted in footnote 4, p. 9, our data only record whether a woman
contracepted in a given pregnancy interval and when and if she discontinued
contraception. They do not record when she began contracepting or any other
interruptions in contraceptions other than the final decision to discontinue.

—44—
of parameters using likelihood ratio tests.29
Among these parameters, we have a particular interest in the magnitude
of the serial correlation coefficient, p, its statistical significance and
the influence of its inclusion or exclusion from the econometric model
on the other parameters of the model (i.e., the constant term, °o' and the

coefficients of A, W and H which are, respectively, a1, a and a3). Accordingly, we present two estimates of each set of a's in Table 2, one in

which p is constrained to be zero and one in which p is free to assre a
nonzero value.

It is easy to see in Table 2 that p is positive and statistically

significaàt in every instance.30 Among the non—contraceptors p — 0.450
when only the constant term is entered and fails to 0.426 when the wife's
age at marriage is held constant, but does not fall any further when wife's

education and husband's predicted income are added to the model. Similarly,
the estimate of p in the contracepting subsample falls from 0.549 to 0.531
when A is held constant and to 0.526 when W and H are also held constant.
If we recall that the definition of p is the fraction of persistent

variance

(a2) in total variance (a2 + cr2), the decrease in p is easily

understood as showing that the exogenous variable A in the non—contracepting
subsample and

tribute to

the

variables A, H and W

in

the contratepting subsample con-

the persistent component of variation in conception probabilities

property
difference in log
is distributed as
difference in the

of maximum likeli,hood estimation is that twice the
likelihood between two equations (within set A or set 3)
Chi—square with n degrees of freedom where n is the
number of parameters in the two equations.

30Comparing lines (1) and (1') in Table 2, for example, we find that
log likelihood rose from —692.71 to —619.50, a difference of 73.21. Twice
the difference in log likelihood is 146.4 while the critical value of
chi—square with one degree of freedom at the .95 level is 4.6.

— 45

—

Table 2
Estimates of Parameters of Model for Contraceptors and

Non—Contraceptors in First Pregnancy Interval after Marriage
Wife's
Age at

.

Constant

0

(a)

A.

B.

Non—Contraceptors

Husband's
Predicted

Wife's

Marriage Education

Income
(C3)

(Cl)

Log
Like1iood
.

.

.

(1)

2.016

(1')

1.214

(2)
(2')

(3)
(3')

0.450

•

1.154
0.172

0.426

0.0033
0.0042

1.022
0.132

0.426

0.0031
0.0041

—692.71
—619.50
.

—680.42
—613.36
0.017
—0.004

—0.0033
0.0125

—679.80
—613.33

.

Contraceptors

.
.

(4)
(4')

2.264
1.180

0.549

(5)
(5')

1.307
0.646

0.53r

0.0038
0.0046

(6)
(6')

1.072
0.943

0.526

0.0036
0.0042

—336.92
—319.43

.

—332.42
—316.32
—0.0016
—0.0068

0.0387

—331.82

•

- 46

—

among women in the two subsamples. The small size of the decrease in o,

however, also shows that the contribution of other factors we have not

held constant constitutes the malor fraction of persistent variation. This
suggests that it is unlikely that the heterogeneity problem can be overcome
simply by holding constant a number of observable variables.

The size of the decrease in p caused by the addition of exogenous
variables is, of course, related to the statistical significance of these

variables. The wife's age at marriage is the only variable to pass a test
of statistical significance at conventional levels in either subsample.31
Wife's education and husband's predicted income are utterly without effect
on log likelihood in the non—contracepting subsample (e.g., the change in

log likelihood from line (2') to line (3').is 0.03). This is not entirely
surprising because the channels through which education and income may
affect the monthly probability of conception among non—contraceptors are
essentially limited to correlations of these variables with health or
coital frequency.

Our theory suggests that we should expect to find a larger impact
of income and education on the monthly probability of conception among

contraceptors. In this group, variation in conception probabilities is
caused by variation in contraceptive efficiency due to differences in the
techniques

chosen and the care with which a given tech*ique is used as

well as variation in natural fecundability. Comparing lines (5') and
we

(6'),

find that the change in log likelihood is not completely trivial (twice

the change in log likelihood from line (1') to line (2') for
noncontraceptors

line (4')
is

to
is 12.1 and the corresponding change from
confidence
line (5') for contraceptors is 6.2, both of which exceed the 0.95
level. Wife's age is also significant in the equations in which a
constrained to equal zero.

— 47 —

the difference in log likelihood is 2.9), but it falls well below conven
tional

levels of significance. 32

Estimates of
of

the monthly probability of conception and the effects

changes in exogenous variables on that probability differ substantially

depending

on whether or not serial correlation is taken into account. In

Table 3, we present examples of estimates of levels and changes in the
nrnthly probability of conception among non—contraceptors and contraceptors

with and without p constrained to equal zero. These estimates are derived

from the parameter estimates in Table 2. Before tuning to Table 3, it
will be helpful to show how the estimates in Table 3 are derived from those
in Table-2 and how they are to be interpreted in light of our statistical
discussion in Section II.

When p is constrained to equal zero, we proved in Section II that the
resulting estimate of the monthly probability of conception is an unbiased
estimate of the harmonic means of the conception probabilities of the in-

dividual women in the sample. Let the harmonic mean be
ors and

for noncontracept—

for- contraceptors. If p were truly equal to len (i.e., if all

women in a sample had identical conceptionnprobabilities), then the harmonic

means would equal the arithmetic sans of the two grouns, p and p*. If we
are

interested in measuring the arithmetic means, the difference between

and

between *

(or

and

*) measures

the bias caused by ignoring serial

correlation.

In order to make this comparison, it is necessary to evaluate p and *

32The

critical value of Chi—square with two added parameters is 6.0

at the 0.95 level. Since the critical value with one added parameter is
4.6, it is clear that neither B nor W would be significant if entered alone
into the equation.

Table 3
Estimates of Monthly Probability of Conception Derived From
Parameter Estimates in Table 2

.

(a)

Harmonic Mean ( or 1)
with

Serial Correlation
Ignored

(b)

Arithmetic Mean

with

or p*)

Serial Correlation
Allowed

(p0)

(0>0)

.022

.113

.012

.038

3. Ago 20

.026

.122

4. Age 21

.023

.111

.

.010

.048

6. Age2O

.013

.040

7. Age 21

.012

.035

8. Age 30

.004

.010

.014

.046

.015

.048

.015

.052

H — 3

.023

.097

13. if a 7

.015

.052

14. H — 10

.011

.027

A. Model with Constant
term only (an)

1.

Non—Contraceptors

2. Contraceptors
B. Effect of Wife's Age at Marriage
(Model with a0, a1)

Non—Contraceptors

Age 30

Contraceptors

C. Effect of Wife's Education*
(contracaptors

only)

9. W—8
10.W=12
11. W — 16

of Husband's Predicted**

D. Effect

Income (contraceptors only)
12.

*

These

estimates are obtained

a, a2, a3 by setting A a

20

and

H

from
—

7.

parameter estimates of models with

**

These

a2,

estimates are obtained from parameter estimates of models
with
20 and W — 12.
a by setting A

a0, a1,

- 49 at

the beginning of the first month of marriage. The reason for this is

that when serial correlation is present, the conditional probability of
conception

without

in month I of the subsamfle of women who have gone j—l

conceiving iA nailer the larger is I

because

months

the most fecund

women tend to be selected out of the original sample by conceiving in

the early months of the interval.
The deriviatjonr'of estimates of
marriage

from

and

*

evaluated

at the outset of

the parameter estimates in Table 2 is straightforward. We

need only read off the appropriate values from a table of the standard
normal

(1
in

integral. If we consider line (1') in Table 2, for example, then

), the

monthly probability of not conceiving among non—contraôeptore

the first month of marriage is
a —1.214

——
so that

—

.113,

_t2/2dt..

.887

the value which is entered in line 1(b) in Table 3A. When

serial correlation is not
the

1

allowed, the value of a0 in

the upper limit of

integral is 2.016 (see line (1) in Table 2) so that — 1022, the value

which is entered in line 1(a) of. Table 3A. Thus, we see that bias from
not considering setial correlation is quite larger. Similarly, in lines 2(b)
and 2(a) of Table 3 we see that the arithmetic mean monthly probability of

conception among contraceptors is * — .038 and the
In Table 3B, we

values

harmonic mean is

—

.012.

evaluate the monthly probability of conception for several

of wife's age at marriage for non—contraceptors and contraceptors with

and without p constrained to be zero from parameter estimatessin line! (2),

(2'), (5) and (5') in Table 2. Here, we notice that the effect of increased
wifets age is to reduce the probability of conception in both groups and that
this negative effect is markedly greater when serial correlation is taken

into account. There is some evidence from these estimates that failure to

- 50

-

account for serial correlation results in downward biased estimates of
contraceptive efficiency, e. Recall from Section I, that we defined the
monthly probability of conception while contracepting as
from which it follows that e

1 —

p*/p.

—

p(l

— e)

Using the estimates for 20 year

old women in lines 3(a) and 6(a) in Table 3 we may compute contraceptive
efficiency as e — 1 —

— .5 when p is constrained equal to zero, while,

from estimates in lines 3(b) and 6(b), we compute e — 1 —

p*/p

—

.67 when

p is unconstrained.

In parts C and P of table 3, we evaluate the ceteris paribus effects
of variations in wife's education and husband's predicted income, on the
probability of conception among contraceptors using the parameter estimates

contained in lines (6) and (6') of Table 3•34 The most notable features
of these estimates are that husband's predicted income appears to have a

large negative impact on * suggesting that higher husband's income is
associated with improved contraceptive efficiency while wife's education
has, if anything, a slight positIve effect on p*.
This finding, if it is not simply a result of imprecision in our parameter estimates, is rather surprising because it is wife's education that
has been found repeatedly to have a substantial negative impact on completed
fertility while husband's predicted income has a weaker, non—monotsnic effect

33The absolute values of e should not be taken too seriously because
it is quite likely that the natural fecundability, p,. of non—contraceptors
is lower than that of contraceptors since one of the reasons for not con—
tracepting is subfecundity or sterility. A more complete econometric model
would allow for the decision to contracept to be determined simultaneously
with the monthly probability of conception in order to reduce or eliminate
this selection bias.

341t should be emphasized that neither W nor H was statistically significant and, therefore, that little confidence may be placed in the magnitude
or signs of tFir effects.

- 51
(see, for example, Willis, 1973). However, it should also be noted that

Michaeland Willis in their paper at this Conference have found that husband's predicted income has a significantly positive effect on the probability that couples used the highly effective oral contraceptive pill
in the period 1960—64 while wife's education had a weaker, non—aonotonic
ef feet on this probability. While both our finding and the Michael—Willis
finding are based on data from the 1965 National Pertilitt Study, their

samples and ours are independent.35 Moreover, estimates of completed
fertility equations from 1965 PD'S data yield very similar results to those

estimated by Willis (1973) from 1960 Census data. These apparently contradictory effects of husband's income and wife's education on completed

fertility and contraceptive efficiency present a puzzle. Hopefully, future
research will determine whether the apparent contradiction is genuine and,
if so, how to resolve it.

350ur sample consists of women whose first birth interval began in
1946—1950, while their sample consists .f women who were married, bad
their first birth or had their second birth in the period 1960—1964.

Bibliography
Becker, Gary S., "An Economic Analysis of. Fertility," Demographic and
Economic Change in Developed Countries, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1960.

_______________

"A

Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal,

Vol. 75, September 1965, pp. 493—517.

Becker. Gary S. and Lewis, H. Gregg, "On the Interaction Between the
Quantity and Ounlity of Children," The Journal of Political Economy,
March/April

1973, pp. 279—288.

Ben—Porath, Yoram, "Short Term Fluctuations in Fertility and Economic

Activity in Israel," Demography, Vol. 10, No.

2, May 1913, p. 185—204.

Ben—Porath, Yoram and Welch, Finis, Chance, Child Traits, and Choice of
Family Size, R—1117—NIH/RF, December 1972, Rand Corporation, Santa
Monica, California.
Goldfeld, 534. and R.E. Quandt, Nonlinear Methods in Econometrics, Amsterdam—London, North—Eolland, 1972.
Hardy, ci. H., ci. Polys and J. E.

Littlewood, Inequalities, Second
Edition, Cambridge University Press, 1952.

Kendall, Maurice and Stuart, Alan, The Advanced Theory of Statistics,
Vol. I, New York, Hafner Publishing, 1969.

Keyfitz, Nathan , "How Birth Control Affects Births," Social Biology,
June 1971.

Kiefer, 3. and Wolfowitz, 3. "Consistency of the Maximum Likelihood
Estimator in the Presence of Infinitely Many Incidental Parameters,"
Annals of Mathematical Statistics, Vol. 27, No. 4, December 1956.
McCabe 3. and D. Sibley, "Economic Determinants of
Yale Economic Growth Center, xerox, October 1973.
Michael, Robert T. and Robert
Household Production Under
December 1973.

Life Cycle Fertility,"

Willis, "Contraception and Fertility;
Uncertainty", NBER

Working

Paper No. 21,

Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek, "Family Investments in Human

Capital: Earnings of Women", Journal of Political Econoor,
197b (forthcoming).

Pearson, K., "Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of Evolution.
flisection of Frequency Curves," Philosophical Transactions.of the
Royal Society, Series A, Vol. 185, 1894
Perrin, Edward and Mindel C. Sheps, "Human Reproduction: A Stochastic
Process," Biometrics, Vol. 20, March 1964, pp. 28—45.

Potter, R.G. and Parker, "Predicting the Time Required to Conceive,"
Population Studies, 18, 1964, pp. 99—116.
Quandt, R., "New Methods for Estimating Switching Regressions.," Journal
of the American Statistical Association, June 1972.

Rao, C.R., Linear Statistical.Inference and its Applications, Wiley, t965,
Ryder, Norman B. and Charles F. Westoff, Reproduction In the United
States 1965, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971.

Sanderson, Warren and Willis, Robert 1., "Economic Models of Fertility:
Some Examples and Implications," New Directions in Economic Research,
51st Annual Report, National Bureau of Economic Research, New York,
September 1971, pp. 32—42.
Schultz, Theodore W. (ed.), "New Economic Approaches to Fertility,"
Wetional Bureau of Economic Research, printed as a supplement to
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 2, Part II (March/April 1973).
Sheps, M. C., "On the Time Required for Contraception," Population Studies 18,
1964: 85—97.
Sheps, H. C. and 3. Menken, "On Estimating the Risk of Conception from
Censored Data," T.N.E. Creville, Population Dynamics, Academic Press, New
York, 1972, pp. 167—200.
Sheps, M. C. and 3. A; Menken, Mathematical Models of Conception and Btrth,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973

Simon, Julian L., "The Effect of Income and Education Upon Succtssive
Births," mimeo, University of Illinois, 1973.
Willis, Robert 3., "A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility
Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 2, Part II, March
April 1973, pp. s14—s64.
Zellner, A., "Bayesian and Non-Baysesian Analysis of the Regression Model
with Nultivariate Student—t Error Terms' May 1973, (Unpublished paper).

