                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THEORIES OF ECONOMIC REGULATION



                          Richard A. Posner




                    Working Paper No.41


CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research. Inc.
                 261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                             May 1974




                  Preliminary; Not for Quotation

     NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

     This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.

     The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a   grant
from the National Science Foundation to the NBER for research   in the
area of law and economics. The opinions expressed herein are    those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the   National
Science Foundation.
               THEORIES OF ECONOMIC REGULATION
                     Richard A. Posner*




                         Introduction

     A major challenge to social theory is to explain the

pattern of government intervention in the market——what we

may call "economic regulation." Properly defined, the term
refers to taxes and subsidies of all sorts as well as to

explicit legislative and administrative controls over rates,
entry, and other facets of economic activity. Two main
theories of economic regulation have been proposed. One is

the "public interest" theory, bequeathed by a previous genera-
tion of economists to the present generation of lawyers.1

This theory holds that regulation is supplied in response to

the demand of the public for the correction of inefficient or
inequitable market practices. It has a number of deficiencies
that we shall discuss. The second theory is the "capture"

theory—-a poor term but one that will do for now. Espoused oy
an odd mixture of welfare state liberals, muckrakers, Marxists,

and free—market economists, this theory holds that regulation

is supplied in response to the demands of interest groups

struggling among themselves to maximize the incomes of their
members. There are crucial differences among the capture
theorists.   I will argue that the economists' version is the

most promising but shall also point out the significant weak—
                                2

nesses in both the theory and the empirical research that

is alleged to support it.

        I.   The Public Interest Theory of Regulation
                   A.   The Original Theory
     Two assumptions seem to have typified thought about
economic policy (not all of it by economists) in the period
roughly from the enactment of the first Interstate Commerce

Act in 1887 to the founding of the Journal of Law and
Economics in 1958. One assumption was that economic markets

are extremely fragile and apt to operate very inefficiently
(or inequitably) if left alone, the other that government regu—
lation is virtually costless. With these assumptions, it was

very easy to argue that the principal government interventions
in the economy——trade union protection, public utility and
common carrier regulation, public power and reclamation pro-

grams, farm subsidies, occupational licensure, the minimum
wage, even tariffs——were simply responses of government to
public demands for the rectification of palpable, and remedi-
able, inefficiencies and inequities in the operation of the

free market. Behind each scheme of regulation could be dis-
cerned a market imperfection the existence of which supplied

a complete justification for some regulation assumed to operate
effectively and without cost.

     Were this theory of regulation correct, we would find

regulation imposed mainly in highly concentrated industries
(where the danger of monopoly is greatest) and in industries

that generate substantial external costs or benefits. We do

not. Some fifteen years of theoretical and empirical research,
                              3


conducted mainly by economists, has demonstrated that regulation
is not positively correlated with the presence of external
economies or diseconomies or with monopolistic market struc-
ture. Few, if any, responsible students of the airline indus-
try, for example, believe that there is some intrinsic pecu-

liarity about the market for air transportation that requires

prices and entry to be fixed by the government. The same may
be said for trucking, taxi service, stock brokerage, ocean

shipping, and many other heavily regulated industries. Even
the danger of "market failure" in such traditionally unquestioned
areas of regulation as health care, the legal profession, and

the safety of drugs and other products is increasingly discounted.

The conception of government as a costless and dependably effec-

tive instrument for altering market behavior has also gone by
the boards.2 Theoretical revision has both stimulated and been
reinforced by a growing body of case studies demonstrating that

particular schemes of government regulation——whether of taxicabs,
or producers of natural gas, or truckers, or airlines, or stock

brokers, or new drugs, or electricity rates, or broadcasting——
cannot be explained on the ground that they increase the wealth

or, by any widely accepted standard of equity or fairness, the
justice of the society.3
                     B A Reformulation
     The empirical evidence is sometimes challenged on the

ground that the disappointing performance of the regulatory
process is the result not of any unsoundness in the basic
goals or nature of the process but of particular weaknesses

in personnel or procedures that can and will be remedied (at
                              4

low cost) as the society gains experience in the mechanics

of public administration.4 Thus reformulated, the public
interest theory of regulation holds that regulatory agencies
are created for, bona fide public purposes but are then mis-

managed, with the result that those purposes are not always
achieved.

     This reformulation is unsatisfactory on two grounds.

First, it fails to account for a good deal of evidence that
the socially undesirable results of regulation are frequently

desired by groups influential in the enactment of the legis-

lation setting up the regulatory scheme. The railroads sup-
ported the enactment of the first Interstate Commerce Act,

which was designed to prevent railroads from practicing price

discrimination, because discrimination was undermining the
railroads' cartels. American Telephone and Telegraph pressed
for state regulation of telephone service because it wanted to

end competition among telephone companies. Truckers and airlines
supported the extension of common carrier regulation to their

industries because they considered unregulated competition
"excessive." Sometimes the regulatory statute itself reveals an
unmistakable purpose of altering the operation of markets in

directions inexplicable on public interest grounds, as in the
reference in the ICC's statutory mandate to the desirability of

maintaining "balance" among competing modes of transportation.5
None of this evidence is decisive against the public interest
theory——in each case other groups besides the industry directly

regulated supported the legislation. Whether the other groups
were also interest groups is discussed later on.
                             5


     Second, the evidence that has been offered to show mis-

management by the regulatory agency is surprisingly weak. Much
of it is consistent with the rival theory (about which more in

Part II of this article) that the typical regulatory agency

operates with reasonable efficiency to attain deliberately

inefficient or inequitable goals set by the legislature that

created it. The proclivity of some agencies for concentrating
their resources heavily on cases of small individual conse-
quence-—a proclivity often thought to be convincing evidence of

mismanagement——is in fact consistent with an efficient allocation
of resources within the agency.6 The frequent criticisms Of

agencies for relying on case—by—case adjudication to make policy
rather than engaging in elaborate planning exercises is ex-

tremely superficial since it ignores, first, the intrinsic
difficulty of forecasting the future and, second, the disastrous

consequences for agencies, notably the Federal Communications

Commission, that have engaged in such planning.7 The, common
argument that the employees of regulatory agencies must be less

able than their counterparts in the private sector since they
are paid lower salaries8 ignores the fact that service with an

agency frequently increases the later earning capacity of the
employee in the private sector. The agency makes a contribution
to the employee's human capital. This contribution, when added
to his salary, may equal the value of the salary (plus contribu-
tions of human capital) that he would have received in the pri-

vate sector.9 In sum, one is left puzzled as to why such fail-
ures of regulation in the public interest as one observes should

be ascribed so confidently to bureaucratic ineptitude.
                              6


     Third, no persuasive theory has yet been proposed as to
why agencies shoul,d be expected to be less efficient than other

organizations. The motivation of the agency employee to work
diligently and honestly is similar to that of the employee of

a business firm. Both want to obtain advancement (not neces-
sarily within the employing firm or agency) and to avoid being
fired, demoted, or humiliated. To some extent, these motiva-
tions are independent of the incentive of the agency's head

to enforce standards of diligence and honesty against the
employees. Many employees will want to demonstrate the pos-
session of excellent qualities in order to improve their pros-

pects for superior private employment anyway.   In any event,

the agency head's incentive is clear. He derives few benefits

from the slackness of his staff——not even the famous "quiet

life." His life would not be so quiet, for many employees
would be restless and dissatisfied, knowing that their oppor-

tunities for private employment were being impaired by the
agency's reputation for laxity and sloth.
     Furthermore, the agency's head is answerable both to the

legislature and (if he desires promotion or reappointment) to
the executive branches. Legislative oversight of agencies is
too little emphasized. Unlike business firms government agencies
must go to their capital markets——the legislative appropriations
committees——every year. There is competition among agencies
for the largest possible slice of the appropriations pie and
the agency that has a reputation for economy and hard work
enjoys an advantage in the competition, for only in the excep-

tional case will it be to the legislators' advantage that the

agency's personnel be lining their pockets (whether with
                                7


pecuniary income or with nonpecuniary income such as leisure).'°

       One objection to the foregoing argument is that the agency
differs from the private firm in not competing in any product

market. But that is to say only that the agency is like a
private monopolist, and there is no convincing theoretical or
empirical support for the porposition that the internal manage-
ment of monopolistic firms is any laxer that that of competitive

firms. Another objection is that the agency has little incentive
to minimize costs because, unlike a business firm, it cannot

keep the profits generated by its cost savings. Yet most
employees of business firms do not share in the profits of the
enterprise, and they are somehow motivated to work efficiently.

Moreover, I have suggested several ways in which agency employees,
from the head of the agency down, do "profit" from efficient
management, and lose if the agency is managed inefficiently.

  C. A Further Reformulation of the Public Interest Theory
       The idea that regulation is an honest but frequently an

unsuccessful attempt to promote the public interest becomes
somewhat more plausible if we introduce two factors often ignored.

The first is the intractable character of many of the tasks

that have been assigned to the regulatory agencies. The clear-
est example is the regulation of price levels under public
utility and common carrier statutes. These statutes require
the   agencies to determine the costs of the regulated firms and
to    hold their prices to those costs, and there are good grounds
for believing that the necessary instruments of measurement and

control simply do not exist.' The agencies are asked to do
the impossible and it is not surprising that they fail and in
                                 8


attempting to succeed distort the efficient functioning of the

regulated markets. But this does not explain why legislatures
assign such tasks to agencies.
     The second factor is the cost of effective legislative

supervision of the agencies' performance. In a recent article
on legal rulemaking, Isaac Ehrlich and I point out that legis-

lative bodies are a type of firm in which the costs of produc-

tion are extremely high and, moreover, rise very sharply with
increases in output.12 The reason is that legislative "produc-
tion" is a process of negotiation among a large group, the

legislators, and the analysis of transaction costs in other
contexts suggests that bargaining among a number of individuals

is a costly process (and explains why legislatures require only
a majority and not a unanimous vote in the conduct of their

business). Because costs of bargaining rise rapidly with the
                                                                    S
number of bargainers, a legislature cannot respond efficiently
to a growth in workload by increasing the number of its members.
Hence, as the business of a legislature rises, it can be ex-
pected to delegate more and more of its work to agencies, and

to exercise progressively less control over those agencies. This
theory has various testable implications. It suggests for example
a "life cycle" theory of administrative regulation. The agency
is created at a time when the legislature has a strong interest
in the problem to be dealt with by the agency. But as time

passes, and other problems come before the legislature, the

legislature finds itself unable at reasonable cost to continue

to devote time to properly monitoring the agencies created

previously. The theory also implies that administrative failure
                                9


will become, on average, a more serious problem over time,
with the growth of the size and complexity of the economy.

As we shall see shortly, however, answers to these questions
might not discriminate adequately between the version of the

public interest theory suggested here and some versions of the

capture theory of regulation.
              D. Behavioral Assumptions of the
                   Public Interest Theory

     A serious problem with any version of the public
interest theory is that the theory contains no linkage or

mechanism by which a perception of the public interest is

translated into legislative action.   In the theory of markets,

it is explained how the efforts of individuals to promote their

self—interest through transacting bring about an effective
allocation of resources. There is no comparable articulation
of how a public perception as to what legislative policies or

arrangements would maximize public welfare is translated into
legislative action. It is not enough to say that a voter will
vote for the candidate who promises to carry out the policies

that the voter perceives to be in the public interest; other
policies might benefit the particular voter more. Policies
that benefited 51 percent of the voters might impose much
greater costs on the other 49 percent, in which event the majority

would be confronted with a conflict between principle and

interest ——and no body of theory or of evidence suggests that

they would be likely to vote the former.
                              10


     There are two possible ways around this problem. One,

suggested by Ronald Coase, emphasizes the moral differences
between private and political action. The assumption that
market behavior is normally motivated by fairly narrow con-
siderations of self—interest is plausible because most market

decisions are social goods rather than bads. To be sure, a
decision to sell a new product may harm a competitor or a
locality or a group of workers or of customers, but the decision
makers can be reasonably confident that these harms are more

than. offset by the gains to others. Where, however, an in-
dividual votes for policies designed to exploit his fellows,

he can hardly avoid confronting the moral implications of his
action and the moral code may constrain him from voting in
that manner.

    A second approach is to observe the potentiality for

collusion among politicians. There are only two important
political parties in this country, and there are barriers not
only to the formation of additional parties but to the takeover

of either of the major parties by disgruntled members or out-
siders. Thus there would appear to be opportunities for the
politicians who dominate the parties to agree to impose some

of their own policy preferences on the electorate. They could
also use their monopoly power to obtain pecuniary income——and

doubtless do——but I am assuming that they take at least some

of their monopoly profits in the form of satisfaction from im—

posing on the public their conception of the public interest
(which might differ from the conception held by the electorate.
and from the desires of any particular interest group). If
                             11


this analysis is accepted, it becomes plausible to suppose that
some policies are adopted because they conform to the public in-
terest——as conceived by the politicians.
          II. Some Versions of the Capture Theory
                      A. The Marxist
     The theory that economic regulation is not about the
public interest at all, but is a process by which interest groups

seek to promote their (private) interests, takes several dis-

tinct forms. One, which is put forward by Marxists and by Ralph
Nader—type muckrakers, can be crudely summarized in the following

syllogism. Big business——the capitalists——control the institu-
tions of our society. Among those institutions is regulation.
The capitalists must therefore control regulation. The syllo-
gism is false. A great deal of economic regulation serves the
interests of small—business——or nonbusiness——groups, including

dairy farmers, pharmacists, barbers, truckers, and, above all,
union labor. Such forms of regulation are totally unexplained
(and usually either ignored or applauded) in this version of the

interest—group or "capture" theory.
               B. The Political Scientists'
                        I'ormulations

     A more interesting version of the "capture" theory derives
from political science, and in particular from Bentley and
Truman and their followers, who emphasize the importance of
interest groups in the formation of public policy.13 The
political scientists have developed some evidence of the impor-

tance of interest groups in legislative and administrative pro-

cesses, but unfortunately their work is almost entirely devoid of

theory. They do not tell us why some interests are effectively
                               12

represented in the political process and others not, or under
what conditions interest groups succeed or fail in obtaining

favorable legislation.14
       A few political scientists have proposed the rudiments, at

least, of a usable theory. This theory—-which the term "cap-
ture" describes particularly well——is that over time regulatory
agencies come to be dominated by the industries regulated.15
This   formulation is more specific than the general interest group

theory. It singles out a particular interest group——the regu-
lated firms——as prevailing in the struggle to influence legis-
lation, and it predicts a regular sequence, in which the original
purposes of a regulatory program are later thwarted through the
efforts of the interest group.

       Unfortunately, the theory is still unsatisfactory. First,
it is confusingly similar to, and in practice probably indis—
tinguishable from, some versions of the public interest theory
discussed in Part I. Second, which I have generously called it
a "theory," it is actually a hypothesis that lacks any theoretical
foundation. No reason is suggested for characterizing the inter-

action between regulatory agency and regulated firm by a metaphor
of conquest, and surely the regulatory process is better viewed
as the outcome of implicit (sometimes explicit) bargaining be-
tween the agency and the regulated firms. No reason is suggested
as to why the regulated industry should be the only interest group

able to influence an agency. Customers of the regulated firm
have an obvious interest in the outcome of the regulatory process——

why may they not be able to "capture" the agency as effectively as
the regulated firms, or more so? No reason is suggested as to
                               13

why industries are able to capture only existing agencies--
never to procure the creation of an agency that will promote

their interests—-or why an industry strong enough to capture an
agency set up to tame it Qould not prevent the creation of the

agency in the first place.

       The "theory" answers none of these questions. In addition
it is contradicted by three important bodies of evidence. First,
not every agency is characterized by a pristine virtue; often
there is no occasion for conquest. As mentioned earlier, there
is now considerable evidence that a major purpose (in fact) of

the original Interstate Commerce Act was to shore up the rail-

roads' cartels)6 Later amendments, typically passed at the
behest of the Commission itself, seem to have been less rather

than more favorable to railroads (an example is the Hepburn Act
which gave the ICC the power to fix maximum rates). The sequence
is opposite to what the capture hypothesis predicts.

      Second, the theory has no predictive or explanatory power
at all when a single agency regulates separate industries having
conflicting interests. The ICC is again a conspicuous example.

It regulates competing modes of transportation——truckers, rail-

roads,   and barge lines——and the theory does not tell us which
one the ICC can be expected to favor. This difficulty is not
limited to the agency with a multi—industry "clientele." There
are   always competing groups within industry. The interests of
the trunk airlines are not identical to those of the regional or
of the local service lines: which will the CAB decide to promote?
The interests of the telephone companies, primarily AT&T, are in

conflict with those of Western Union and other "record" carriers:
                             14

which competing group will the Federal Communications Commission

promote?

     Third, the capture theory ignores a good deal of evidence

that the interests promoted by regulatory agencies are frequently
those of customer groups rather than those of the regulated firms

themselves. Indeed, not only many examples of specific regula-
tory policies, but some of the structural characteristics of the
regulatory process, seem best explained by reference to the in-
fluence on the regulatory process of interest groups consisting
of customers of the regulated industry.17

            C. The Economic Theory of Regulation
    What I shall call "the economic theory of regulation" was

proposed by George Stigler in a pathbreaking article.'8 The
theory seems at first glance merely a refined version of the

capture theory just discussed. It discards the unexplained, and

frequently untrue, assumption of pristine legislative purpose;
it admits the possibility of "capture" by interest groups other

than the regulated firms; and it replaces the "capture" metaphor,
with its inappropriately militaristic flavor, by the more neutral
terminology of supply and demand. But it insists with the poli-
tical scientists that economic regulation serves the private inter-
ests of politically effective groups.
     More is involved, however, than merely a recasting of the

work of the political scientists. The economic theory is more pre-
cise and hard—edged——easier to confront and test with a body of
data——than the political theory (which, as I pointed out, is not
really a theory at all). Moreover, the economic theory is com-
mitted to the strong assumptions of economic theory generally,
                             15

notably that people seek to advance their self—interest and do

so rationally. A political scientist can argue that regulation
is more likely to be imposed in a declining industry because ad-

versity is a greater spur to effort than opportunity19 (an ex-
ample that assumes that regulation is normally obtained for the
benefit of the regulated firms). The economist is reluctant to
accept such an explanation. He does not distinguish between a
profit forgone and a loss incurred——the former is a cost too,
                              20
indeed the same kind of cost.    (I note parenthetically that
the hypothesis is contradicted by a good deal of evidence.21)
     It is, of course, a weakness rather than a strength in a
theory that it is so elastic as to fit any body of data with

which it is likely to be confronted. The political science
theory of regulation is such a theory. Exceptions to the general

rule that regulatory agencies are captured by the regulated firms
are explained away by facile references to the personality of

the legislators, public opinion, ignorance, folk wisdom,22 etc.
The economic theory insists that regulation be explained as the
outcome of the forces of demand and supply. Outcomes that can-
not be so explained count as evidence against the theory.

         III. A Closer Look at the Economic Theory
                        of Regulation
                      A. The Theory
     I shall now try to describe the economic theory more pre-

cisely and to state what I believe to be its strengths and weak-
nesses. The theory is based on two simple but important insights.

The first is that since the coercive power of government can be

used to give valuable benefits to particular individuals or groups,
                             16

economic regulation——the expression of that power in the economic
sphere——can be viewed as a product whose allocation is governed
by laws of supply and demand. The second insight is that the
theory of cartels may help us locate the demand and supply curves.
    Viewing regulation as a product allocated in accordance with
basic principles of supply and demand directs attention to fac-

tors bearing on the value of regulation to particular individuals

or groups——since, other things being equal, we can expect a pro-
duct to be supplied to those who value it the most. It also
directs our attention to the factors bearing on the cost of ob—
tairiing regulation. The theory of cartels illuminates both the
benefit and the cost side. The value of cartelization is greater,
the less elastic the demand for the industry's product and the

more costly, or the slower, new entry into the industry (or car—
telized markets within the industry) is.

     The theory identifies two major costs of cartelization
(besides punishment costs, which are relevant only where car-
telization is forbidden by law). The first is the cost to the
sellers of arriving at an agreement on the price to be charged by
and the output of each seller—-this agreement determines the pro-
fits of each cartel member. The second cost is the cost of en-

forcing the cartel agreement against nonparticipants or defectors.
Cartels are plagued by "free rider" problems. After the sellers
agree to charge the price that maximizes their joint profits, each
seller will have an incentive to sell at a slightly lower price,

because his profits are likely to be higher at the much greater

sales volume that a slightly lower price will enable him to obtain.
If enough sellers submit to the temptation, the cartel will col—
                             17

lapse. A cartel is particularly fragile if members are able to
conceal price cuts from one another: then each has the hope of
being able to obtain substantial short—term profits before the
other members realize that he is cutting price and match him.23
     Since the effect of common methods of regulation (entry con-

trol, minimum rates, exemption from the antitrust laws) is the
same as that of cartelization——to raise prices above competitive

levels——the benefit side of cartel theory is clearly relevant.

The cost side also seems relevant. The members of the industry

must agree on the form of regulation. And just as the individual
seller's profits are maximized if he remains outside of the

cartel (as long as his competitors remain inside), so any indi-
vidual or firm that would be benefitted by a type of regulation

will have some incentive to avoid joining in the efforts of his
group to obtain the regulation. If the regulation is forth-
coming, he will benefit from it——he cannot be excluded from the

protection of a general regulation, just as a seller cannot be
excluded from the benefits of his competitors' charging a monopoly

price——but, unlike the active participants in the coalition, he
will benefit at no cost.

     The theory of cartels teaches that the reluctance to cooper-

ate in maintaining a monopoly price is most likely to be overcome
if the number of sellers whose actions must be coordinated is

small, which tends to reduce the costs of coordination and of
policing, and if the interests of the sellers are identical or

nearly so, which should reduce the cost of securing agreement.24

Likewise in the regulatory sphere, the fewer the prospective bene-

ficiaries of a regulation, the easier it will be for them to
                              18

coordinate their efforts to obtain the regulation. Also, it
will be more difficult for one of them to refuse to participate

in the cooperative effort without causing the effort to col-

lapse. Thus, all will tend to participate, knowing that a de-
fection is likely to be matched promptly by the defection of

the remaining members of the group, leaving the original defec-
tor worse off than if he had not defected. The homogeneity of
the interests of the members is also significant. The more
homogeneous their interest in the regulation in question, the
easier (cheaper) will it be for them to arrive at a common posi-

tion and the more likelywill it be that the common position
does not so disadvantage one or more members as to cause them
to defect from the group.25

     The analysis of cartels is plainly relevant to the devel-

opment of an economic theory of regulation, but it is not that
theory. If it were, we would observe the same industries ob-
taining regulatory protection as form durable cartels. We do
not. Many industries, such as agriculture, certain occupations,
many branches of retail trade, and some manufacturing industries

such as textiles, which have obtained favorable regulation, lack
the characteristics that predispose a market to cartelization,
in particular fewness of sellers. Casual observation suggests
that highly concentrated industries are actually less likely to
obtain favorable regulation than less concentrated industries,26
reversing the usual expectation with regard to the incidence of
carte lization.

     There are two reasons why the pattern of regulation and the

pattern of private cartelization are different. First, the
                               19

demand for regulation (derived from its value in enhancing

the profits of the regulated firms) is greater among industries
for   which private cartelization is an   unfeasible   or very costly
alternative——industries   that lack high concentration and other

characteristics favorable to cartelizing. They lack good sub-

stitutes for regulation. (This point suggests, incidentally, a
testable——in principle anyway——hypothesis of the economic theory

of regulation: among randomly selected unconcentrated industries
the presence of cartel—like regulation will be negatively re-
lated to the price elasticity of demand for the industry's pro-

duct at the competitive price. The qualification is critical,
and makes the test difficult to carry out in practice.)
       Second, whereas cartelization is the product purely of the

cooperative action of the firms, favorable regulation requires,
in addition, the intervention of the political process. Some
industries may be able to influence that process at lower cost
than others and these may not be the same industries that are

able to cartelize at low cost. In particular, the political
dimension of regulation requires two modifications of the theory

of cartels as applied to regulation. First, as proposed in a
paper by Professor Stigler on the free—rider problem, which ap-
pears as an appendix to this article, each member of an industry

will have an interest in participating in the coalition seeking

protective regulation when there is a significant asymmetry among
the positions of industry members. Protective regulation can take
a variety (greater than in the case of private cartelization) of
formsu-—limitation of entry, cash subsidy, tariff, etc.——and the

choice of the form may, assuming asymmetry among the positions of
                                20

the industry's members, affect differentially the welfare of
those members. If so, each will want to participate in the in—

dustry    campaign for regulation so that the choice of the form
                                                                    •
of regulation to seek will reflect his views. The free—rider
problem will still be easiest to overcome where the number of
firms in the industry is small, but if the asymmetry condition

is fulfilled even the presence of many firms may not erect an
insurmountable obstacle to the formation of an effective coali-
tion. This suggests that it may be cheaper for large—number
industries to obtain public regulation than to cartelize pri-

vately.

     Second, the determinants of political influence must be
worked into the supply side of the market in regulation. But
before this can be done it is necessary to specify the character

of the political system under discussion: the political system
of the Soviet Union——or of the City of Chicago—-is not identical
to that of the United States.

     One can distinguish three distinct forms of political

system all of which play some role in the actual political sys-
tems of democratic countries such as the United States. One
system I will call "entrepreneurial": favorable legislation is
sold27 to the industries that value it most. For the reason just
mentioned, these would not be the same industries that form pri-

vate cartels. The costs of cooperative action are irrelevant
under this system: the government can use its taxing or other
powers of coercion to enable the industry to overcome any free—

rider problem it might have, in order that the industry can raise

the maximum purchase price for the legislation.                     S
                             21

     The next system to be considered is the "coercive": legis—
lation is awarded to groups that are able to make credible

threats to retaliate with violence (or disorder, or work stop-

pages, or grumbling) if society does not give them favorable
treatment. We lack good theories of threats or violence but as
a first approximation it would seem that the number of people in

the group would be an important determinant of its ability to
make credible threats of serious disorder or violence (as op-

posed to threats of minor sabotage, annoying and costly but not

deeply threatening).
     The third system is the "democratic": legislation is
awarded by the vote of elected representatives of the people.

This system, like the coercive, emphasizes the importance of
numbers: not of threateners but of voters. The groups are not
identical, but there is great overlap, so we are led to predict
that the economic legislation of dictatorial regimes will broadly
resemble that of democratic ones——as seems on casual observation

to be the case. Willingness to pay is also important in
the democratic as in the entrepreneurial political system, since

legislators are elected in campaigns in which the amount of money
expended on behalf of a candidate exerts great influence on the
outcome. However, unlike the case of an entrepreneurial system,
in a democratic system the free—rider problem remains a serious
one: it may limit the ability of an industry or other interest
group to make substantial campaign contributions.

     The foregoing analysis suggests that while the characteris-
tics that predispose an industry to successful cartelization may
                             22

also help it to obtain favorable government regulation, one
characteristic that discourages cartelization——a large number
of parties whose cooperation is necessary to create and main-
                                                                    S
tain the cartel——encourages regulation. Large numbers have

voting (and, potentially, coercive) power and also increase the
likelihood of an asymmetry of interests that will encourage

broad participation in the coalition seeking regulation. In

addition, large numbers, and other factors that discourage
private cartelization, increase the demand for protective legis-
lation.

     The economic theory can thus be used to explain why we

so often observe protective legislation in areas like agricul-

ture, labor, and the professions, where private cartelization
would hardly be feasible. This is an important advance over the
other theories that we have examined. However, the economic         5
theory has not been refined to the point where it enables us to

predict specific industries in which regulation will be found.
This is because the theory does not tell us what (under various
conditions) is the number of members of a coalition that maxi-

mizes the likelihood of regulation. Formally, this is the num-
ber beyond which the loss of group cohesiveness caused by adding
another member would outweigh the increase in the feasibility and

attractiveness of regulation by virtue of the greater voting

power and greater demand for regulation (due to the greater dif-

ficulty of privately cartelizing).
     I used to think that there was one case in which the theory

yielded an unequivocal, and testable, prediction. That is where

the number of firms in the industry is small, thereby facilitat-    S
                               23

ing   the organization of the industry for effective political
action,28 but the number of employees in the industry is great.29

Since the profits from protective regulation can be divided
between the employees and the firms through collective bargain-

ing, it should be possible for the firms to induce the employees

to "lend" their voting power to obtaining such regulation. The
industry does not quite have the best of both worlds, because

the firms' profits from favorable legislation and hence their
incentive to seek it will be diminished by the amount of the

payoff to the employees, which may be considerable. Legislation

favorable to the industry, by raising prices, will reduce output
and hence the industry's demand for inputs, including labor.
The reduction in demand will harm not only the employees who
are laid off but the remaining employees as well—-the diminution

in the number of employees reduces their voting power which they

might want to exercise in other areas. These costs will presum-
ably be considered by the union when it negotiates for its share

of the profits conferred by the regulation being sought by the
firms.

      The major problem with this hypothesis is that the small
number of firms is a factor that, by reducing the costs of pri-

vate collusion, reduces the industry's demand for favorable legis-
lation. So the economic theory is not refuted by observing that
the most conspicuous example of such an industry——the automobile
industry——seems to have been unsuccessful either in obtaining
favorable regulation or in warding off unfavorable regulation
(such    as safety and emission controls). Anyway, the automobile

example——like   so many in this field——is ambiguous.3°
                             24

     As this example suggests, the economic theory is still so

spongy that virtually any observations can be reconciled with
it. Consider, as a further example, the apparent paradox that
so many regulated industries appear to be either extremely
atomistic (like agriculture) or extremely concentrated (like
local telephone or electrical service). The former would
appear to encounter substantial free—rider problems in organiz-

ing a politically effective group; the latter would appear to
have little demand for regulation. The moderately concentrated

industry would seem to have the optimal structure in terms of
the costs of obtaining legislation and the benefits to be derived
from it. But theory can worm its way out of this hole, too.
For the small—number case, we can point out:   (1) even a

naturally monopolistic industry would gain from legislation that
increased the demand for its product (e.g., by suppressing sub—

stitutes) or prevented entry;31 (2) even if the members of the

regulated industry do not gain from regulation, other groups,
for example groups of customers, may;32 and (3) concentration or
monopoly may itself be the resultof regulation. In the large-
number case, we can point out that the reluctance of each member
of a coalition to participate substantially In it may be dominated

by the number of members who participate, albeit very modestly.

Is industry X, having 10 members, likely to spend more money on
trade association activities than industry Y, which differs only
in that it has 10,000 members? Free—rider problems are presumably
not serious in the case of industry X. Let us assume that each
member of that industry contributes $1000 for a total of $10,000

and that this approximates the optimal expenditure for the indus-

try. Free—rider problems may be serious in industry Y, so serious
                                25

that it would be impossible for the industry to raise $1000
from each member were that necessary to reach an optimal level
of expenditures. But the industry does not have to raise that
amount from each member in order to match industry X-—to do that
it need only raise $1 from each member.

     As   part   of the search for a harder—edged theory of regu-

lation, it has been suggested that the geographic concentration
of the people who would benefit from favorable regulation is an
important element since a legislator will exert greater efforts

on behalf of a voter bloc large enough to influence the outcome

of an election materially. But it has not been demonstrated
that this is a generally valid proposition. If the same number
of voters are more widely dispersed, no legislator will pay as
much attention to their demands but more legislators will pay
some attention and the net effectiveness of the interest group

in the legislature may (it is an empirical question whether it

will) be greater. The proposition also ignores the importance
of the President in the legislative process. A Presidential can-
didate has little reason to respond to the desires of voter blocs
concentrated in states in which the vote is not expected to be
close. Thus we are at a loss to say whether observing a geo-

graphically concentrated——or dispersed——group obtaining——or fail—
ing to obtain——regulation confirms or refutes the economic
theory of regulation. And this illustrates the essential de-
ficiency of the economic theory of regulation in its present
form. At best it is a list of criteria relevant to predicting
that an industry will (or will not) obtain favorable legislation.

It is not a coherent theory yielding unambiguous and therefore
                              26

tes table hypotheses.

     Another sort of weakness is that the theory, pushed to its

logical extreme, becomes rather incredible because it excludes
the possibility that a society concerned with the ability of

interest groups to manipulate the political process in their
favor might establish institutions that enabled genuine public
interest considerations to influence the formation' of policy.

One can certainly argue that the U.S. Constitution, in estab-

lishing an independent judiciary, did just this (this point is
discussed further below). The constitutional requirement of
payment of compensation in eminent domain cases is a similar

example.33 More generally, the many features of law and public
policy designed to maintain a market system are more plausibly
explained by reference to a broad social interest in efficiency

than by reference to the designs of narrow interest groups.34
One can of course say that on some issues the relevant interest

group consists of everyone, or almost everyone, in the society.
But this usage robs the interest group concept of its utility

by collapsing it into the public interest theory.
                        B. The Evidence
     Let us turn now to the empirical evidence bearing on the

economic theory of regulation. There are a fair number of case

studies——of trucking, airlines, railroads, and many other indus-
tries——that support the view that economic regulation is better
explained as a product supplied to interest groups than as an
                                                            35
expression of the social interest in efficiency or justice.

I shall discuss in a moment the question just how much support
for the economic theory of regulation these studies really provide.   S
                              27

But first I want to discuss another type of empirical evidence,

so far largely neglected, that provides additional support for
the economic interest group approach. This is evidence concern-
ing the procedures emp'oyed in the regulatory process.

     A corollary of the economic theory of regulation is that

the regulatory process can be expected to operate with reason-
able efficiency to achieve its ends. The ends are the product

of the struggle between interest groups but, as suggested earlier,
it would be contrary to the usual assumptions of economics to

argue that wasteful or inappropriate means would be chosen to
achieve those ends. We saw that the evidence traditionally

adduced to show that regulatory agencies are inefficient is

highly ambiguous.   I want to go beyond that evidence and note

some general features of the regulatory process that suggest
it is well designed to achieve the ends posited by the economic

theory of regulation.

     One is the delegation of regulatory authority by legisla-
tures to administrative agencies. As mentioned earlier, legis-

latures cannot continuously regulate a complex area; they must
delegate much of the regulatory function either to the courts
or to administrative agencies. In the area of economic regula-
tion the legislative choice has generally been the administra-

tive agency rather than the court. Lawyers defend this choice
on the ground that the public interest purposes assumed to lie
behind the legislation can be achieved more efficiently due to

(1) the agency's specialization and(2) its independence from
political control. The first reason seems specious. Courts have

long handled highly complex economic questions, such as those
                            28

which arise in antitrust cases, no less efficiently (or more
inefficiently) than the agencies——is a merger case tried to a

federal district court apt to be mishandled worse than one tried
before the FTC, or the ICC?36 The second reason is illogical.

The choice is not between agency and direct legislative regula-
tion——the latter is assumed to be impracticable. The choice
is between agency and court and the court is more insulated from

political control than the agency. The terminal character of

many judicial appointments, the general jurisdiction of most
courts, the procedural characteristics of the judicial process,

and the freedom of judges from close annual supervision by appro-
priations committees, all operate to make the courts freer from

the interest group pressures operating through the legislative
process, and more disposed to decide issues of policy on grounds

of efficiency, than any other institution of government——specif—
ically the administrative agency, where these features are ab—
                    37
sent or attenuated.    If I am correct in suggesting that the

judicial process is designed to resist interest group pressures,
it would seem to follow that the delegation phenomenon should
count as evidence in support of the interest group theory of

regulation.
     My article Taxation by Regulation38 presented some additional
evidence of the influence of interest group pressures on the struc-
ture and procedures (as distinct from the substantive outcomes)

of the regulatory process. The article suggests that a number
of standard features of public utility and common carrier regu-
lation, including controls over construction of new plant and

over abandonment of service, the duty of the common carrier to

serve all corners, and the tendency to impose public utility and
                             29

common carrier controls on industries that sell services rather

than goods, are best explained on the theory that regulation

is designed in significant part to confer benefits on politi-

cally effective customer groups. Much regulation, I argued, may
be the product of coalitions between the regulated industry and

customer groups, the former obtaining some monopoly profits

from regulation, the latter obtaining lower prices (or better
service) than they would in an unregulated market——all at the

expense of unorganized, mostly consumer, groups.39
     Since that article was written, an example has occurred
to me where regulation may be the product of an alliance between

the industry and a supplier group. A perplexing feature of air-
line regulation is that although the CAB has evidently been ef-

fective in facilitating cartel pricing by the airlines, it has

(until very recently40) exercised no control whatever over non—

price competition. The effect of unrestricted nonprice competition
when price competition is constrained is to increase the costs

of the competing firms and thereby reduce their profits, but,

under plausible assumption, by less than if they competed in price.
It seems that the higher costs in the airline industry have gone

largely into equipment purchases. The airlines compete with one
another by purchasing newer and more comfortable aircraft and by
offering more flights and therefore greater convenience to travel-

ers. The airlines may have purchased more equipment than they would
if they were competing in price as well as in service (although
a possibly offsetting fact is that the demand for air travel
is less than it would be if the industry's prices were

lower). If so, this would suggest that
                              30

an apparently inexplicable omission in the regulatory scheme
may actually be the calculated result of a coalition of inter-
est groups

     The body of empirical ev:idence supporting the economic

theory of regulation has, however, several shortcomings.
     1. Most of the evidence is consistent with any version

of the interest group theory. The evidence relating to the
internal efficiency of regulatory agencies does not enable one

to discriminate among any specific such theories (such as the

economic theory, because none asserts that regulatory agencies
are inept.42 Only the public interest theory is damaged by such
evidence. The case studies on the substance of regulatory policy
suffer from the same inadequacy. To show that the Interstate
Commerce At was enacted to benefit the railroads, or the

Civil Aeronautics Act the airlines, or that the licensure of

physicians benefits them rather than their patients, or that
much regulation seems subservient to special—interest customer
groups, is to show only that interest groups influence public
policy. For these case studies to support the economic theory
of regulation they would have to demonstrate that the character-

istics and circumstances of the interest groups were such that
the economic theory would have predicted that they, and not some
other groups, would obtain the regulation that we observe them

enjoying. Otherwise any legislation that benefitted some group
at the expense of the general public would count as support for
the economic theory of regulation.

     I am aware of only three studies that have tried to

test the economic theory of regulation, as distinct from the       S
general interest group theory: two by Professor Stigler (of
                                    31

highway weight limitations for trucks and of occupational licen—
        43                                            .        44
sure)         and one by Charles P. McPherson (of tariffs) .        Only
the results of one of the studies (trucks) clearly support the
             45
theory.
        2. The empirical research has not been systematic. The
researcher does not draw a random sample of, say, the economic

legislation passed in the last ten years and ask how much of that

legislation can be explained by the economic theory of regula-
tion. Instead he picks the cases that seem from a distance to

support the theory46 and seeks to determine whether that initial

impression was correct.        I am not criticizing these studies.

Had they shown that trucking, and airline, and railroad regula-
tion could not be explained by reference to the operation of in-
terest groups, the significance for scholarship would have been

immense. But even a lengthy series of case studies cannot pro-

vide much support for the economic theory of regulation given that
the industries studied do not appear to be——and were not selected

as--typical and that apparent counterexamples abound. The "con—
sumerist" measures of the last few years——truth in lending and
in packaging, automobile safety and emission controls, other pol-

lition and safety regulations, the aggressiveness recently dis-

played by the previously dormific Federal Trade Commission-—are
not an obvious product of interest group pressures,47 and the pro-

ponents of the economic theory of regulation have thus far largely
ignored such measures. Nor have there been case studies of in-
dustries that fail (or never try) to obtain favorable regulation.

Furthermore, there is a serious question whether it is proper to

define the subject of study as "economic" regulation. Criminal

laws, civil rights legislation, legislative reapportionment, and
                               32

other "noneconomic" regulations affect economic welfare no
less than the conventional forms of economic regulation and it
seems arbitrary to exclude them from the analysis: presumably

they obey the same laws of social behavior that we think ex-

plain economic regulation.
        3. Some of the case studies of regulation have produced

evidence difficult to reconcile with the economic theory.     I

refer in particular to studies which indicate that maximum—

price regulation has little or no effect on the price levels

of public utilities48 and that some forms of regulation generate

costs in resource misallocation that seem large in relation to
the benefits to the favored interest group.49 Both sorts of
evidence may seem to confirm the influence of interest groups

in the regulatory process but it is only the crudest form of

interest group analysis that they support. There is no basis
in the economic theory of regulation for ineffectual regulation——

for trying and failing to limit the prices of the regulated firms.
The obvious explanation is that maximum price controls are a

figleaf which the regulatory process uses to conceal from the

public its domination by an interest group. But the economic
theory of regulation——as thus far developed——does not predict

that regulatory agencies will practice fraud on the general pub—
       50
lic.

       Nor does the theory predict that legislatures will choose

unnecessarily expensive methods of conferring benefits upon
effective political groups. Perhaps they do not. Although it
has been estimated that hundreds of millions of dollars a year

could have been saved had oil companies received outright grants
                              33

from the Treasury rather than oil import quotas which, in the
process of enriching the companies and the owners of domestic
oil—producing property, induce consumers to make inefficient

substitutions for oil,5' the underlying assumption——that there
is a large avoidable deadweight loss——may well be incorrect: an
increase in income tax rates to finance an outright grant to the

oil companies could have costly substitution effects (e.g., lei-
sure for work) of its own. If the assumption is correct, the
implications for the economic theory of regulation are disturb-
ing. It is in everyone's interest to use a more rather than a

less efficient way of transferring money to the oil companies.
Professor Stigler, in his search for a rational explanation of

the quotas, has argued that it would be impracticable to give
money to the oil companies directly because then firms would

have an incentive to create oil—company affiliates in order to
                              52
be entitled to the subsidy.        However, that danger could be

averted by limiting the subsidy to oil companies in being as
of the date of the grant. The CAB gave cash subsidies to the

airlines for many years its control over entry prevented the
subsidies from attracting new entrants. A similar pattern has

prevailed with the merchant marine. And entry controls are
not even necessary: the cash grant can be limited to the firms
in the industry at the date of the grant (or some earlier date

to prevent entry in anticipation of the grant).
     4. The empirical evidence depends heavily on a confident
rejection of the public interest rationales in which all legis-

lation is——for reasons not yet illuminated by the economic

theory of regulation——cloaked. Sometimes these rationales have
                              34

just enough plausibility to make such rejection questionable.
The oil import quota case is again an interesting one. The
recent Arab oil embargo suggests that it is not palpably absurd

to adopt governmental policies designed to reduce U.S. depen-
dence on the oil produced by the Arabs. Professor Stigler
has argued that if this were the actual purpose behind the oil

import quota system, it would have been carried out not by a

quota  system but by a tariff since the revenues generated by
a tariff would go to the taxpayers rather than to the oil com-
panies' stockholders.53 But the argument proves only that the
purpose behind the system may have been a mixture of public

interest considerations and interest group pressures.54
        5. The effects of economic regulation are difficult to
trace. A tax on gasoline might help the railroad industry.
The cartelization of the airline industry under the CAB's aegis

benefits surface transportation (the demand for which is in-

creased by anything that increases the price of a substitute
service). These complications make it difficult to identify the
industries that benefit from and those that are injured by regu—
lation. It is superficial to point to an industry as an example
of an effective political group because it enjoys a high tariff

without considering the impact on it of other governmental poli-

cies, including many ostensibly imposed on different industries.
We do not know whether to regard automobile emission controls

as a sign of the industry's inability to ward off adverse regu-
lation or as a token of how limited, and late, government regu-

lation of the automobile industry has been.
                                                                   .
                            35

     6. An important but as yet unexplained datum is the
characteristic public interest rhetoric in which discussions

of public policy are conducted and the policies themselves

framed. The use of language that, if the economic theory of
regulation is correct, is utterly uninformative and indeed

misleading is not costless; presumably it is employed only
because there are offsetting benefits. These benefits must

have to do with increasing the costs to members of the public
of obtaining accurate information about the effect of the actions

of their legislative representatives on their welfare.

     Recent developments in the economic theory of fraud may

prove helpful in explaining the prevalence of misleading
rhetoric in discussions of public policy. The propensity to
engage in fraud seems to be related to such factors as the

difficulty (cost) of the buyer's determining the performance
characteristics of the product (by inspection, use, or what-
ever) and the value of the buyer's time. The greater the

cost of determining the product's performance characteristics,
or of the time spent by the buyer in trying to ascertain those
characteristics, the more fraud we can expect to find. Where
the product is legislation, the cost of determining its quality
is often extremely high. With respect to the value of the
buyer's time, it is important to note that a legislati     pro-
posal must be "sold" to two groups: the legislators and the
electorate. Our earlier discussion of the costs of legislation

implied that the cost of a legislator's time is very high,

which in turn implies that the amount of time he can effi—
                              36

ciently devote to appraising the merits of proposed legisla-
tion is small.

        The introduction of considerations based on the economic

analysis of fraud, or more broadly of the costs of information,
suggests room for the possibility of reviving the public—interest—

miscarried theory of regulation in a way that it can be made

rigorous and empirically testable.


                           Conclusion

        This article has offered a number of criticisms of both

the traditional public interest theory of regulation and the
newer economic theory which conceives regulation as a service
supplied to effective political interest groups. Neither
theory can be said to have, as yet, substantial empirical sup-

port.     Indeed, neither theory has been refined to the point       S
where it can generate hypotheses sufficiently precise to be
verified empirically. However, the success of economic theory
in illuminating other areas of nonmarket behavior leads one to

be somewhat optimistic that the economic theory will eventually
gell: the general assumption of economics that human behavior
can best be understood as the response of rational self—inter--

ested beings to their environment must have extensive applica-
tion to the political process.




                                                                     .
                      Footnotes
  *professor of Law, University of Chicago Research Associate,
   National Bureau of Economic Research. I wish to thank
   Gary S. Becker, Ronald H. Coase, Paul W. MacAvoy, B. Peter
   Pashigian, and George J. Stigler for their helpful com-
   ments on an earlier draft.

    This paper was originally given at a conference on regu-
    lation sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Re-
    search, and is part of a series of studies in the area of
    law and economics bei•ng carried out by the Bureau under a
    grant from the National Science Foundation. It is not an
    official Bureau publication since it has not undergone
    the full critical review accorded National Bureau publi-
    cations, including approval by the Bureau's board of direc-
    tors.

1. The theory is more often assumed than articulated. Some
    representative works embodying it are James C. Bonbright,
    Principles of Public Utility Rates (1961); Kenneth Culp
    Davis, Administrative Law Treatise (1958) and 1970
    supplement thereto; Henry J. Friendly, The Federal
    Administrative Agencies: The Need for Better Definition
    of Standards (1962).

2. Some examples of the emerging theory of "government failure"
    are Jack Hirshleifer, James C. DeHaven & Jerome W. Milliman,
    Water Supply: Economics, Technology, and Policy 74—82 (1960)
    Richard A. Posner, Regulation of Advertising by the FTC
    (American Enterprise Institute, Nov. 1973), and Natural
    Monopoly and Its Regulation, 21 Stan. L. Rev. 548 (1969).
3. See, e.g., William F. Baxter, NYSE Fixed Commission Rates:
    A Private Cartel Goes Public, 22 Stan. L. Rev. 675 (1970);
    Cabinet Task Force on Oil Import Control, The Oil Import
    Question (1970); Ronald H. Coase, The Federal Communications
    Commission, 2 J. Law & Econ. 1 (1959); George W. Hilton,
    The Consistency of the Interstate Commerce Act, 9 J. Law
    & Econ. 87 (1966); William A. Jordan, Airline Regulation
    in America: Effects and Imperfections (1970); Edmund W.
    Kitch, Marc Isaacson & Daniel Kasper, The Regulation of
    Taxicabs in Chicago, 14 J. Law & Econ. 285 (1971) Paul W.
    MacAvoy, The Regulation—Induced Shortage of Natural Gas,
    14 J. Law & Econ. 167 (1971): Sam Peltzman, Entry in Com-
    mercial Banking, 8 J. Law & Econ. 11 (1965) , and An Evaluation
    of Consumer Protection Legislation: The 1962 Drug Amend—
                             —2—


      ments, 81 J. Pol. Econ. 1049 (1973); and, for a general
      summary of the literature, William A. Jordan, Producer
      Protection, Prior Market Structure and the Effects of
      Government Regulation, 15 J. Law & Econ. 151 (1972).

4. An interesting example of this point of view is provided
    by E. Pendleton Herring, Public Administration and the Pub—
    lie Interest (1936), which argues that the challenge to
    public administration is to develop techniques of overcoming
    the interest group pressures that threaten to deflect legis-
    lative programs from serving the public interest. He may
    underestimate the difficulties of doing this because of a
    certain economic naivete that leads him to suggest in places
    that opposing group interests can be harmonized in a way
    that vindicates the public interest. Ordinarily harmony
    is achieved at the expense of the public interest. We give
    several examples later on.
 5. National Transportation Policy, 49 U.S.C. preceding § 1.
6. Richard A. Posner, The Behavior of Administrative Agencies,
    1 J. Leg. Studies 305—23 (1972).

7. See, e.g., Richard A. Posner, The Appropriate Scope of
    Regulation in the Cable Television Industry, 3 Bell J.
    Econ. & Management Sd. 98 (1972); William S. Comanor &
    Bridger Mitchell, The Costs of Planning: The FCC and Cable
    Television, 15 J. Law & Econ. 177 (1972).

 8.   The question is never asked whether their jobs might be less
      risky or require less skill than the private—sector jobs with
      which they are compared.
 9. See Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 391 "1973);
     Ross D. Eckert, What Do Regulatory Commissions Maximize?
     (unpublished manuscript, Dept. of Econ., Univ. of So. Calif.,
      1972).

10. One could argue that the legislator may not have much
     incentive to ride herd on the agency: he will not get paid
     more and his popularity with the voters will be increased
     only marginally. But this ignores the fact that the actual
     audit will be conducted by an employee of the legislative
     body, who will have the same incentive to conduct a search-
     ing audit as any privately employed auditor.
11.   See, e.g., Richard A. Posner, Natural Monopoly and Its
      Regulation, 21 Stan. L. Rev. 548 (1969).
12. Isaac Ehrlich & Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis
     of Legal Rulemaking, 3 J. Leg. Studies 257 (1974).
                             —3—


13. See Arthur F. Bentley, The Process of Government (1908):
     David B. Truman, The Government Process: Political
     Interests and Public Opinion (1951). For specific appli-
     cation of the approach to regulatory agencies see Id. at
     416—21. For the position of Herring on the role of interest
     groups in regulation see note 4 supra.  It is interesting to
     note that "interest group" is not a pejorative term for most
     of the political scientists, since they are either indif-
     ferent to or unaware of the fact that the economic costs of
     regulation procured by an interest group normally exceed the
     economic benefits.

14. The vagueness of the theorizing in Truman's book, supra
     note 13, especially at 506—07, 515, is typical.
15. See Marver Bernstein, Regulating Business by Independent
     Commission (1955); Samuel P. Huntington, The Marasmus of
     the ICC: The Commission, the Railroads, and the Public
     Interest, in Public Administration and Policy: Selected
     Essays 58 (Peter Woll ed., 1966); Avery Leiserson, Interest
     Groups in Administration, in Elements of Public Administra-
     tion 314 (Frix Morstein Marx ed. , 1946); Harmon Ziegler,
     Interest Groups in American Society 278—91 (1964).

16. See George W. Hilton, supra note 3; Gabriel Kolko, Railroads
     and Regulation, 1877—1916 (1965); Paul W. MacAvoy, The
     Economic Effects of Regulation: The Trunk—Line Railroad
     Cartels and the Interstate Commerce Commission Before 1900
     (1965).

17. See Richard A. Posner, Taxation by Regulation, 2 Bell J.
     Econ. & Management Sci. 22 (1971).

18. The Theory of Economic Regulation, 2 Bell J. Econ. & Manage-
     ment Sd. 3 (1971). For an attempt to marshal empirical
     support for the theory see Jordan's article on producer
     protection, supra note 3. Stigler, it should be noted,
     builds on earlier work by economists on the political system
     See James Buchanan & Gordon Tullock, The Calculus of Consent
     (1962); Anthony Downs, An Economic Theory of Democracy
     (1957); Mancur Olson, Jr., The Logic of Collective Action
     (1965).

19. James Q. Wilson, The Politics of Regulation 8 (Brookings
     Institution, forthcoming).
20. Ronald Coase, however, suggests the interesting possibility
     that when a business is in decline, managers may find it
     profitable to shift their attention from improving their
     business operation to improving the political environment,
     another potential source of profits. There is a further
     point: the costs of becoming informed about opportunities
     for enhanced profits through government regulation may be
     greater than the costs of perceiving losses that regulation
     might reduce.
                               -4—

21.   For example the airline industry was not declining in 1938
      when the Civil Aeronautics Act was passed, or the railroad
      industry in 1887 when the first Interstate Commerce Act
      was passed. One tends to associate regulation with declin-
      ing industries primarily because so many regulatory programs
      were instituted during the depression of the l930s.

22. See David B. Truman, supra note 13, at 512.
23. For a summary of cartel theory see Richard A. Posner,
     Oligopoly and the Antitrust Laws: A Suggested Approach,
     21 Stan. L. Rev. 1562, 1566—75 (1969).

24. The characteristics that predispose a market to carteliza—
     tion are discussed in Richard A. Posner, supra note 9, at
      116—17.

25. On the other hand, the more successful and profitable the
     cartel, the greater the costs to consumers, and so the
     greater the incentive of consumers to organize against
     the cartel. Professor Stigler has suggested that the role
     of the "outsider" (e.g., the consumer) is greater in the
     public regulation that in the private cartelization context
     (see George J. Stigler, supra note 16, at 16), but it is
     not clear why a cohesive group of customers would not be
     equally effective in exacting concessions from a private
      cartel.

26. For some evidence in support of this hunch see Charles B.
     MacPherson, Tariff Structures and Political Exchange (un-
     published Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Chi. Dept. of Econ.,
      1972).

27. At what price? The government has a monopoly of the sale of
     regulation so presumably will be able to charge a positive
     price even if the cost of supplying regulation is zero.
     In fact the cost is greater than zero, both because the pro-
     duction of legislation is costly (see text at note 12, supra)
     and because regulation that favors one group imposes costs
      on others.

28.   I assume that the free—rider problem is least serious when
      the number of parties is very few, albeit larger coalitions
      might also be able to overcome the problem.
29. The fundamental distinction between number of firms and num-
     ber of voters undermines Professor Stigler's hypothesis
     (George J. Stigler, supra note 16, at 7) that small firms
     will enjoy disproportionate political influence. If the
     number of employees is proportional to sales, it is not ob-
     vious why small firms should be any more important in ob-
     taining favorable regulation than in the formation of a pri-
     vate cartel.
                             —5—

30. Conceivably safety and emission controls hurt foreign manu-
     facturers more than domestic ones. Without evidence, I
     find this suggestion somewhat implausible, however. For
     example, the emission controls reduce engine performance,
     always a big selling point for American cars, which would
     seem to hurt the domestic manufacturer more. Also, the
     argument ignores the fact that many imported cars are manu-
     factured by foreign subsidiaries of domestic manufacturers.
     These foreign entanglements of the domestic companies may
     however explain why the industry does not enjoy tariff pro-
     tection. Also to be considered is the fact that while the
     gasoline tax would seem to reduce the demand for automobiles,
     the proceeds of the tax are largely earmarked for highway
     construction——and highways are complementary to automobiles——
     so the tax may have little adverse effect on the industry
     after all. The need for further research in this area is
     dramatically apparent.
31. Even under conditions of natural monopoly, the profit-
     maximizing monopoly price will reduce entry, albeit of
     firms having higher costs than the monopolist.
32. See Richard A. Posner, supra note 15.
33. See Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 22 n. 2
     (1973).

34. The role of legal institutions in supporting the market
     system is a major theme of Economic Analysis of Law,
     supra note 33.

35. See references in note 3 supra.
36. For some evidence, see Richard A. Posner, A Statistical
     Study of Antitrust Enforcement, 13 J. Law & Econ. 365
     (1970).

37. See Richard A. Posner, supra note 33, chs. 23, 27. An
     interesting point here is the traditional reluctance of
     the courts to permit groups to litigate. This comes about
     through requirements of "standing" to sue and prohibitions
     against "lay intermediaries" between client and lawyer.
     A trade association cannot bring a lawsuit seeking a legal
     rule favorable to its members. The member must sue on his
     own behalf. This reduces the influence of interest groups
     in the litigation process. But see NAACP v. Button, 371
     U.S. 415 (1963).

38. Supra note 15.
39. This extension of the economic theory of regulation helps
     explain, for example, why the original Interstate Commerce
     Act was supported by (some) shippers as well as the rail-
     roads themselves: the railroads' discriminatory pricing——
     the target of the Act——both undermined the railroads' cartels
     and harmed shippers competing with favored purchasers.
                               —6—


40. When it approved capacity—limitation agreements among air-
     lines in certain markets.

41. See George J. Stigler, Price and Nonprice Competition, in
     his Organization of Industry 23 (1968).
42. The theory, discussed in Part IIB supra, that regulatory
     agencies eventually knuckle under to the regulated firms
     comes close to implying that regulatory agencies are in-
     eptly managed (otherwise they would not be so easily con-
     quered). This is an example of the confusing overlap, noted
     earlier, between this version of the capture theory and the
     public interest theory.
43. See note 16 supra.
44. Supra note 23.

45. Stigler's tests of occupational licensure produced mixed
     results. A partial test of the theory is also attempted
     in B. Peter Pashigian, Public vs. Private Ownership:
     Consequences and Determinants of Local Transit Systems
     (unpublished manuscript, Univ. of Chi. Grad. Sch. of Bus.,
     Oct. 1973), again without successful results.
46.  However, this does not appear to be true of Professor
     Stigler's study of state limitations on truck weights.

47. See Sam Peltzman's recent study of the regulation of new
      drugs by the Food and Drug Administration, supra note 3;
      cf. my Reflections on Consumerism, 20 U. Chi. L. S. Rec.,
      no. 3 (spring 1973), p. 19.
48. See Thomas G. Moore, The Effectiveness of Regulation of
     Electric Utility Prices, 36 S. Econ. J. 365 (1970); Raymond
     Jackson, Regulation and Electric Utility Rate Levels, 45
     Land Econ. 372 (1969); George J. Stigler & Claire Friedland,
     What Can Regulators Regulate? The Case of Electricity,
     5 J. Law & Econ. 1 (1962).

49. The oil import quota program is a notable example. See
     Cabinet Task Force on Oil Import Control, supra note 3,
      at 28—30.

50. This would be a logical extension of Professor Stigler's
     remarks on the relevance of information costs in the analy-
     sis of the political process (supra note 16, at 11—12), but
     it has not been made. On the economics of fraud, see
     Richard A. Posner, Regulation of Advertising by the FTC,
     pt. 1 (American Enterprise Institute, Nov. 1973), and refer—
     ences cited therein. Possible applications of the economic
     theory of fraud to the theory of regulation are discussed
     in the text below.

                                                                    .
                             —7—


51. See note 49 supra.

52. George J. Stigler, supra note 16, at 4—5.
53. Id. at 4.

54. Another consideration is that the oil import quota
     program could be and was established by Executive Order
     rather than by statute, whereas imposition of a tariff
     would have required congressional action.
