                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     A THEORY OF SOCIAL INTERACTIONS

                              Gary   S. Becker*




                     Working Paper No. 42



 CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                 National Bureau of Economic Research. Inc.
                  261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016


                                June1974

                    Preliminary; Not for Quotation

     NBER working papers. are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

     This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.



     *Unjversjty of Chicago and National Bureau of Economic Research.
Over the years I have received helpful comments on a succession of
drafts from numerous persons, especially my colleagues at the University
of Chicago, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. I received
very useful comments on the draft prepared for publication from Robert
Barro, Isaac Ehrlich, Sam Peltzman, and George Stigler, and valuable
research assistance from Walter We8sels. My research has been supported
by a grant to the NBER from the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of
Health, Education and Welfare (Grant lROl HD07161—02) for research on
the analysis of human fertility behavior.
                           "No Man is an Island"

                                     John Donne, Devotions Upon Emergent



                         "Man Is a Social Animal"

                                     Seneca, De beneficlis




I.    Introduction

      Before the theory of consumer demand began to be formalized by Jevons,

Wairas, Marshall, Menger and others, economists frequently discussed what

they considered to be the basic determinants of wants. For example, Bentham

discusses about fifteen basic kinds of pleasures and pains —   all   other plea-

sures and pains are presumed to be combinations of the basic set -, and Mar-

shall briefly discusses a few basic determinants of wants before moving on

to his well known presentation of marginal utility theory.1 What is relevant

and important for present purposes is the prominence given to the interactions

among individuals.

      Bentham mentions "the pleasures... of being on good. terms with him or

them", "the pleasures of a good name", "the pleasures resu!ting from the view

of any pleasures supposed to be possessed by the beings who may be the objects

of benevolence", and "the pleasures resulting from the view of any pain sup-

posed to be suffered by the beings who may become the objects of malevolence".

Nassau Senior said that "the desire for distinction...is a feeling which if we

consider its universality, and its constancy, that it affects all men and at

all times, that it comes with us from the cradle and never leaves us till we

go into the grave, may be pronounced to be the most powerful of aH human

passions".2 Marshall also stresses the desire for distinction, and illustrates
                                          2




  its influence by discussing food, clothing, housing, and productive
                                                                      actIvities
        As greater rigor permeated the theory of Consumer demand, variables like

  distinction, a good name or benevolence
                                              were pushed further and further out of
  sight. Each individual or family generally is assumed to have aj
                                                                   utIlIty func-
  tion that depends directly on the goods and services it consumes. This
                                                                               is not
 to say that interactions between individuals
                                                   have been completely ignored.
 Pigou, Fisher and Panteleonj at the turn of
                                                 the century4 included attributes
 of others in utility functions (but
                                        did nothing with them). In the recent
 literature, "demonstration" and "relative income" effects on savings and
                                                                          con-
 sumption,5 "bandwagon" and "snob"
                                     influences on ordinary consumption theor,6
 and the economics of philanthropic contributions7
                                                        have been discussed. But
 these efforts have not been
                               unified, and, more significantly, have not cap-

 tured the dominance attributed to social
                                              interactions by nineteenth century
 economists.

       Of course, sociologists have for a long time emphasized the central role

of interactions and their importance in the basic structure of wants
                                                                     or perso-
nal i ty. Veblen's
                     Conspicuous consumption and
                                                   conspicuous leisure (if for this
purpose he is classified as a sociologist)
                                               have entered ordinary discourse.
At one point he said "But it is    nly when taken in a sense far removed from

its naive meaning that the consumption of goods can be said to afford the incen-

tive from which accumulation
                               invariably proceeds. The motive that lies at the
root of Ownership is emulation... ." and "..   .the   usual basis of self—respect is
the respect accorded by one's neighbors".8      Interactions were also emphasized

by Durkheim, Smmel, Freud, and Weber, as well as in modern discussions of

"social exchange" and the "theory of act ion".9

      My interest in interactions can
                                         probably. be traced to a study of dis-

crimination and "prejudice",1° where I
                                         analysed discriminatory behavior by
                                            3




 incorporating   the race, religion, sex or other personal characteristics of

employees, fellow-workers, customers, dealers, neighbors, etc. into utility

functions. Subsequently, in order to provide a theoretical framework for a

study of philanthropy by the National Bureau of Economic Research, I incor-

porated the standard of living of "poorer" persons into the utility functions

of "richer" ones. Further reflection gradually convinced me that the em-

phasis of earlier economists deserved to be taken much more seriously because

social interactions had significance far transceidjng the special cases dis-

cussed by myself12 and others.

      This essay incorporates a general treatment of interactions into the

modern theory of consumer demand.        In Section 2, various characteristics of

different persons are assumed to affect the utility functions of some per-

sons, and the behavioral implications are systematically explored. Section

3 develops further implications and applications in the context of analyzing

intra-family relations, charitable behavior, merit goods and multi—persons

interactions, and envy and hatred. The variety and significance of these

applications is persuasive testimony not only to the importance of social

interactions, but also to the feasibility of incorporating them into a ri-

gorous analysis.



2.    Theoretical Framework

      A. Equilibrium for a Single Person

     According to the modern (and very old!) theory of household behavior,'3



                             U. =
                                    U1   (z1,   ...,z)                 (2.1)
                                            -4-

  is the utility function of the ith person, and Z1,
                                                                 Z are the basic
 wants or commodities. As indicated
                                            earlier, Bentham mentions about 15
 basic    wants, whereas Marshall and Senió- stress an even smaller tumber.

 Each person also has a set of
                                      production functions that determine how
 much of these commodities
                                  can be produced with' the market
                                                                      goods, time,
 and other resources available to him:


                  Z. =   f   (x., t., E', R!, ...
                                                    R')                (2.2)

 where
         x are quantities of different market goods and
                                                               services, tj are

 quantities of his own

 time, E' stands for his education, experieryce, and
                                                            "environmental" variables,
 and R!, ...      R   are characteristics of other persons that affect his output

of commodities. For example, if Z1 measures i's distinction in his occupa-

tion, R, ...           could be the opinions of I held by other persons in the

same occupation. Presumably, characteristics of others affect the pro-

duction of a significant fraction of commodities.

         If the       were completely outside l's control -    that   is, unaffected
by what he does with his resources -        i   would maximize U taking the
                                                                               R as
given. This is one way to justify the usual neglect of interactions.

They are considered beyond the control of the
                                                       persons being studied, and,
therefore, taken as given when analyzing their reactions to changes in re-

sources and prices.

         The point of departure of my approach is to assume the contrary; namely,

that i can change R. by his own efforts. For example, he can avoid social

opprobrium and perhaps ostracism by not engaging in criminal activities;

achieve distinction by working diligently at his occupation, giving to

charities, or having a beautiful house, or relieve his envy and jealousy
                                               -5-


    by talking meanly about or even physically harming his neighbors. These

    effects can be formalized in a production function for

    the    (Ri, ...            that depends partly on the efforts of i and partly on
                       Ri)]
    other variables.

          To simplify the discussionI4 I follow Senior and assume only a single

    commodity (distinction?) that is produced with a single good (the input of

    time is ignored) and a single characteristic of others. Then maximizing

    utility is equivalent to maximizing the output of this commodity, and one

    can write
                              =   Z(x,   R).                       (2.3)




    I assume also (until Section 3C) that the effect of other variables (in-

    cluding the efforts of others) on this characteristic is not dependent

     on i's own efforts. Therefore, R can be written as the additive function

                            R = D. +     h,                         (2.4)

    where h measures the effect of i's efforts, and D. the level of R when i

    makes no effort; that is, D measures i's "social environment."

          His budget constraint for money income can be written as

                        +         = Ii,                             (2.5)

    where I. is his money income, pRh is the amount he spends on R, and

    is the price to him of a unit of R.




S
Substitute   R -
                   D1
                                             -6-


                        for h in equation (2.5)          to   get
                                                                                                 .
                        + PRR =              =
                                  II +pRD.         Si.              (2.6)


The right hand side gives the sum of i's money income and the value to him of

his social environthent, and will be called his social income. The left hand

side shows how°              his social income is "spent": partly on his "own" goods

(x) and partly on the characteristics of others (R).15

        If i maximizes the utility —     output          function given by equation (2.3) sub-

ject to the constraint on social income given by equation (2.6), the equili-

brium condition


                   U/ i =       Px                                  (2.7)



If I did not want to purchase any R,               would be a "shadow" price, measured

by the monetary equivalent of the marginal utility (viz marginal product)

of R to i when R = D. (or when h =       0).


        His equilibrium position is shown graphically in Figures 2.1 and 2.2.

The first figure assumes that R has a positive marginal product in the produc-

tion of Z (a positive marginal utility); that R refers, for example, to the

respect accorded i rather than to his envy of others. The quantity oD

measures his social environment, and ox his own income (measured in terms of
                                      0
x), so that the "endowed" point E gives his utility when he spends nothing

on R.    If E0S0 measures the opportunities available for purchasing additional

R,17 he would maximize his utility by moving along E0S0 to point e0, where

the slope of this opportunity curve equalled the slope of his indifference

curve. His equilibrium purchase of R is measured by the line-segment h0
                                            -7-


               2.2 assumes that R has a negative marginal product (or utility)
      Figure
because say it measures the income or prestige of persons that I envies.

The section of the opportunity curve to the south—east of point E0 Is now

Irrelevant; and he moves along the south-west section E0S0              to point e0.

He is willing to give up resources to reduce R because his utility is raised

by a reduction in R; at point e, he spends enough resources to reduce R

by h0.
         Note that since the marginal (and average) price of R is negative in

Figure 2.2, i's social incoe is tess than his own income because the value of

his social environment is subtracted from his own income.              That is, he is made

worse off by his social environment if it is dominated by characteristics

of others that are distasteful to him. Note too that as long as the marginal

utility of R is not zero at the socially endowed position, his social income

would differ from his own income even if he did not want to spend anything

 on R. He would add to (or subtract from) his own income the product of D

 and the (monetary equivalent of the) marginal utility of R at the endowed

 position E. In other words, the traditional income concept is incomplete

 even when no resources are spent trying to influence the attitudes or situa

 tion of others.

         The analysis developed for social interactions in these figures and

 in equations (2. ,     (26 ), and   (2.7         is applicable also whenever there is

 a physical environment that either can be altered directly or can have its

 effects augmented or diminished. For example, the human capital of a per

 son is the sum of the amount inherited and that acquired through investments;

 moreover, the amount invested is partly determined by the inheritance.
                                       -8-
Or the temperature in a house is determined by the weather and
                                                               expenditures

on fuels, insulation, etc. that reinforce or offset the natural environment.

      A more general analysis, therefore, would assume that every term

entering the utility function has both an environmental and acquired compo-

nent. The general analysis could readily be developed, but I have chosen

to simplify the discussion by ignoring the non-social environment. The

results are consistent with those from the general analysis as long as the

contribution of the social environment is, on the whole, significantly more

important than that of the physical environment. This is assumed to be true.

(I am indebted to Gilbert Ghez and especially Robert Barro for stressing the

general nature of the analysis).




       B.   Income and Price Effects

      An increase in l's own income alone -    without   any change in prices or

the social environment - would increase both x and R unless one were inferior.

The average percentage response in x and R per one percent change in his own

 income is not unity, but is less by the fraction a, where a is the share of the

social environment in his social incom.18 Therefore, the effect of a change in

his own income on his utility-output         is smaller, the more important his

social environment is.
                                        -9-




          Put differently, the greater the contribution of his social environment

    to his social income, the more that his welfare is determined by the attitudes

    and behavior of others rather than byhis own income. Traditional models of

    choice by economists assume that own efforts and access to property income

    and transfer payments determine welfare. On the other hand, those who stress

    the social environment, its normative requirements and sanctions for compliance

    and noncompliance, and the helplessness of the individual in the face of his

    environment naturally see society dominating individual efforts and, conse-

    quently, see little scope for important choices by individuals.

          The relative importance of the social environment, as well as other

    implications of the theory of social interactions, can be empirically estimated

    from information on expenditures motivated by these interactions. f i's

    social environment did not change when his own income changed, the induced

    absolute change in the characteristics of others would equal the change in

    his contribution to these characteristics. However, the relative change in

    his contribution would differ from the relative change in these characteristics

    because the level of the latter is partly determined by the social environment.

          Consider again Figures 2.1 and 2.2, where an increase in i's own income

    with no change in the environment is shown by a vertical increase in the en-

    dowed position from E to E1. Since his equilibrium position changes from e0

    to e1, the change in R is exactly equal to h1 -         the change in i's contribu-
                                                      h0,
    tion to R.   The percentage change in R in Figure 2.1 is clearly less than that

    in h since R is the sum of h and (a fixed) 0. Since the percentage change in

    R in Figure 2.2 is negative, it is also less than the percentage change in h,


W   which is positive (since h is negative). However, if R had been increased
    by the increase in i's
    own income -  ifsay the new equilibrium position was at point e1 -, the per-

    centage change in R would be positive, and would clearly exceed in algebraic.
                                          -10-
                                                                                                             .
 valuethe    negative percentage change inh.

         The own-income elasticity of demand for contributions is related to

 the elasticity of demand for characteristics by the formula


              dh     I.     n                                     19
                                R                   -
                                        1 +
                                              cL(           1)1        ,      (2.8)
                            n(=l-cx)



where 0            1 is the fraction of own income that is spent on contributions

 to R.    If a> 0, if the social environment adds to i's social income, then

 clearly nh >             Moreover,    if n =           1   -a <           1, necessarily nh >    1   even

when       < 1;    that is, contributions to the characteristics of others could have

a "high" income elasticity even when the characteristics themselves had a "low"

elasticity. Of course, if h > 1, the own income elasticity of demand for

own consumption (n) would be less than unity. That is, social interaction

 implies a relatively low income elasticity for own consumption even without

 introducing transitory changes in income, errors in variables, and the like.

         Equation (2.8)   further implies that an increase in a, an increase

in the social environment, with no change in the own-income elasticity of de-

mand for characteristics relative to the average elasticity                                      would

increase the own-income elasticity of demand for contributions.22 In other

words, the more that i's social Income is determined by his social environment,

the greater would be the percentage change in his contributions to the charac-

teristics of others as his own income changed.

         If, on the other hand, a < 0 -    the   social environment subtracted from



                                                                                                             .
i's social income -' then equation (2.8)    implies that h <     when nR >

and h >        when     < 0 (these different cases are shown in Figure 2.2). His de-
        nR

mand for characteristics would probably be reduced by an increase in his own income

(i.e., R <   0) if these characteristics have a negative marginal utility to him.

Again, an increase in a, with nR/n held constant, would raise
                                                                 %     (the argument
in footnote 22 fully applies).



       Since the social environment to any person cannot be readily observed,

an indirect method of estimating at least its sign would be useful.       If

nR/n were known-, that is, if the relative income elasticity of demand for

characteristics were known, the sign of a could be estimated simply from

 information on the own-income elasticity of demand for contributions to the

environment, and its magnitude from additional information on the fraction of

own income spent on these contributions. Equation (2.8) implies that


                              n-i-i
                         a=   hn                               (2.9)



Therefore,     a   0 as nh_!L_ 1, and information on nh, 'R' and          would be

 sufficient to estimate a.

      An increase in a social environment that adds to i's social income would

 increase his demand for own goods if they had positive income elasticities. If

his own income were unchanged, his increased expenditure on own goods has to be

"financed" by reduced contributions to the characteristics of others. Similarly,

an increase in a social environment that subtracts from his social income

would increase 'his expenditures on others and reduce his expenditures on own

goods. Consequently, the effect of a change in the environment is always (i.e.,
                                       —12-

 as long as own goods are not inferior) partly offset by induced changes in

 i's contributions in the opposite direction, regardless of whether the envi-

 ronment adds to or subtracts from i's scal income.
                                                           -




         Geometrically, a change in the social environment is shown by a hori-
zontal movement of the endowed position. An increase in the environment

shifts the endowment in Figure 2.1 from point E1 to E2; the equilibrium posi-

 tion is changed from point e1 to a point on a higher indifference curve, (e2),

and i's contribution declines from h1 to h2. In Figure 2.2, the equilibrium

 is changed from point e1 to a point on a lower indifference curve
                                                                        (e2), and

 i's contribution increases from
                                    h1 to h2.23
          If both the own and environment incomes
                                                    of i changed, the effect would
be a combination of those when each alone
                                              changed. For example, if both in-
comes increased, the effect on his contributions of the increase in the en-

vironment would at least partly offset the effect of the increase in his
                                                                         own
income.     In particular, if both incomes increased by the same percentage, the


percentage change in contributions would be greater, equal, or smaller than

that as his demand for characteristics exceeded, equalled, or was less than

unity.

         Through the assumption that    is constant, I have been assuming,

in effect, that expenditures       and the social environment are perfect

substitutes in producing characteristics of others.       However, the qualitative



                                                                  j
implications of this assumption can also be derived if they are simply

better substitutes for each other than for own consumption —
                                                                        rises as h

rises, but not "too" rapidly. For example, a rise in the environment would

reduce contributions, and a rise in own income would increase contributions

by a relatively large percentage if the environment and expenditures on

these characteristics are simply relatively close direct substitutes.
                                                  —13-

          A rise in the cost of changing the characteristics of others                          would

     induce the usua.l substitut ion (and perhaps income) effects away from these

    characteristics. If the environment were given, the absolute change in contri-

    butions would equal the absolute change in these characteristics, while the

    percentage changes would differ according to equation (2.8)

                     dh
                           R               1 +   a          - 1)
             E — -            —
                           FE —    E
                                                       (-
             h                         R         1 -   a                              (2.10)

     (same proof as in footnote 19).


     Therefore, when a >   0,   Eh would exceed ER by an amount that would be greater,

     the greater a and the smaller .             Similarly,        when a <   0,   Eh would be less

     than ER24 by an amount that would be greater, the greater, the absolute value

     of a and the smaller .




S
                                                    -14-

  3.    App)ications

        Three specific applications of the general analysis of social Interaction

  are now considered: interactions among members of the same family, charity,

  and envy and hatred. These applications not only provide empirical support for

  the income and price implications just derived, but also bring out a number of

 other implications of social interaction.

        A. The Family

        Assume that i cares about his spouse j25 in the sense that i's utility

 function depends on j's welfare.               I assume until much later in this section

 that j does not care positively or negatively about I.
                                                                      For simplicity, let
 the variable measuring this dependence,               R. ,   equal
               I.+h..        S.
        R. =            = —i-       =    x.
                 p                              ,                           (3.1)
         I
                             p              j



where I. is -i's own income,
                                        are the contributions from i to j, Si is j's social
income, and x are the goods consumed by j. The social income of i can be

derived by substituting equation (3.1) into equation (2.6):

                        R. = S. =               +     R1
          x i + R                       :1::.                 ,             (3.2)
where    is the price               to i of transferring resources to j.            If i can

transfer resources to j without any "transactions" costs — presumably, these

costs are reduced by sharing a common household -, and if i cares sufficiently

about j to have h.. >   0,   then         =          and




                                                                                               .
                                                      -15-


            Si
                           +         = I.   +   I.   =x..                     (.3)

    The social income of i           equals the combined own incomes of i and j, or the
    "family's" own         income.    Moreover, the equilibrium condition given by equation

    (2.7) implies that

                     au.       u.
                                                 =      = 1,
                               (R.   =   x.)                                  (34)



    or I would receive equal marginal utility from j's and his own consumption.

            Conditions (3.3) and (3.4) are shown graphically in Figure 3.1. Re-

    sources can be transferred from i to j by moving along i's budget line in a

    southeast direction from the endowed position at point E0. The equilibrium

    position is at point e, where the slope of i's indifference curves equals the

    slope of his budget line (= to -                 1). The   vertical (or horizontal) intercept

    gives the family's own income -i's social income-, deflated by the price of x.

           An important implication of this analysis is that a change in the dis-

    tribution of family income between i and j has no effect at all on the consump-

    tion or welfare of either, as long as i continues to transfer resources to j.

    A change in the distribution would be on the same budget line as                      if total

    family income is unchanged: the change from E to E1 is nominally more favorable

    to j, whereas the change to E2 is nominally more favorable to i. Since there

    is only one point of tangency between i's budget line and an indifference

    curve, the equilibrium position must be unchanged at e.                   A shift in favor of

    j's income to E1 simply induces an equal reduction in i's contributions to j


•   (from h7. to h.'. in the figure), whereas a shift against j's income to E2

    induces an equal increase in his contributions (from                     to
                                                                                     26
                                     -16-




       This discussion has assumed a two person family, but is equally applicable

 to larger families that include grandparents,
                                                 parents, children, uncles, aunts,
 or other kin.   If one member, call him the "head", cares sufficiently about all

 other members to transfer general resources
                                               to them7 redistribution of income
 among members would not affect the consumption of
                                                       any member, as long as the
 head continues 1o contribute to all.

       The head's concern about the welfare of other
                                                       members provides each,
 including the head, with some insurance against disasters,      If a disaster

 reduced the income of one member alone, k,
                                              by say 50 per cent, the head would
 increase his contributions to k, and thereby1 offset to some extent the decline

 in k's income. The head would "finance" his increased contribution to k by

reducing his own consumption and his contributions to other members; in effect,

each member shares k's disaster by consuming less.     If k's share of family

income were negligible, hewouldessentiallybe fully insured against his own

disasters because even a 50 per cent decline in his income would have a negli-

gible effect on family income, and thus on the consumption of each member.

Since the share contributed by any member would tend to be inversely related

to family size, large families, including the extended kinship family found

in certain societies, can provide self-insurance especially when old-age, health,

and other kinds of market insurance are not available or are very costly8

Note that insurance is automatically provided when resources are voluntarily

transferred, without the need for any member to have dictatorial control over

the family's allocation of resources.

      This result on the unimportance of the distribution of income among person5

linked by transfers can also be used to understand the
                                                          interaction among gene-
rations?9   Suppose that the resources of the present generation are changed at

the expense of or to the benefit of the resources accruing to future generations.
                                        —17-



 For example, increased government debt or social security payments are financed

 by increased taxes on future generations, or increased public investment, per-

 haps in schools, with benefits accruing o future generations are financed by

 taxes on the present generation.   If present and future generations are fully

connected by a series of intergenerational transfers, called "bequests", then

each of these apparent changes in the relative resources of present and future

generations would tend to be offset by equal but opposite change in bequests.

 In particular, increased public debt would not raise the real wealth or consump-

tion of the present generation nor reduce that of future generations because

increased taxes on future generations would be matched by increased bequests to

them. Similarly, increased public investment in education would be matched

by reduced private investment in education.30

      The budget constraint of the head is determined by total family income,

not his own income alone -   equation   (3.3) for a two-person family can be readily

generalized to many persons. Since the head maximizes his utility subject to

his budget constraint, anything that increased family income would increase

his utility. Therefore, the head would consider the effect on total family

income of his different actions, and would forfeit own income if the incomes of

other family members were increased even more. For example, he would not

move to another city if his spouse's or childrens' income would be decreased

by more than his own income would be increased. Or although children
                                                                         usually
eventually set up their own households and fully control their own incomes, the

head would guide and help finance their investments in education and other

human capital to maximize the present value of the real income yielded by these

investments.3

     Put differently, the head automatically internalizes the "external" effects

of his actions on other family mernbers.3
                                        -18-

       Indeed, because the head maximizes family

  income   he fully internalizes these external ities not only when the income of

 different members, but also when their consumption, the other side of the

 budget constraint, is directly affected.       He would take an action directly

 affecting consumption only when either the value of any increase in his con-

 sumption exceeded the value (to him) of any decrease in other members' con-

 sumption, or whçn any decrease in his own was less valuable than the increase

 in theirs. 32
 •     .



       For example, he would read in bed at night only if the value of reading

 exceeded the value (to him) of the loss in sleep suffered by his wife, or

 he would eat with his fingers only if its
                                               value exceeded the value (to him)
of the disgust experienced by his family. The development of manners and

other personal behavior "rules" between
                                            family members well illustrates how
apparent "external" effects can be internal ized by social interaction between

members.

      Note too that not only is the head better off when his utility is raised,

but so too are other members of his family, even if his actions directly reduce

their consumption or increase their discomfort
                                                   and disgust. For if his utility
is raised and if their welfare has
                                      a positive income elasticity to him, he
would increase his contributions to them by more than enough to offset their

initial losses. For example, if he benefits from reading at night, his wife

does too because he more than compensates her for her loss of sleep.32   a


      The head maximizes a utility function that depends on the consumption of

all family members subject to a budget constraint determined by family income

and family consumption. Therefore, the effect of a change in relative prices

of gooàs, or in aggregate family income (as well as in its distribution) on
                                                                            a

fami ly's consumption of different
                                     goods could be predicted solely from the
head's utility function and a budget constraint on family variables. The
                                           -19-

     usual substitution and income effects of demand theory would be fullyapplicable.

             In this sense, then, a family with a head can be said to maximize "its"

    consistent and transitive utility function of the consumption of different

    members subject to a budget constraint defined on family variables. The

    "family's" utility function is Identical to that of one member, the head,

    because his concern for the welfareof other members, so to speak, integrates

    all the members,! utility functions into one consistent "family" function.

             That is to say, a "family's" utility function is the same as one of its

    members not because this member has dictatorial power over other members, but

    because he (or she!) cares sufficiently about all other members to transfer

    resources voluntarily to them. Each member can have complete freedom of

    action; indeed, the person making the transfers would not change the consump-

    tion of any member even with          dictatorial power! For example, if i had
    dictatorial power, he could move the equilibrium position e in Figure 3.1 to

    the vertical axis (or anywhere else), but would not choose to move it because

    his utility partly depends on j's consumption.33

             Nothing much has yet been said about the preferences of members who are

    not heads. The major, and somewhat unexpected, conclusion is that if

    a head exists, other members also are motivated to maximize family income and

    consumption, even if their welfare depends on their own consumption alone.
    This is     the "rotten kid" theorem. (I owe this name to the Barro family).
    For consider a selfish member j who can take an action that would reduce his

    income by b, but increase that of another member k by c.      Initially, j would
    be worse off by b since the gain to k is of no direct concern to him. However,

    if c =   b,   the head would transfer enough additional resources to j from k to

    leave him (and k) equally well off since intra-family reallocations of income

S   do   not affect the consumption of any member. Moreover, if c > b       if family

    income were raised by j's action—, and if J's welfare were a superior "good"

    to the head, then he would transfer enough additional resources to j to make
                                          -20-


                                                                                              .
    j better off. Consequently, even a selfish j would only, undertake actions
                                                                               that
    raised family income or consumption, regardless of the initial impact
                                                                          on him.
             In other words, when one member
                                               cares sufficiently about other members
    to be the head, all members have the
                                           same motivation as the head to maximize
    family opportunities, and to internalize fully all within family "externalities",

   regardless of how selfish (or)indeed, how
   a selfish child receiving                 envious) these members are. Even
 'itransfers from his parents would
                                    yomatically consider the effects of his
   actions on other siblings as well as on his parents. Put still
                                                                        differently,
   sufficient "love" by one member
                                      guarantees that all members act as if they
   loved other members as much as themselves.
                                                    As it were, the amount of "love"
   required in a family is economized:
                                          sufficient "love" by
                                                                 one member leads all other
  members by "an invisible hand" to act as if they too loved everyone.

           Armed with this theorem, I do not need to dwell on the preferences of

  non-heads. Of course, just as there may be no head if all members are suffi-

  ciently selfish, so there may be none if they are all sufficiently altruistic.

  Each would want to transfer
                                 resources to other members, but no one would want
  to accept transfers. Aside from
                                      that, mutual interaction or mutual
                                                                            interdependence
  of welfare raises no particular problems.4

           By assuming in Figure 3.1 and in the formal
                                                         development given by equations
  (3.1) to (3.4) that only a single good is consumed by each
                                                                  person, Ieliminated
  any distinction between transferring general
 part i cul a r
                                                    purchasing power and transferring
i\goods to another member.     If each member consumes many goods, the conclusions

  in this section about family
                                  utility functions, internalization of within-family

 externalities, and so on fully hold only if the head is content to transfer

 general purchasing power. He would transfer in this form if his utility function

 depended on the utility of other members. That
                                                       is, if his utility function could
                                               -21-

.
      be written in the form

            Uh = Uh
                    (xhj, XhmP l '<21
                                              m'"9n(xni '"xnm'               (3.5)
      where x.. is the quantity of the jth
                                           good consumed by the ith person, and

                 m ag.
      dg.
             O(=.z1
                J   b—      dx..)   implies that the utility of the ith person is unchanged.
                       tJ

      If he is concerned not about
                                       the utility of other members, but their consumption
      of particular "merit"
                           goods, the conclusions can be quite different. The syste-
     matic discussion of merit goods ts
                                        postponed to section 3c.
             If parents are transferring resources to their children
                                                                          in the form say of
     gifts and expenditures
                                on education and other human
                                                                capital or after they die in
     the form of bequests, then
                                    an increase in the income of
                                                                    parents by a given per-
     centage would tend to increase
                                        contributions to children by a still larger per-
     centage, certainly by one exceeding the increased welfare of their
                                                                        children
     (see the discussion in Section 2).
                                         In other words, contributions to children
     can be very responsive to a change in parental income without
                                                                   the welfare of
     children being so responsive.

                Empirical evidence on bequests,
                                                      gifts, and many other transfers to
    children is seriously deficient.       The general impression is, however, that
    bequests have a very high income
                                          elasticity. Moreover, the elasticity of
                                                                                  expenditures
    on children's education with
                                      respect to parental income does appear to be above

    unity (Schultz, p.9), which is consistent with the
                                                         implications of the theory.
            The responsiveness of expenditures on children's education
                                                                       and other train-
    )ng and ski lis to parental income
                                          has often been noted, nd lamented as evidence
    of immobility and rigid "class" structure. Yet
                                                    my analysis implies that the
    welfare of children - a
                            measure of their "class"-
                                                      rises by a smaller
                                                                         Percentage
    than parental
                  expenditures on them, and
                                            Possibly even by a cm11.-
                                      -22-
                                                                                      fH
than parental income. Put differently, considerable regression toward the mean

across generations -i.e., the expected income or other measure of the position

of children would be much closer to the average position than is that of their

parents    -,   can be observed at the same time that contributions to children are

very responsive, to parental income.35

      The crucial point is that considerable regression toward the mean across

generations would occur partly because of geneticfactors and luck if all parents

spent an equal amount on their children. As a result of this and given interde-

pendent preferences, higher income parents tend to spend considerably more on

their children then lower income ones. However, these expenditures would only tend

to dampen but not eliminate the regression toward the mean. Therefore, the

elastic response of contributions to children can give a very biased picture of

the degree of immobility or inheritance of "class" position.       Indeed, contri-

butions would be more responsive to parental income the stronger are the basic

forces producing mobility because parents attempt to offset these forces.      In

other words, an elastic response of contributions to parental income may be

evidence of sizeable niobility!35a

      B.   Charity

      If someone makes contributions of time or goods to unrelated persons or

to organizations, he is said to be "charitable" or "philanthropic". The dis-

cussion of contributions within a family indicates that charitabe behavior

can be motivated by a desire to improve the general well-being of recipients.6

Apparent "charitable" behavior can also be motivated, however, by a desire to

avoid the scorn of others or to receive social
                                                 acclaim. Not much generality is

sacrificed, however, by only considering charity motivated by a desire to improve

well-being.37
                                        —23—
          The numerous implications about family behavior developed in the pre-

    vious section fully apply to the synthetic "family" consisting of a chari-

    table person i and all recipients of his charity. For example, no members'

    well-being would be affected by a redistribution of income among them, as

    long as i continued to give to all of them. For he would simply redistribute

    his giving until everyone losing income was fully compensated and everyone

    gaining was fully "taxed".     Moreover, all members, not simply i, would try to

    maximize "family" opportunities and "famMy" consumption, instead of their own

    income or consumption alone.    In addition, each member of a synthetic "family"

    is at least partly "insured" against catastrophes because all other members,

    in effect, would increase their giving to him until at least part of his loss

    were replaced. Therefore, charity is a form of self—insurance that is a sub-

    stitute for market insurance and government transfers. Presumably, the rapid

    growth of these latter during the last 100 years discouraged the growth of

    charity.

          According to the analysis in Section 2, an increase in the income of a

    charitable person would increase his charitable giving by a greater percentage

    than the increase in the well-being of recipients. Indeed, his income elasti-

    city of demand for giving would exceed unity, possibly by a substantial amount,

    as long as his elasticity of demand for their well-being (which I will call

    his demand for charity) was not much below


    his average income elasticity. The available evidence on charitable giving

    clearly supports this implication of the theory: income elasticities esti-

    mated by iaussig8 from              giving in different income classes in 1962

    are all well above unity, ranging from a low of +1.3 in the under $25,000

    class to a high of +3.1 in the $100,000 - $200,000 class.

         A crucial implication of an interpretation of charitable giving in terms

S
of social interaction between the giver and others is that an increase in the

incomes of recipients would reduce giving. Therefore, an increase in the incomes S

of   both recipients and givers should not increase giving by as much as an

increase in the incomes of givers alone. These implications are tested and

confirmed by Schwartz, who analyzes aggregate time series on incomes and chari-

table giving in the United States between 1929 and 1966, and also compares his

findings with the cross-sectional findings of Taussig reported above39.

       The usual theory of consumer chance ignores social interactions, and

would consider charitable giving simply as a "good'1 that enters the giver's

utility function along with his other goods:

       U. = U. (x., h ),
                                                              (3.6)

where h measures the amount given by i, and x1 are the other goods that he

consumes. This "conventional" approach does not imply that an increase in

i's income would increase his giving by a particularly large percentage, nor

that an increase in the incomes of recipients would lower his giving.      Therefore,

considerable ad hocery would be required if the "conventional" approach were

to explain the evidence on charitable giving that is more readily explained by

an approach that incorporates social interactions


       These findings can be used to make very crude, but instructive, calcula-

tions of the share of recipient's own incomes in the social incomes of


contributors      If the own income elasticity

of demand for giving is taken from Taussig as +   2.0,   the share of own income

spent on giving as .04 (see Schwartz, p. 1278), and the income elasticity of

demand for charity as equal to the average income elasticity (actually,

Schwartz's findings suggest that it may be lower than the average), then accord-

ing to equation (2.11), charity's share in social income would be
                                                                                        S
               0.4.   If the own income elasticity of giving were taken   as + 3.0
                                               -25-




    rather than +   2.0,   charity's share would double to .08; if, in addition,

    the income elasticity of charity were only V5 of the average elasticity, its

    share would increase further to .11 ( a tithe ?).



           -C. Merit.GoodS and Multi—Person Interactions
                                                                          power to reci-
           Contributor5 are content to transfer general purchasing
                                                                                               -
    pients if they are concerned about the general welfare or utility of recipients
                                                 restrict or earmark their transfers, on
    as seen by recipients. They want to
                                                  about particular "merit" goods consumed
    the other hand, if they are concerned
                                                      want transfers to their children spent
    by recipients. For example, parents may

    on education or housing, or only the money incomes                   rather than "full"


    incomes of children                   may be of concern to parents, or contributors

    to beggars may not want their giving spent on liquor or gambling.




S
                                        -26-




        Assume, therefore that I transfers
                                                resources to j that are earmarked
  for particular goods
                       consumed by j because the utility function of I depends
  not only on his own goods but also on these goods of
                                                       j.    If j were permitted
  to spend his own income as he wished, an assumption
                                                      modified shortly, he would
 spend less on these goods as a result of the earmarked
                                                          transfers from I.
 Clearly, the reduction in his
                                own spending would be greater, the greater the
 transfer, the smaller the fraction of
                                        his social income spent on these goods,
 and the smaller their income
                              elasticity. For example, if they take 20 per-
 cent of his social income, and have
                                      an income elasticity equal to 2.0, he would
 reduce his own spending by 60 cents for each dollar
                                                        earmarked by .40
       As long as j continues to spend on the merit
                                                        goods, earmarked transfers
 are worth as much to j as a transfer
                                        of general purchasing power with equal

 monetary value. Moreover, i would not have a greater effect on j'sconsumptjon

 of these goods with earmarked
                                 transfers than with general
                                                               transfers. Therefore,
 as long as j continues to spend on these goods, earmarked
                                                               transfers are
equivalent to general transfers; and
                                        the results derived for the latter fully
hold for the former. For
                           example, a redistribution of income between i and j
would have no effect on the
                             consumption of either as long as both continue to
spend on the merit goods,, or both i
                                      and j want to maximize their combined
incomes, not their own incomes alone.

      On the other hand, if j did not want to spend
                                                    anything on the merit
goods because earmarked transfers
                                    were sufficiently large, such transfers would
be worth less to j and more to i than would general transfers
                                                              with equal money
value. Moreover, various results derived for general
                                                      transfers no longer holds
for example, a redistribution of income to j and
                                                 away from i would reduce j's
consumption of merit goods and increase his
                                               consumption of other goods.
                                            -27-



       If i were aware that j reduced his spending on merit goods when transfers

 increased, i would be discouraged from giving because j's reaction raises i's

 private price of merit goods to


                                                                           (i)
                                                   Ll
                                    =        L
                   1m                   m
                            r
                                j           mm

where p is the market price of merit goods, and the other terms are defined in

 footnote 1O.        Similarly, if j were aware that i reduced his transfers

when j increased his spending on merit goods, j would also be discouraged

 from spending because i's reaction raises the price to j.         Indeed, j could end

up consuming fewer merit goods than he would if i were not concerned!          That
these induced reactions are not simply hypothetical nor always minor is per-

suasively shown in a recent study of higher education.h42         States earmark

transfers to higher education mainly through highly subsidized public insti-

tutions. Private spending was apparently reduced by (at least) 75 cents per

dollar of public spending in 1966-67; private spending may have been reduced

by more than a dollar per dollar of public
                                                   spending in 1959-60, so that total
spending on higher education in that year would have been
                                                                  reduced by public
spending.

      Both i and j want to limit the induced reactions of the other because

such reactions reflect the incent'ive
                                             to "underreveal" preferences about merit goods
and "free-ride" in their consumption. Since equation (3.7) shows that these reactions

raise the price of merit goods to i and j, in effect, both want to lower these

prices. Indeed, it is well-known from the theory of public goods, and a merit

good is a particular kind of "public" good,
                                                    that efficient prices to i and j would be
less than the market price; indeed, these efficient prices would sum to the

market price of the merit
                                            Efficient prices might be achieved, for

example, by i and j matching each other's spending in specified proportions,
                                                                                        .
                                        -28-



 or each might be given a spending quota.

       I Intentionally say "might" be
                                         achieved because any agreement ha to be
 "policed"           to insure that each lives up to his commitment.
                                                                     Policing
 is relatively easy for the consumer of the merit goods, j, since he
                                                                      usually
 automatically knows how much is spent by I, but is much more difficult for i

 Since he does not automatically know how
                                               much is spent by j4 Parents may use
 their children's grades in school to measure the input of time and effort by

 children that presumably "matches" the money contribution by the parents.'

Or parents may save a large part of their total transfer to children for
                                                                         a be-
quest when they die in order to provide an incentive for children to spend

"appropriately" at least while their parents are alive.46
                                                                  This may explain
why the inheritance tax on bequests apparently has induced relatively little

substitution toward gifts to children.4

      The "underrevealing", "free-riding", coordination of efforts, and "policing"

discussed for merit goods are common to all
                                                 multi-person interactiors; i.e., all
situations where two or more persons are affected by the consumption, attitudes,

or other behavior of the same person. The analytical issues for multi-person

interactions are the same as for other "public" goods:
                                                             is public intervention
desirable -   for   example, should charitable giving be deductible from personal

income in arjvjng at tax liabilities in order to lower the private price of

giving—, and do         private equilibria without government intervention more

closely approximate joint maximization, a Nash
                                                   non-cooperative game solution, or
something quite different? Since space is limited, I refrain from discussing

further these and related issues.



                                                                                        .
                                             -29-

S
           D.   Envy   and   Hatred

           An envious or malicious
                                      person presumably would feel better off if some other
     persons become worse off in certain respects. He could "harm"
                                                                         himself (i.e., spend
     his own resources) on harming others: in Figure 2.2, he gives up
                                                                      k0 units of
     his own consumption in order to harm others by h0 units. The terms of trade

     between his own harm and the harm to
                                             others, given by the curve E0S0 in Figure
     2.2, is partly determined by his skill at
                                                    "predatory" behavior, and partly by
     public and private expenditures to
                                           prevent crime, libeling, malicious acts, tres-
     pass, and other predatory behavior. Since an increase in these expenditures

    would increase the cost to him of harming others, he would be discouraged from

    harming them. Only limited evidence is available
                                                           on predatory expenditures,
    but what is does support this implication of the theory. Crimes
                                                                    against
    persons provide some evidence on predatory behavior since most assaults and

    murders probably are motivated by the harm to victims8 The frequency of assaults

    and murder (and also crimes against
                                            property) apparently are strongly negatively
    related to the probability of
                                      conviction, punishments, and other measures of the
    cost of committing these crimes

          Section 2 suggests that a rise in own income would tend to reduce
                                                                            pre-
    datory expenditures.                     An increase in the social environment,50
    on the other hand, would necessarily increase
                                                       these expenditures, unless own con-
    sumption were an inferior good. Therefore, a rise in the social environment and

    own income by the same per cent would reduce
                                                       predatory expenditures by less
    than would a rise in own income
                                       alone, and might even increase them.

         Again, the implications of the theory can be tested with evidence on crimes

    against persons. Since assaults and murders have been more frequent at lower

    income levels,51 an increase in own income appears to reduce crimes against
                                                                                per-
                                     -30-

 sons, if differences in own income alone are measured by differences in the

 incomes of individuals at a moment in time (as in the discussion of charity

 in section 3B). As predicted by the theory, an increase in own income that

 is accompanied by an increase in the social environment (as measured by

 the income of others) does not have such a negative effect on these

crimes. Indeed, the frequency of assaults and murders has not been reduced by

the sizeable growth in aggregate incomes during the last O years, nor do higher

income states presently have fewer crimes against persons than other states.52

      Over the years, even acute observers of society have differed radically in

their assessment of the importance of envy and hatred. Two hundred years ago,

for example, Adam Smith recognized these "passions", but shunted them aside with

the comment:53 "Envy, malice, or resentment, are the only passions which can

prompt one man to injure another in his person or reputation. But the greater

part of men are not very frequently under the influence of those passions, and

the very worst men are so only occasionally. As their gratification too, how

agreeable soever it may be to certain characters, is not attended with any real

or permanent advantage it is in the greater part of men commonly restrained by

prudential considerations. Men may live together in society with some tolerable

degree of security, though there is no civil magistrate to protect them from

the injustice of those passions". (Smith,      my italics).   To Thorstein

Veblen, on the other hand, writing many years later, these motives are the

very stuff of life that dominate everything else:4 "...the desire for wealth

can scarcely be satiated in any individual instance, and evidently a satiation

of the average or general desire for wealth is out of the question. However

widely, or equally, or 'fouly', it may be distributed, no general increase of

the community's wealth can make any approach to satiating this need, the ground

of which is the desire of everyone to excel everyone else in the accumulation S

of goods." (Veblen, p.32).
                                             —31-

.         In    principle, the importance of envy and hatred can be measured using

    equation (2.9)        by the contribution of the relevant social environment to

    social income; this is        done in a crude way In section 2b for charity. Un-

    fortunately, not enough information is available either on the own income elas-

    ticity of demand          or on the fraction of own Income spent on "predatory" be-

    havior to     make,      even crude estimates of the relative contribution of evy

    and hatred.

          Still, it may be useful to note several implications of the differing

    views about the significance of envy and hatred. For example, Veblen's belief

    that the welfare of a typical person primarily depends on his relative income

    position implies that social income essentially is zero:             that the value of

    the social environment causing envy would exactly offset the value of own in-

    come For then, and only then, would a rise in this social environment and
    own   income by the same per cent, prices held constant, not affect social income

    or welfare. That is,             a rise in all incomes in a community by the same

    per cent would not improve anyone's welfare in Veblen's world.55

          If social income were negative, if the environment causing envy were more

    important than own income, a rise in the environment and own income by the

    same per cent would lower social income and welfare. That is, a general rise

    in incomes in a more extreme Veblenian world would actually lower welfare!6

          On the other hand, Smith's belief that envy is a relatively minor determi-

    nant of welfare implies that social income is positive: the environment causing

    envy is less important than own        income. A rise in the environment and own

    income by the same per cent would then raise social income and welfare. That

    is,        Veblen's general rise in the community's income would raise the welfare

    of the typical person.
                                     -32-

4.mmary
      This essay uses simple tools of economic theory to analyze interactions

between the behavior of some                 persons and different characteristics

of other persons. Although these interactions are emphasized ih the contemporary

sociological and anthropological literature, and were considered the cornerstone

of behavior by several     prominent 19th century economists, they have been largely

ignored in the modern economic literature.

      The central concept of the analysis is "social income", the sum of a

person's own income (his earnings, etc) and the monetary value to him of the rele-

vant characteristics of others, which I call his social environment. The optimal

expenditure of his own income to alter these characteristics is given by the

usual marginal conditions. By using the concept of social income, I can analyze

the effect on these expenditures of changes in different sources of income

and in different prices, including the "price" of the social environment.

Perhaps the most important implication, is that a change in own
income alone would tend to cause a relatively large change in these expenditures;

in other words, the own income elasticity of demand for these expenditures would

tend to be "large", certainly larger than the elasticity resulting from equal

per cent changes in own income and the social environment.

      Interactions among members of the same family receive the greatest atten-

tion: The "head" of a family is defined not by sex or age, but as that member,

if there is one, whb transfers general purchasing power to all other members

because he cares about their welfare. Afamily with a head is a highly inter-

dependent organization that has the following properties:

      A redistribution of income among members would not affect the consumption

or welfare of any member because it simply induces offsetting changes in transfers

from the head. As a result, each member is at least partially insured against

    disasters that may strike him.
                                      -33-



         Not only the head but other members too act "as if" they "loved" all

    members, even when they are really selfish, in the sense that they would

    maximize not their own income alone but family income. As it were, the existence

    of ahead economizes on the amount of true love required in a family.

         A family would act "as if" it maximized a consistent and transitive utility

    function subject to a budget constraint that depended only on family variables.

    This utility function is the same as the head's not because he has dictatorial

    power, but because his concern for the welfare of other members integrates

    all their utility functions into one consistent "family" function.

          Transfers from parents to       children in the form say of schooling,

    gifts and bequests tend to be negatively related to what the income of children

    would be relative to         their parents in the absence of these transfers.

    Therefore, the relative income of children inclusive of transfers could be

    unrelated or even negatively related to these transfers. Consequently, one

    cannot infer anything about the stability across generations of economic or

    social positions simply from knowing the relation between parental position and

    the amount transferred.

         tiore      briefly treated are charity and envy, with special attention

    to the effects of different kinds of income change on charitable contributions

    and expenditures to alleviate envy. For example, the much higher income elas-

    ticity of demand for charitable contributions estimated from differences in

    individual incomes at a moment in time than from aggregate changes in incomes

    over time are shown to be implied by this theory of social interactions, but not

    readily by the traditional theory of choice.



.
       From
            a methodological viewpoint, the aim of the paper is to show
                                                                           how
                                                                                   .
another relation considered
                             important in the sociological
                                                            and anthropological
 literature can be usefully
                            analyzed when Incorporated into the framework
                                                                            pro-
vided by economic theory
                            Probably the main explanation for
                                                               the neglect of
social Interactions by economists is neither analytical
                                                         Intractability nor a
preoccupation with more Important
                                   concepts, but excessive attention to formal
developments during the last 70 years. As a consequence, even,
                                                                  concepts con-
sidered to be important
                           by earlier economists, such as social interactions,
have been shunted aside.




                                                                                   .
                                    -35-

                                 References



Adams, James D. "Asset Transfers at Deathtime", Department of Economics,

      University of Chicago, unpublished, (February, 1974).

Alchian, A. A. and Allen, W. R., University Economics, 2nd ed., Wadsworth.

Barro, R. , RAre Government Bonds Net Wealth?", unpublished, (March, 1974).




Becker, G. S., The Economics of Discrimination, Chicago, University of

      Chicago Press,(l957, 2nd ed. 1971).

Becker, G. S., "Notes on an Economic Analysis of Philanthropy", unpublished

      (April, 1961).

Becker, G. S., a "Interdependent Preferences: Charity, Externalities, and

      Income Taxation", unpublished, (March, 1968).



Becker, G. S., "A Theory of Marriage: Part H", Journal of Political Economy,

      special supplement (March/April, 1974).

Becker, G. S. and Stigler, G. J., "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensa-

      tion of Enforcers", Journal of Legal Studies (January, 1974).

Becker, G. S. Human Capital 2d ed. (New York: Columbia University Press, 1975).

Bentham, J. a Principles of Morals and Legislation, 1789.



Bentham, .J. b "The Philosophy of Economic Science" in J. Bentham's Economic

      Writings, ed. by Stark.

Blau, P. M., "Social Exchangd', in International Encyclopedia of the Social

      Sciences, Vol. 7   (MacMillan and Free Press, 1968).
Boulding, K., The Economy of Love and Fear, Wadsworth (1973).

Brady, D. and Friedman, R. D., "Savings and the Income   Distribution"   in Studies

      in Income and Wealth, Vol. X (New York: NBER, 1947), pp. 247-65.
                                      -36-

DeTray, D., "Child Quality and the Demand for Children", Journal of Political

                  Vol. 81, Part II (March/April, 1973).

Duesenberry, J S., Income, Savings, and the Theory of Consumer Behavior,

      Cambridge: Harvard University Press,(l949).

Ehrlich, I. and Becker, G. S., "Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self—

      Protection", Journal of Political Economy, (July/August, 1972).

Ehrlich, I. "Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and

      Empirical lnvestigation", Journal of Political Economy, (May/June, 1973).

Fisher, I., Mathematical Investigations in the Theory of Value and Price, (1892).

Johnson, H., "The Effect of Income-Redistribution on Aggregate Consumption With
      Interdependence of Consumers' Preferences", Economica, (May, 1952).

Leibenstein, H., "Bandwagon, Snob, and Veblen Effects in the Theory of Con-

      sumers' Demand", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 61i (May, 1950), 183—207

Lipset, S M and Bendix, R , Social Mobility in Industrial Societies (Berkeley

      University of California Press, 1959).

Marshall, A., Principles of Economics, 8th ed., MacMillan.

McPherson, M ,   "Public   Supply and the Demand for Higher Education", Ph D

      dissertation in progress, University of Chicago

Michael, R I and Becker, G S , "On the New Theory of Consumer Behavior",

      Swedish Journal of Economics, 75, 4, (1973).

Mincer, J., Schooling, Experience and Earnings (New York: Columbia University

      Press, 1974).

Panteleoni, M., Pure Economics,

Parsons, D. 0., "Intergenerational Wealth Transfers and the Educational Decisions

      of Male Youth", unpublished, Ohio State University (1974).

Parsons, I ,     "Social   Interactions" in International Encyclopedia of the

      Social Sciences, Vol. 7. (MacMillan and Free Press, 1968).

Peltzman, S., "The Effect of Government Subsidies-in-Kind on Private Expen-

      ditures: The Case of Higher Education," Journal of Political Economy,
                                          -.7—
     Pigou, A. C., "Some Remarks on Utihi,",
                                                 Economic Journal, XIII (1903),
           pp. 19-214.

S    Samuelson, P. A., "The Pure Theory of Public
                                                  Expenditijres", Reviw of Economics

           and Statistics, (November, 1954).

     Samuelson, P. A., "Social Indifference Curves", Quarterly Journal of Economics,

           (February, 1956).

     Schoeck, H., Envy, tiew York: Harcourt Brace,(l966).

    Schultz, 1. W., The Economic Value of Education,(New York: Columbia University

           Press, 1967).

    Schwartz, R., "Personal Philanthropic Contributions", Journal of Political

          Econom1 78 (November/December, 1970), PP. 1264-91).

    Shoup, C., Federal Estate and Gift Taxes,(Washington, D.C.:
                                                                   The Brookings
           Institution, 1966).

    Smith, A., The Wealth of Nations,(New York: Modern
                                                           Library Edition, 1937).
    Task Force Report of the Crime Commission a, Crime and Its Impact — An

          Assessment,(U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967).
    Task Force Report of the Crime Commission b, The Challenge of Crime in a

          Free Society, (u.s. Government Printing Office, 1967).

    Taussig, M., The Charitable Contribution in the Federal Personal Income Tax,

          unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, (1965).

    The Random Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged, (1967).

    Veblen, 1., The Theory of the Leisure Class, (New York:
                                                                Modern Library ed.,    ).

    Vickery,   W. S., "One Economist's View of Philanthropy" in Philanthropy and

          Public Policy, edited by F. Dickinson, (New York: National Bureau of

          Economic Research, 1962).
.                                           -38-
                                         Footnotes




            1See Bentham
                              Chapter V, and Marshall, Book III, Chapter II.

            2Quoted in Marshall p. 87.


            3Marshall.     He limits his discussion of
                                                         consumer demand to the largely
     formal theory of marginal theory because of the importance he
                                                                   attaches to the
      interaction between activities,
                                        consumer behavior and the basic wants: "...such
     a discussion of demand as is possible
                                              at this stage of our work must be confined
     to an elementary analysis of an almost purely formal kind." (p. 90).
                                                                                He never
     developed the more complicated and less formal analysis.

           4See
                   Pigou, Fisher, p. 102, Pantejeoni (I owe this reference to George
     Stigler.)

           5See
                  e.g., Duesenbery, Johnson, or Brady and Friedman.



           6See Leibenstein.


           7See      Boulding,       Vickery, Schwartz, and Alchian and Allen, pp.l352,

          8See Veblen, pp. 25, 30.


          9See Parsons, and Blau.

         '°See Becker, 1957, 1971.


         See      Becker, 1961.


           Other drafts that were also circulated include Becker l968a

         13For an exposition of this theory see Michael
                                                        and Becker.

             have also developed the
                                        analysj assuming many commodities and
    many characteristics
                                                                  -39-

          15Sociologists                sometimes assert that variables like social approval

and respect "do not have any material value on which a price can be put..."
                                                                                                                •
(see Blau).                             But prices measure only scarcity, and have nothing in-

trinsically to do with "material value": R' for example, only measures the re-

source cost to i of changing social approval, respect, etc.

                 assume for simplicity in this formula that                         measures the marginal

as well as average price of R.


           171f he can also reduce R by giving up own goods, the curve E0S0

would continue in the south-west direction (see ES in the figure). How-

ever, this section would be irrelevant if R had positive marginal utility.

                     differentiating equation (2.6) with respect to                      alone,

n wnxx+wn
        RR=1-a,
where
                                                                           dx

w=__,
                                   PRR
                                             =l-w,                 xctLj        '




          dR          :i.
                                              PRDi
                        —,               a
          di.             R
                                                  Si

and I am assuming that,                           is given (not dependent on h, x, etc.).          Of course,

the weighted average of income elasticities with respect to a change in Si must

equal unity, as in the usual analysis.


                Since
                              dh = dR   —
                              di.       di.



hdLh
          dh
                                   dR Rh
                                   dR        I.        R               R
                                                                                          (2.8')



But
  R                                                        S. -   I.
  —=
  h
               PRR
                      =1+          PRD.
                                              =1+            I.

  =   1    +
                I-    a
                               1        =     (1-a)          +
                                                          -40-




.   Since I - a =


    rh    —-         (+l-a).
                             (see footnote           18    ),



          20
               For
                       I +c(-
                          I-a               >i since! >1, and 1 -c< 1.

                     increase in a lowers            because the relative contribution of own

     income to social income would be reduced.

          22
                dnh
                        (_ = constant                R 1                         R
                                                                                     a —
                        —                                           1)
                         n                                                   n
                                                                                       da
    Both terms are greater than zero because                          <          .- < 0
                                                                          1, and da          (this is shown

    shortly); therefore, dflh
                                             >0.

          23The endowment-income elasticity of demand for contributions can

    easily be shown      to   equal
                         dh        D    =     - 1)               (1
               Nh =                                   [-              +
                                                                          a(--       1)) ]   + 1.

    Clearly, when a >         0,       Nh < 0 if           a = N, the average endowment-income

    elasticity of demand; and when a < 0, Nh > 0                          if NR a




          24 assume that an increase in the absolute value of                                 reduces the demand
    for R, so that Eh >        0.

         25
              Caring is not simply a deus ex machina introduced to derive the

    following implications since I have shown
                                                                   elsewhere (Becker, 1974) that the
    marriage market is more likely to pair
                                                                a person with someone he cares about
    than with an otherwise similar
                                              person that he does not care about.
                                   -1l-


     26
                                                                                 .
          If the utility of i also partly depended directly on the amounts he

transferred to j, perhaps because 's "prestige" or "approval" partly depended

on these transfers, then redistribution of family income would have a net

effect on the consumption of both i and j.

      27A somewhat weaker assumption is that the family is "fully

connected" through a series of transfers between members; for example,

a transfers resources to b because a cares about b, b transfers to c

because b cares about c, and so on until m transfers to the last member n,

and n transfers to no one (this assumption is made in an intergenerational

context by Barro).               Indirectly, a (or any other member but n)

would be transferring to all members because an increase in his contributions

to b would induce an increase in the contributions to all other members.

      28The interaction between self and market insurance is analyzed in

Ehrlich and Becker.

      29This application is taken from the detailed discussion in Barro.




       30The empirical evidence does strongly suggest that most of the invest-

ment in higher education by state governments has been offset by reduced

 private investment (see Peltzman, and McPherson)

       31The incentive that parents have to invest in their children is dis-

 cussed in several places (see e.g., De Tray, and Parsons).




                                                                                 .
                                                            -42-

.             3laThe Coase Theorem proves that when "bargaining costs"
                                                                       are negligible,

     each family member could always be induced to maximize family oppo-rtunities

     through bargaining with and side payments from other members.                                 I have proved

     that the head (and, as shown later, other members too) has this incentive

    and, in effect, makes or receives "side payments" without bargaining with

    other members. The word "automatically" is used to distinguish this

     theorem from the Coase Theorem.


             32Although this is a rather immediate implication of his interest

    in maximizing family opportunities, a direct proof may be instructive.

    Suppose that a particular action changed the utility of the head by
                                        n

               dlJh mudx +              E              mudx.,                            (1 )
                                       j=l
    where mu =              , and dx. measures the change in consumption of the jth
                                            J
                        j
    family   member.    If the head can transfer resources to other members dollar

    for dollar, in equilibrium,

                     mu =                       all j,                        (2 )
                            XhPj

    where       is the marginal utility of income to the head, and p is the cost

    of x.. Substitution of equation (2') into (1 )                           gives
        J

                                   n
       duh =                                       p.dx.)    =     E          p.dx..        (3 )
                       phd)ch +
                Xh
                                  J=l, h '             -           all   j
                                                                                     -



    Since the head takes an actiorr if and only if, dUh > 0, equation (3 )

    implies    (since Ah > 0) that he takes an action if, and only if,

                        E    P.dX >               0,                                        (4')
                              -
                       all j


    which was to be proved.
                                                                                        .
                                                                 is consumed
     32aRecall that I have been assuming that only a single good
                                                       many goods. The transition
by each person, although this analysis presupposes

to many goods is straightforward if the head's utility depends on a function
                                              member that is monotonically re-
of the various goods consumed by another
                                                 (see the discussion later in this
lated to the utility function of that member

section).
      33
           It   is difficult to contrast my derivation of a "family" utility function

with a traditional derivation since explicit derivations are rare.      The most

explicit appears to be in a well-known article on social indifference curves by

Samuelson (1956).       He briefly considers the problem of relating individual and

family utility functions, and perhaps gives the same derivation as mine.
                                                                                 I




say "perhaps" because his discussion is brief, and has

 a      statement about grafting aconsistent "family welfare function" onto the

                      functions of different family members (p. 10), and some others
 separate utility

 equally unclear.


       For example, he said "... (a family member's) preferences among his own

 goods have the special property of being independent of the other members

 consumption. But since blood is thicker than water, the preferences of the

 different members are interrelated by what might be called a 'consensus' or

 'social welfare function' which takes into account the deservingness or ethical

 worths of the consumption levels of each of the members". (Ibid) How are these

 preferences interrelated by a "consensus", and why not simply incorporate


                                                                                        S
                                                     .-Ii4_




•    the "deservingness" of the consumption levels of different members into some

     members' preferences (as in my approach)? Incidentally, at one poirlt(p. 9),Samuelson

     appears to believe that if the family utility function is the same•as the head's,

     he must have sovereign power, which I have shown to be wrong.

           He later (p. 20) says that "if within the family there
                                                                  can be assumed to take
     place an optimal reallocation of Income so as to keep each member's dollar

    expenditure of equal ethical worth, then there can be derived for the whole fa-

    mily a set of well-behaved indifference contours relating the totals of what

     it consumes: the family can be said to act as if it maximizes such a group

    preference function" (italics in original).                    In my analyses, the "optimal re-

    allocation" results from interdependent preferences and voluntary contributions,

    and the "group preference function" is identical to that of the "head".


                     frequently has been alleged to me that mutual interaction of the

    form

                      =
                          U   [x., g. (iii)]

                 U. = U. [x,
                             g (u.)],
    where x. and x. are the own consumption of i and j, and 9. and g. are monotonic

    functions of the utility indexes U. and Ui,, results in instability and unbounded

    utility levels:. For, it is argued, an increase in x. by one unit directly raises

    i's utIlity, which raises j's Ut           1 i   ty   through g. ,   which in turn further raises
    i's ut iii ty, and so on

    until U. and U. approach infinity.
                                                     Mathematically, there is an infinite regress
    since, by substitution,

             =
                 U    Ex.,       x., g. { x,              {
                                                              'j' g {...   .}]
           However, with appropriate restrictions on the magnitude of the interactions,

    the infinite regress has a finite effect, and the "reduced forms" of
                                                                                           U and Uj on
    x. and x. are well defined. Consider, for
                                                                example, the Cobb Douglas functions
                                                      -k5-
                                            a.        b.
                                  =
                              I             I
                                                      J



                                            a.b.                                                     •
                        U.
                          J
                                  =.       x.
                                            J
                                                      U.,
                                                      I
                                                                                        -




                                                                        b. can either be > or < 0.
where a1 arid a presumably are > 0, and b1 and


By substitution,
                                           ab.
            ____
                   a.
                                            JI                           .
         u=x
          i
             l-b.b.
               1
                                        l-b.b.
                                                I J         =   )I
                                                                cz.


                                                                I
                                                                        )(I
                                                                         J




                    Ii _
                   a.b.
                 l-b.b.
                                       x
                                            a.
                                           l-b.b.
                                                  -         =
                                                                c.       f.
         U = x            -                                     ç•J
          j                             j                           I    J



where b.b. is independent of monotonic transformations on U. and U.. A

finite sum to the regress requires that lb.b.l < 1; essentially, that the

marginal utilities or disutilities due to interdependence are less than

unity. Note that a1though it is possible for a. = b. and a.                           b.., for own

consumption and the welfare of the other person to be equally "important",

the conditionbbI < 1 imp] ies that either                               > .j,   or      or both:

that is, for at least one of the persons, own consumption has to be more

important than the other person's consumption in the "reduced forms".




                                                                                                     .
                                                -46-

        351n one study, the elasticity of children's
                                                     years of school ing with
  respect to parental income is a sizeable +1.2, at the same time that the

 elasticity of children's income with respect to parental income is only

      or a 70 per cent regression toward the
                                                             mean (unpublished calculations
 by Jacob Mincer from the Eckland Sample).

       Note in this regard, however, that parents cannot easily prevent

 considerable regression toward the mean by investing in their children.

 For let the relation between the human capital invested in children and

 parental income be

                S=a+b logI+u,
 where b is the elasticity of
                                      parental response, and urepresents other
 determinants of S. According to the theory of investment in human capi-

 tal (Mincer; Becker, 1975),

         logic           a+rS c +v,
where r is the rate of return
                                      on human capital, and v represents other deter-

minants of log I. Then by substitution

       log Tc        (a + ra) + rb log I + (ru + v).

Even if r were as large as .2, and b as large as
                                                                   2.0,   rb would only be
 .4: the regression toward the mean would be 60 per cent.

      If v      c log I + v', where I-c measures the degree of "intrinsic"

regression to the mean, then by substitution,                                           -
                                                                            .




         log I = (a + ra) + (rb + c) log I +                   (ru +v')

Since the analysis in the text implies that b would be positively related to

1cas parents try to offset the "intrinsic" regression, the "observed" re-

gression to the mean,

                 -
                     y    1 -   (c + rb) = (1   -
                                                    c)   -
                                                             rb,

may be only weakly related to the "intrinsic" regression lc.
       I am indebted to discussions with Jacob Mincer on the issues sketchily

covered in this footnote.

       35a   It   is generally believed that the United States has a more mobile
                  .




"open" society than European countries do, yet (admittedly crude) comparisons
of occupational mobility between fathers and sons do not reveal large dif-

ferences between the United States and several Western European countries

(Upset and Bendix). Since the analysis in this paper suggests that parental

contributions to their children's education and other training is more

responsive to parental position in "open" societies, more responsive parental

contributions may be offsetting the greater "openness" of American society.



       6The Random House Dictionary defines charity as "the benevolent feeling,

especially toward those in need or in disfavor".

       37The utility function of a charitable person who desires to improve the

general well-being of recipients can be written as
                                                I.÷h
                      u. = U.   [x., x.(=              )   I   '

 where h is his charitable giving,                   measures the well-being of recipients,
                                                 x
        U.             U.
 and                          > 0;      that is, a unit increase in the own income of reci-

 pients has the same effect on the utility, of a charitable person as a unit

 increase in his giving.


              The utility function of a person who makes "charitable contributions

  to win social acclaim can be written as


                      U = U
                                       j.
                                (x., —s—,
                                       pi
                                            _,
                                            h


                                            P
                         U.                                                   increase his
   where still -— > 0
                                   -
                                       an increase in his contributions would
                                               -148-
     acclaim-,        but now the sign of U1/I. is. not so obvious.
                                                                             If, however, contri-
     butions and the income of recipients were much closer substitutes for each

     other than for the own consumption of the contributor, which is plausible, then

 these utility functions have similar implications.
 Not
                   much generality is sacrificed, therefore, by only considering charity

 motivated by a desire to improve the well-being of recipients.

             8ee      Taussig. These estimates are net of differences in tax rates. Note,

 however, that charitable giving is estimated from itemized deductions in personal
 income                                                           -
Atax    returns. Since only giving to (certain) institutions and not to individuals

 can be deducted, since many taxpayers, especially with lower incomes, do not

 itemize their deductions, and since others inflate their deductions, the response

 of tax-reported giving may not accurately describe the response of actual giving.

            39Schwartz's study, like Taussig's, is based on personal income tax returns

 (see Schwartz). Both studies also estimate the price elasticity of

 giving, where price is measured by one minus the marginal tax rate.

 Schwartz finds considerable response to price, elasticities
                                                                              generally exceeding
 -
      .5,   which is                 consistent with the implications of the theory of social

 interactions. Taussig, on the other hand, finds only a weak response to price,

 but Schwartz argues that Taussig's findings are biased downward.

            140
                  It is easily shown that

                        r. =         —   vn
                         j
                                 1

                                         mm
where V is the share spent on merit goods, n their income elasticity, and

      the reduction in j's own spending per unit increase in i's contribution.
 r
Therefore, if v =
                         m       .2, and nm = 2.0,    r.   0.6.
                                                       j


            I+lFor   example, if j spends 60 cents less for each dollar transferred
                                                                                    by
I, the price to i would be

              =
                    m   —i;- =   2.5
or more than twice the market price.
                                        -49-

        42
             See Peltzman.

        43
             A proof of thiswell-known summation formula can be found in Samuelson,
                                                                                         .
1954.


        hThe difficulty of policing "merit" goods is shown amusingly in a recent

Wizard of Id cartoon. Two drunks meet and one says "Could you spare a buck for

a bottle of wine?" The other answers, "How do I know you won't buy food with

it?"

        45 I owe this example to Lisa Landes.


        Li6Thjs conclusion about theincentives provided by large bequests is a

special case of a more general result proven elsewhere (see Becker-Stigler) that

relatively large pensions discourage employees from acting contrary to the in-

terests of their employers (          a bequest serves the same purpose as a pension)

                 the discussion in Shoup and Adams

                  robberies, burglaries and larcenies, on the other hand, probably are

motivated by the prospects of material gain.

         4ee Ehrlich

         50That is, in that part of the social environment that motivates predatory

expend i tures.


         51Persons committing crimes against other persons as well as against pro-
                                                               (see the Task Force
perty are much more likely to live in low income areas


Report of the Crime Commission a, Table 9).




                                                                                         S
                                                              -50-
             52
                   The rate of assaults grew significantly from 1933 -
                                                                                      65 In   the United
   States, and the murder rate remained about the
                                                                         same (Task Force Report of the

   Crime Commission b, Figures 3 and 4).                         Higher income states do not have fewer

  crimes against persons even when the probability of conviction, the puiiishi€.ii

  and several other variables are held constant (Ehrlich, Tables
                                                                 2                            5) Mote
  that Ehrlich's study, unlike the evidence from the Crime Commission, holds

  the "price" of crime constant when estimating the effects of income (and holds

  income constant when estimating the effects of price).

             53Not much later, Jeremy Benthari reached a similar conclusion: "The
                                                                                  p1e-
  sure derivable by any person from the contemplation of pain suffered by another,

  is in no instance
                                   so great as the pain so suffered."
                                                                               (Bentham b).
         54        .
              Similarly,           a sociologist recently has argued that envy is a powerful

 motive in primitive as well as advanced
                                                                 societies, communist as well as capi-
 talist ones, and is critical in
                                                         determining economic progress and public policy
 (see Schoeck).


         54a,,,, income here includes the value of
                                                   other aspects of the social
 envi ronment.



         551f

                          = U.
                                       (II.r),
where f is the
                          average community income, then
                       S. =   I.   -
                                       p
                                           r
where S. is l's social income, and
                                                          p is the price of I in terms of T. if
I did not engage in predatory
                                                      behavior, p would simply equal the slope of his
indifference curve:
             dI.          I.
sIope=__!_ = .J.. =                     pr
             dl
Hence

        s.
                       II
                   x. - L .                    = o.
                                -51-

                                                        is undesirable because
     6When envy is so important, economic development
                         Schoeck's discussion of what he cafls "the envybarrier
it lowers welfare. See

of the developing countries".




                                                                                  .
                                —52—



.
x




                  u


                                        us




     /
                  #9


             F




                 /-
             /             h0



    //   /

                       I
                       I

0
                       D                     Si   A
                           Figure 2.1
.
                —53—




           I
    U2



         / /
          Ua               U3
                                              E2




                                 h2

                            k0




           h0


                                      \
                       I

                                      \t
                                          I
                                              so
0                      0                           R
                           —54-.




         x




jjj=Ij+Ij!j
    px




              I   I

              I   1


              I   I                =*=-1
              I   I

              I   I

              I   I




                                       u


         0
                      Figure 3.1
