                        NBER WORK[NG PAPER SERIES




                    ThE STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF LOCAL

                      STRUCTtJRE IN SOCIAL NEIWORXS


                            Paul W. Holland
                                   and
                           Samuel Leinhardt*

                          Working Paper No.    1414




       COMPUTER RESEARCH CENTER FOR ECONO{tCS AND MANAGEINT SCIENCE
                National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                           575 Technolog>, Square
                      Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

                                June 19714



                     Preliminary: not for quotation


NBER working papers are distributed inforirlly and in limited numbers for
coirnents only. They should not be quoted without written permission.
This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER publications;
in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval by the Board of
Directors.
NBER Computer Research Center. Carnegie-Mellon University, School of
Urban and Public Affairs. Research supported in part by National Science
Foundation Grants GS-39778 to Carnegie-Mellon University and GJl1514X2 to
the National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                                                                                .
                                   Abstract

We introduce the concept of a triad census of a digraph arid shcw hc it
can   be used to enumerate various types of subgraph configurations. We
give the basic probabilities needed for computing means and variances for
a triad census under the UJMAN distribution for digraphs. These concepts
are combined to provide a way of testing propositions about social struc-
ture using sociometric   data. An application to O8 sociograins   is   given.




                               Acknowledgements
                                                                                .
We are grateful to James A. Davis, J. Richard Dietrich and Christopher
Winship for their aid in the progress of this research.




                                                                                S
                                           Contents

1. Introduction                                                                      •    1

2. The Triad Census of a Di'aph                                                      .    3


3. Configurations in Diaphs                                                               8


4. Linear Combinations of Triad Frequencies                                              13

5. The Distribution of a Random Subgraph Census                                          19

6. Testing Structural Hypotheses                                                         27

7.   Surriimry and Discussion                                                            33

Appendix:       Conditional Uniform Distributions for Random        Graphs     . . .     35

References                                                                               39




                                            Figures


Figure 2-1:       The 3   Isonrphism Classes for Diaphs with g=2             . . .   .    6a

Figure   2-2: The 16 Isomrphism Classes            for   Diaphs with g3 . . . .           6b

Figure   3-1:     Pictorial Representation of the Configurations Defined
                  by   (3—2)                                                             12a

Figure   3-2:     Pictorial Representation of Configurations Given by (3-4) .13a

Figure 4-1:       Pictorial Representation of Bin and B0t Configurations                 17a




                                             Tables


Table 14_l: Selected           Weighting Vectors                                         19a

Table    5-1:    Numerators      for p(u) Under UMAN     Distribution                    26a
                                                                          .
Table 5-2: Numerator for p0(u,v) Under UJI'tA

Table 5-3: Numerator for p2 (u,v) Under UIMAN
                                                Distribution
                                                Distribution
                                                               .    26b

                                                                    26f

Table 6-1: Results of Testing Mazur's Proposition                   29a

Table 6-2: Weighting Vector for Configuration Critical to Mazur's
           Proposition                                              30a




                                                                          .




                                                                          .
1. Introduction

      Graph theory and network concepts are corrronly used by social scientists

to operationalize theoretical statements about structural regularities in

social systems. These concepts are especially appropriate for models of

the fine structure of interpersonal relations. Here the identification of
individuals as "nodes" and interpersonal relations as "edges" in a graph
is imnediate. Graphtheoretic concepts are used to represent both models
of social structure and data on social structure. A     basic reference
detailing the application of graph theory to models of social structure is
Harary, Norn and Cartwright [1965]. The usual data representation, the
sociogram, was introduced by Moreno [19314].
      Theoretical statements incorporating network analogies have been
fonnalized in mathentical models of social and perceptual behavior. For
example, the cogri-tive balance theory of Heider [191414] was fonrialized
by Cartwright and Harary [1956],Davis [1967] and Flament [1963]. Horrns'
[1950] propositions about behavior in groups were fonralized by Davis and
Leirthardt [1972] and Holland and Linhardt [1971]. Radcliff-Brc.jn's 119140]
and Nadel's [1957]    theoretical statements on   kinship and role systems were
fonnalized by White [l963J and White and Lorrain [1972]. We view these
models as "global" in the sense that they imply that the entire organization
of the system will fit into some relatively simple patterns.
      Sociomet-ric data have corrnon1y been collected by investigators interested
in sill-sca1e social systems. In the years since the introduction of the
                                            —2—




technique, data have been compiled on a large variety of groups by numerous
                                                                                   S
investigators (see, for example, Davis and Leinhart [1972]). The complexity
of this data has led to the development of various techniques and algo-
Tithms for organizing and simplifying them (see, for example, Moreno, et.
al. [1960] and Boyle [1969]). Most analyses of sociometric data to
social   structure have focused on global properties   such as   cliques, status

hierarchies and corruiiunication   paths.

    Although   there is an abundance of theory, mDdels, data and data analyUc
procedures, it seems fair to say that our understanding of small-scale social
structure has not advanced much beyond the fundamental insights of Moreno,
Heider and Homans. We believe that a major reason for this is the discrep-
ancy between the local level at which the data are collected and the global
level at which the rrDdels are conceptualized. We propose to bridge this
gap by examining local structural properties which are expected to hold,
on the average, across entire social systems. This approach permits the
formalization and empirical study of propositions concerning the effect of
social organization on individual perception and behavior. Such propositions
are quite corrmn in the sociological and social psychological literature.
 Davis [1963] presents a review of propositions about average local properties
 of social networks.     He takes 56 major sociological arid social
 psychological propositions from the writings of a variety of authors and
 restates them in graph.theoretic terms. He then shows that the propo-
 sitions are statements about the consequences of local structire in
 interpersonal relations.


                                                                                   S
                                         —3—




      In the absence of a statistical methodolo' for testing empirical
tendencies of local structure) even Davis' theoretical reformulation
remiins little nre than an interesting exercise in forlism. Our
purpose here is to propose such a methodo1o, (for an earlier state-
ment of our approach see:      (Holland and Leinhardt [1970].) Using this methodolo'
a variety of propositions concerning local structure in networks of
interpersonal relations can be irdeled in graphtheoretic terms and tested
by determining the discrepancy between empirically observed structure
and that which would obtain by chance. 1hi1e we emphasize the sociometric
interpretation of graphs,this interpretation is not essential to the
development or use of our methods.
      In sections 2 through 5 we develop the technical rrteria1 needed for
our method.      In section 6 the use    of   the method   is described and some
examples    are discussed.

2. The Thiad Census     of   a Digraph

      A. Some notation and preliminaries

      For a detailed discusion of meny    concepts and results from graph
theory,    we refer the reader   to Harary, Nonn and       Caxwright   [1965].
However, we briefly discuss a few graph theoretic concepts which we

use   repeatedly.
Digraphs and Socioirtrices: The basic nathentical entity           that concerns
us   is the binary directed graph, or digraph. A digraph is a set of "nodes"

and   a   set of directed "lines" or "edges" connecting pairs of nodes. In

sociometric choice data, the nodes correspond to the 'individual group
                                           —




meithers and       there is a directed line connecting node i to node j if
and   only   if person i chooses person j according to the sociometric
choice criterion employed. The adjective "binary"                  in   the definition of
a digraph refers to the added restriction that we only consider whether or
not   a line connects i to j so that we do not allow for the possibility

that choices may have "strengths" attached to them or that they may be

of different types. Thus the digraph is the mathematical representation

of   the simplest form of sociometric choice data --               unranked   choices on a
single criterion.
      We denote the ninber of nodes in         a digraph by         --   the group size.
If the nodes are       numbered in some arbitrary way 1 to g, then we may
                                                              from

create   a useful matrix representation of the digraph as follows. Let X
be a g by g matrix whose (i,j)        entry    is:

             x
              ij
                      [i iotherwise
                       1°
                            i±                                                              (2-1)


Note that we use i-*j       to mean that   there is a directed line from node
i to node j-- there may also be a directed line from node j to node ibut
this possibility is neither implied nor denied by the notation i±j. The
matrix X is called the adjacency matrix in graph theory and the sociornatrix
in sociometry. We use the latter term. The main diagonal of X corresponds
to self-choice in the        sociometric context, and        for   many   reasons   it is

convenient for us to assumethat X.:ii. 0. Because self-choice is often
disallowed in sociometric data, this restriction is generally not significant.
There are        some applications of digraphs       which   allow self-choice (especially


                                                                                                    .
                                           —5—




if the nodes correspond to groups of people rather than to individuals but
we ignore this possibility here. The sociomatrix, X, is not exactly the
same thing as the digraph because it implies that the nodes have been labeled
from 1 to g in some arbitrary way. Strictly speaking, each sociomatrix
corresponds to a labeled diaph, whereas two different sociometrices can
represent the    same unlabeled digraph. In this latter situation the two

sociontrices     will only differ by a simultaneous r.i-colunri permutation.
There correspond to any unlabeled digraph a certain number of labeled
digraphs. These are called the labeled versions of the digraph.



Subgraphs ,Dyads and Triads: Fundamental to the methods we discuss is the
notion of a    subgraph   of a digraph. If we     delete some of the nodes and       all
the   lines in a digraph that either go to or come from           the   deleted nodes,

the resulting entity      is   a subgraph of the digraph. If we delete all but

k of the nodes)then we shall call the result a k - subgraph.               Since a k-

subgraph   is also a digraph with k     nodes) it rry    be   represented by a k by k

sociomatrix,and    it has a certain ninrüer of labeled versions. There are
                 k-subgraphs in a    digraph   with   g nodes.

      Tkio digraphs with g nodes are said to be isorrDrphic if they are the

same digraph in the sense that they can both          be   represented by the same
sociomatrix.     This means that if    digraph 1 is represented by sociontrix
X   and digraph 2 by Y then there is a rcc.-colurrni permutation of Y call it
Z, such that, as matrices, Xz Z. The notion of isoirphism partitions
digraphs into isorrrphism classes. For example, when g2, there are 3
isorrDrphism   classes or dyads as illustrated in Figure         2-1.    We adopt the
                                         -6-




names null, asyrrmetric and   n&itual to describe the three dyad types.
                            Figure 2-1   goes about   here
      When g3, there are 16 isomorphism classes or triads. These are
 illustrated and named in Figure 2-2. We have adopted the triad naming
 convention of Holland and Leinhard± [1970], which is described in the
 legend. of Figure 2-2.
                            Figure 2-2 goes about     here

     When   g > 14, the number of isorrorphism classes of digraphs grcs very
 rapidly -- for g14 there are 218)and for g5 there are 9608 (see Harary
 [1955]).        We   refer to the isoirorphism classes of digraphs with g

 nodes as the digraph     t1pes.
 B. The Triad Census
     In a digraph there are () distinct 3-subgraphs formed by selecting
 each of the possible subsets of 3 nodes and their corresponding lines.
 These subgraphs can be classified by their isorrorphism type. Let T
 denote the number of these 3-subgraphs of isorrorphism type u (where u
 ranges over the 16 triad names given in Figure 2-2). The triad census
 T is the vector of 16 components given by:

            T                                                                    (2-2)
                (T003' T012,..., T300).
 We have adopted the folling ordering of the components of T to simplify

  coiraninication: 003,012, 102, 021D, 021U, 021C, 111D, lllU, 030T, 030C,

  201, 120D, l2OU, 120C, 210, 300.

      A triad census rray   be   regarded as a way of reducing the    entire
  sociomatrix   X to a smaller set of 16 sunur.xy     statistics.   When g > 5

                                                                                         .
                                        -Ba-


                         Null
      •   -_________ •   Asyrruietric

      .(            >.   Mutual




Fige 2-1: The 3 IsonDrphism Classes for Di'aphs with g2 (i.e., the
Dyad rpes).
                                     -6b-

Figure 2-2: The 16 Isorrorphism Classes       for digraphs with g3 (i.e., the
Triad Types). Triad naming convention:        first digitnuniber of mutual
dyads; second digitnurriler   of asr1retrie   dyd; thd critnurrTher of null
dyads; trailing letters further differentiate arong triad types.




I
003



012

 0                        0


102         02W        021U          021C
                                                                                .
__                      AA
                       0301
                              >0 •—*
                                     030C


/ AA
201          120D        120U
                                     A
                                     .-->*
                                      120C

  0
/2W
  0

_1p

300
                                         —7—




this is a real reduction in information since X contains rrre than 16
elements of data. In general, knowing the triad census of a digraph does
not uniquely determine the digraph. However, as we show in section 4, T contains
a surprising amount of useful inforntion about X.
      A triad census is a special case of the rrore general concept of a
k-subgraph census. Thus we might also consider a dyad census, a tetrad
census or even a pentad census. We show in section 4 that a dyad census
can be computed from a triad census. Furtherore there are so many tetrad
types (218) and pentad      types (9608) that a   k-subgraph census for k >     4   is
often rrore cumbersome than the original sociomatrix. Thus the triad
census occupies an important position among k-subgraph censuses in that it
is both manageable and yet contains a substantial amount of useful informa-
tion.
      For various random digraphs, the first and second rioments of a triad
census are readily computed. These computations are illustrated in
section 5 for a particular random digraph (Corollary 2). This permits
us to test propositions about average local structure in specific
digraphs using the triad census (see section 6 ).
      Because a triad census T is a surrtion over all         3-subgraphs, the
information in T       is relatively stable and is not siificant1y affected by
a few   changes   in   the lines of the digraph. For this reason, reduction to

the   triad census is not as affected by sociometric measurement error or

rmasking   (see Holland and Leinhardt [1973])     as   are methods which   focus on

specific   linkages and individual nodes. This property of the triad census
has

drawn from
                                        —8—




      both advantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, conclusions
            T are likely to be relatively robust, but on the other, if
                                                                                     .
interest focuses on a few specific nodes or lines, the triad census rry
not be useful.

3. Configurations in Di graphs

      A.   Reasons for considering configurations
      Davis and Leinhardt [1972] present a procedure in which a version
of the triad census is used to test a model of small-scale social
structure. Distilling a set of structural propositions from Horrris
[1950]1they examined the triad types to determine which ones were
logically inconsistent with the propositions. They felt that, formalized
in this fashion, a fair interpretation of Hornans was that the inconsistent
triads would be empirically rare. They then showed that a social structure
coithining clusters, Davis [1967], with a transitive hierarchy, French [1956],
was implied by the propositions. Their empirical analysis of sociometric
data lent some support to the model)as did a latter analysis by Davis [1970].
However, a re-examination of this model revealed that it and most other
structural models of interpersonal affect assumed that the affective choice
relation is transitive, Holland and Leinhardt [1971]. The models them—
selves could be expressed as transitive graphs (t-graphs) upon which some
additional constraints had been applied. 'Iftansitivity, however, is not
a characteristic of a triad. Father, it is a property of       a 1owerorder

configuration    which is contained in varying degree by some triad types.
For   example,   assume the triad type 300   represents the sociogram   of a three
person group. (Refer to Figure 2-2 for triad names.) It is transitive from
                                                                                     .
                                        —9—




the point    of view of each rrither. That    is, the -transitive condition,

i+j, j-*k, i÷k,holds for all     6 permutations   of i, j, k. On the other

hand, if one examines the 120C triad type1the transitivity condition

holds only once while it is contradicted, i.e., i±j, j+k and not i-k,

twice. Thus, if Horrns' propositions are          in   fact statements about the

propensity for affective choice to tend toward transitivity and avoid
intransitivity, then a failure to recognize the complex nature of triads

iry yield erroneous conclusions. Indeed, our reanalysis of Davis' [1970]
results   yielded a high level of confinition for the t-graph model (see
Holland    and Leinhardt   [19 71]).
    It    is useful to pursue the notion of transitivity in interpersonal

affect    because it demonstrates the utility of thinking of        structural

propositions in termis of configurations of social relations. Consider, for
example, the statement by Heider [1957] in regard to positive interpersonal
sentiment in triadic situations: "In the p-o-x triad, the case of three
positive relations rry be considered psychologically...transitive" (p.2O6).
For Heider, transitivity defines cognitive balance in affective situations.
His examples of balanced psychological structures are configurational in
that they emphasize transitivity from the point of view of p, the perceiver,
and not necessarily from the points of view of the other entities.
    In an alternative to the t-graph model, Mazur [1971] put forth another
structural proposition. He argued that interpersonal affect data could be
explained by the proposition: "Friends are likely to agree, and unlikely
to disagree; close friends are very likely to agree, and very unlikely
to disagree" (p. 308). If one assumes that an asymmetric pair represents
                                                                                .
                                       —10—




"friends" while a mutual pair represents "close friends" then Mazur's
proposition anrunts to a set of hypotheses concerning the relative
empirical frequency of simultaneous choice of individuals by "friends"
and "close friends". Since the choices of the third individual are not
at issue1 Mazur's proposition is not about triads but refer's instead to
configurations contained in triacis.
    An examination of Davis [1963] reveals numerous other structural
propositions that can be fonm1ized in terms of configurations. The
concepts   of cross—pressures (Berelson, et al., [1954]), homophily-

heterophily (Lazarsfeld and Mertori [1954]), structural balance (Cartwright
and Harary [1956]), distributive justice (Horrns [1961]), cliques (Horrns

[1950]; Lazarsfeld and Merton [1954]; Lipset, et al. [1956]), innovation

in ideas (Katz and Lazarsfeld [1955]), attitude change (Horrris [1950])

and conflict (Colerrn [1957]), as reformulated by Davis ,are all propositions

about   local structure and ny be   described by configurations within a

di graph

    B. Structure   of Configurations

    Configurations   and subgraphs are           that in a configuration
                                         similar except

only some of the lines between a subset of nodes are of interest. We shall
try to rr]<e this vague idea more precise. In section 2 we introduced the
concepts of labeled and unlabeled subgraphs of a digraph, and the socio-
matrix, X. For any 3-subgraph we may construct a 3 by 3 sociomatrix such
as the one given in (3-1):




                                                                                .
                                      -11-


                  x..     x.1
                    13     ik1
         Ix.Ji       —    x. I                                                (3—1)


                          -J
where   i, j and k are 3 distrinct nodes. There are 266LI possible zero-
one sociomatrices of the form (3-1 and they correspond to the set of
all possible labeled 3-node digraphs. These in turn are the labeled
versions of the 16 non-isorrcrphic unlabeled 3-node digraphs. It is
easier to illustrate h to construct a configuration than to give a
precise definition of this concept. We begin with the pairs       of   sub-
scripts that     appear on the entries of   (3-1). The first step is to select
a subset of these ordered pairs of subscripts. For example, to define
the configuration that corresponds to "intransitivity'we select these
three ordered pairs: ij, jk, 1k. The order of the pairs indicates the
direction of the relation. Next, associate a zero or a one with each
ordered pair of subscripts that has been selected. For example, for
intransitivity we associate a 1 with ij, another 1 with jk and a 0 with
1k. These correspond to: i÷j, j÷k and not i-k. For convenience these
item can be arranged in a rrtrix      as    fo11is:

           ij       jk     ik\
                                                                              (3—2)
           1        1      0/
    The first row of the rrtrix that describes a configuration is the
"reading rule" for the configuration. The second r defines the
configure.tion     type. Jkio different configurations can have the same
reading rule but be of different types. For example, the configuration
                                     -12-


that corresponds to "transitivity" has the same reading nile as (3-2)
but a different type. It is given by:
                                                                                   .
                 jk    ik\                                                (3—3)
                          I
                 1     1/
    It is convenient to have a picture for a configuration. We adopt
the following conventions for drawing them. For an ordered pair of
nodes, ab: (i) if ab is not in the reading rule,then no arrow is drawn
from a to b; (ii) if ab is in the reading nile and has a 1 associated
with it1then a solid arri is drawn from a to b; (iii) if ab is in the
reading rule and has a 0 associated with it)then a dashed arrow is drawn
from a to b. For example, the matrix given in (3-2) can be represented
by Figure 3-1.
                        Figure 3-1 goes about here
    inother example of a configuration comes from Mazur 's proposition
about agreement among friends. The reading rule for configurations
which pordray situations in which friends agree or disagree in their
choices of a third individual is: ij, ji, ik, jk. If close friends are
pairs of individuals who choose one another then disagreement among
close friends can be represented by the following configu-ation matrix:
            ii   ii    lic    jk                                          (3_it)
            1    1     1      0)
it is obvious that this matrix is equivalent to the matrix:
            /
                 ji    1k     jk\
                                                                          (3—5)
        I                        I
                 1     0
                              1/
                                                                                   S
                                          -12a-



Figure 3—1:   Pictorial   Representation of       the Configuration   Defined
              by (3—2).




                                      k

                                  /
                              /
                          /
The pictorial representation
                                               —13—




                                       of (3_Li) and (3-5)       is given in Figure       3-2.
                                                                                                         .
                                Figure   3-2   goes about     here
      While we have only discussed configurations that involve 3 nodes,

i.e., 3-configurations, it is clear that this is not an essential part

of   the concept. In general, one may have reading rules that involve k

distinct       nodes) and these result in various types of k-configurations.
If a 3-configuration has a reading rule that involves all 6 of the
ordered pairs ij, ji, ik, ki, jk, k,then it is                   equivalent to a triad.

      The main     reason   for considering configurations is that they are a

frcre   refined set of concepts than the triads. A single triad may contain
many    different configurations. Furthermore, many sociological and social
psychological       propositions about networks make predictions about
configurations rather than about triads. However, in the next section we
show that the triad census can be used to enumerate all 3-configurations.

This1 along with other kncwn properties               of   the triad census, is what makes

it a basic tool.

4. Linear Combinations of            Triad   Frequencies
        Once   we consider a vector such as the            16 triad frequencies   that make
up   a triad census, T, it is natural to consider any linear combination of

the     elemants   of the vector. We use the vector             notation:
                                                                                                 (4—1)


where u is always assumed            to run over   the triad types     given   in Figure        2-2.
        A.     Dyads from   Thiads

        A    simple property of a triad census T is that it determines how many nodes
there are in the digraph. This is because the total number of triads in
a diaph with g nodes is                   and furthere if e'                (1, 1, ...,    1)
                                     -13a-


Figure 3-2:   Pictorial Representation of Configurations Given by (3-u).




                            //           \
                               = T= (
                                                     -14-



                                                                                                 (4—2)
                                                                                                           .
Thus, to find g we merely compute                           fm (4-2) and       solve   for g.

Equation     (4-2) is a simple         and yet        important    example of a linear
combination of triad           frequencies. Let N, A and N denote                the number of

imitual,    asyrrnrietric arid null dyads            in   the   digraph. Furtheniore, let

mU     n denote the number of
  , aU U,                                        mutual,        asyrrmetric and null dyads that
are contained in a triad of type u. Since every dyad in a digraph is
contained in exactly g-2 triads, it is easy to see that
             mt T          mT=        (g-2)     M,                                                ('4—3)



             at T =        u Tu
                           a          (g—2) A,                                                    (4_4)
and

             -.   -.
                       U



             n' T ' nu T =
                       U
                                U     (g—2) N.                                                    (4—5)    .
If we regard g as given, then M, A and N can be written as linear com-
binations of the triad frequencies where the weights are m/(g_2)
a/(g-2) and n/(g_2). The weights used for enumerating N, A and N are
given   in Table 4—i.

      Since the total number of directed lines (or ttchoicestt), C, is given

by
             C = 2M+A,                                                                            (4—6)

it is clear that C, too, can be expressed as a linear combination of the
triad frequencies. The weights for C are                         given   in Table 4-1.

B. In- and Out-degrees from Triads

      The   row and coluim          surr   of   a sociomatrix X will be denoted by {X1÷}

and         }, respectively.           In the sociometric contect, X. is the niner

of choices rrade       by individual        i)whiie X is the number of choices received
                                          —15—




by   individual j.    X    and   X. are also called the out-degree and the
in-degree,   respectively, of node i. In this notation we have         C given
in   (4-6) also given by

                       C X÷ 1X.4                                                 ('4—_/)




      It is sometimes convenient to suniirize a set of numbers by their
mean   and variance. We now do this to the two sets of "degrees ' { X1
and fX+}. From (Lf..7)      we   see that the mean in—degree and the   mean out-degree

are   the same and   are   given by
                   5 C/g       .                                      (4—8)

Since C can be expressed as a linear combination of triad frequencies it
follows that    can also be so expressed. What is rrore interesting is the
fact that the variances of the in-degrees and of the out-degrees can both
be determined by C and linear combinations of the triad frequencies.
Because this fact is useful to us and not widely known we include a proof
of it now. We denote the variance of the                } by S1 and of the
by S. where


and
                        S         (hg) (X1-)2                                    ('4




                        S        (hg) (X+_)2        .                            ('4—10)
                                               —16—



The proof is divided into two               parts given            in   Lenuis 1 and 2 below.
                                                                                                               .
             — in
Lenirnal: Le-tB.
                         ..

                       ij<k
                                       X.. >. and
                                       ji Ici  —               Bout =     .

                                                                          ij<k
                                                                               ij
                                                                               .
                                                                                   X..
                                                                                  ik
                                                                                  X.           then



(a)                                         (2/g) B -               (-        1)                      (4-11)

                                   2
(b)
                               S0           (2/g) B
                                                         out
                                                               -        ( - 1)                        (4-12)

where X is defined in (4-8) and (4-7).

Proof:      Since the proofs of (a) and (b) are nearly identical1we only

prove (a).

                 S (hg) (X - )2                            (hg) (X.)2 -                  ()2          (4-13)


But

                              X..
       j
            +1
                   i,j,k J                                                                                     •
           ij<k
                  x..x.+
                  ji}ci        .

                               ik<j
                                        .   ji i<i         .   .



       z2   ij<k
                   X••XJ•+X••
                         ij
                                                     .                                                (4—14)



In    (4-14) we nde use of the fact that

                                             X?.         X..                                          (4-15)
                                              ij          ij
Hence we have

                              (hg)          (X1)2         (2/g) B +                      .            (4-16)




                                                                                                               .
                                          —17—



Putting (-16) into ('-l3) completes the proof.

       The next   leim shows that B.inand Bout ny both      be expressed   as

linear combinations of the triad frequencies so that together with
                        S and S2out are determined by the triad frequencies.
Lemma 1 it proves that in
Before we state Leirirra 2 we need to define two special configurations
which we shall call B.in and Bout configurations.
       A B1 configuration is defined by the rratrix
                                     ji ki
                                     1     1     ,                          (L_l7)

while a B0t configuration is defined by the iratrix

                                     ij ik\
                                     1     i) .                             (L_l8)

In Figure -l we illustrate B1 and B0t configurations using the
conventions of Figure 3-1 and 3-2.

                              Figure L_1 goes        here


       It is easy to see that B.in
                                 gives the number of B.in configurations
and that Bout gives the nrber of Bout configurations. Lerrma 2 shows
that B.
      in nd Bout can also be computed from the triad census.
 Lenuia 2:   B.
              inand
                 — Bout are given
 (a)                             B.             b.in,u Tu                       (L_l9)
                                    in      u
 (b)                            B
                                    out         bout,uTu                        (—2O)
                                            u

             — bout,u are given in Table '4-1.
where b.in,u and
                               -17a-


                                                                          .

   J                 k                  J                       Ic




            .
            3-
                                                                          .
Bin configuration                           out configuration
                                        B




  Figure 4-1: Pictorial Representation of Bth arid 3out Configurations.




                                                                          .
                                    —18—




Proof: Again we only prove (a). First we note that every B configuration
in the graph is contained in exactly one 3-subgTaph. Hence to count Bin
configurations) we only need to weight each triad frequency by the nuither
of B1 configurations contained in that triad type. To finish the proof
we observe that these weights are exactly the values of binu given in
Table -l.
C. Counting Configurations from Triads
    The proof of Lenuma 2 irkes use of the fact that the number of configurations
of certain types can be counted using only the triad census, T. This leads
us to consider counting all of the possible types of 3-configurations
using only the triad census. Evidently, this requires no new ideas since
any configuration that involves 3 nodes is contained in exactly one 3-
subgraph. Thus, to count the nuither of 3-configurations of a given type
that arise in a digraph)we need only find out hi rrny of these are in each
of the 16 triad types and then sum the correspondingly weighted tri,ad
frequencies. If a configuration only involves two nodes, the same rule
applies except that in order to take care of the fact that each 2-
configuration is contained in g-2 triads, we must divide the weighted
sum of triad frequencies by g-2. This is why the factor g-2 arises
when we count dyad types from the triad frequencies.
    As an example, suppose we wish to find the nimber of intransitive
configurations in a given digraph. An intransitive configuration is
a 3-configuration and can therefore be enumerated by the above rule. The
weights used for counting intransitive as well as transitive configurations
 from T are given in Table '.1—1.
                                       —19—



      As   a final example of counting a 3-configuration using T we consider
                                                                               .
the   one given in (3-3), (3.—4) and in Figure 3-2. Each weight given in

Table L_l for this configuration (the colurrn marked "close friends

disagreeing")     is found by counting the number of mutual dyads in the
given   triad type for which only one member of the mutual pair chooses the
other triad member.
                             Table -l goes about here

      The discussion of sections 4A and 'B shows why the linear combinations
of triad frequencies are important. They give additional information about
the graph, information which iray not be obvious from the triad census
itself, but which is implied by it. Thus the set of all linear combinations
of the triad frequencies is a natural extension of the triad census. While
not all linear combinations of triad frequencies have interpretations in
terms of counting configurations, many do and the concept of configurations
is a key to understanding the set of all linear combinations of the triad
frequencies.
5. The Distribution of a Random Subgraph Census
      Various   notions of "random" digraphs have statistical utility in the

analysis    of sociometric data (see Holland and Leirthardt [1970] and the
appendix to this paper for further discussion). When we obtain a triad
census from an actual sociomatrix, it is also useful to know what we would
expect the triad census to be from a random digraph. While the exact
probability distribution of a triad census from a random digraph is very



                                                                               .
complicated, it is also true that when there is a sufficient number of nodes
                                           -lYa-




Table '4-1:       Selected Weighting Vectors.
                                                              4i
                                                              H
                                                                   > bO
                                                                      )
                                                                   •r-1
                                                              >
                                                              r1
                                                              +     H 1)
                                                                   4- H•
                                                                    (fl

TRIAD
          e          m       a
                                    flu    c           b0t,
003           1       0      0      3      0       0   0      0     0     0


012           1       0      1      2      1       0   0      0     0     0


102           1       1      0      2      2       0   0       0    0     0


021D          1       0      2      1      2       0   1       0    0     0


021U          1       0      2      1      2       1   0       0    0     0


021C          1       0      2      1      2       0   0       0    1     0


hiD           1       1      1      1      3       1   0       0    1     0


111U          1       1      1      1      3       0   1       0    1     1


030T          1       0      3      0      3       1   1       1     0    0


030C          1       0      3      0      3       0   0       0     3    0


201           1       2      0      1      '4      1   1       0     2    2


120D          1       1      2      0      '4      2   1       2     0    0


120U          1       1      2      0      14      1   2       2     0    0


120C          1       1      2      0      14      1   1       1     2    1

210           1       2      1       0     5       2   2       3 11
300           1       3      0       0     6       3   3       6     0    0




                    (g-2)M (g-2)A (g-2)N (g-2)C B.     B0t
              (g)
(say,
a   sufficient number of dyads of each
                                       —20—




        at least 10) and when certain other nondegeneracies obtain (such as

                                         type   ,   a rardom triad census has an
                                                                                           .
approxate multivariate normal distribution. (See Holland and Leinhardt
[1970]   for some simulation results.) In this section, we give foniiulas

for   the means, variances and   covariances of the components of T for a
very    general class of random digraphs. We also give special results for

a   particular class of random digraphs which we have found useful.
      A. Ivbirnts of a Subgraph Census
      We begin by considering the number of k-subaphs of a given digraph
that are of a particular isorrorphism class. We justify this extra gen-
erality on the grounds that it entails no additional difficulties and that
the general results for k-subgraphs may be rrore useful for related problems.
We specialize to triads in section 5B.
      Let u and v denote two isorrürphism classes for k-subgraphs. (In the
triad case, the range of values for u and v are given in Figure 2-2.) For
k-subgraphs where k >    , the possibilities are very numerous --       some   are
given in Ivbon [1968].
      In Theorem 1, beli, we give foniulas for the means, variances and
covariances for the number of k-subgraphs of types u and v for a random
digraph generated by a completely general stochastic mechanism. In
Corollary 1 we specialize this result to the case of a triad census, and
in Corollary 2 we specialize even further to the rroments of a triad census
where the random digraph is of the special variety used in Holland and Leinhardt [1970].
      We need some notation. Let K and L be subscripts that refer to the
distinct k-subgraphs of a given digraph. Thus, we shall speak of 1< being
of a particular isoror'phism class, etc.
                                                —21—



   We    next define the indicator variables HK(u) by:

                           1 if K is of isorrrphism class u
             HK(u)                                                                            (5—1)
                           0 otheqise

The nuither of k-subgraphs of the given di graph that are of type u, H,
is then given by the sum over K of HK(u), i.e.
                          IIu                     .                                           (5—2)
                                    H<(u)
                                K
    Since    we provide formulas that hold for a wide class of random digraphs,
we need a notation        for various   probabilities that arise in the calculations
and which must be        computed explicitly for any            particular application of the
general   results.    Thus we define


             pK(U)   P K is of type                     P HK(u)                               (5-3)

             pK,L(u,v)     P K is      of type        u and L   is of type

                            P               1   and HL(v)        1        .                   (5_Li)
                                HK(u)

   We also need a notation for certain average probabilities which can                            be
computed from PK(U) and
                                PK,L(u,V).
                                                 The first      of   these is easy since it       is
just   the   average value of pK(u) over all            values    of K,i.e.,



             (u) —i--                                                                         (5-5)
                     ()     K


    In   order   to define the other average probabilities that arise, we

need to examine the relationship between two                k-subgraphs       nire   carefully.
                                         -21a-



Let                                                                                    .
        IKflLI   the   number of nodes that K and L have in convmn.            (5-6)


The possible values for K(LI are          0,1,... ,k.   When JKCII    0,   K
and L    are disjointwhile when KL k, K and L are             identical.    In

general, there are




pairs   of   k-subgraphs of a digraph on g nodes for which K ( L           j.
Now we define the average value of PKL(u,v) over all choices of K

and L such that IKnLi as

      —                   1                                                 (5-8)
                                            K L(u,v).
      P(uv)            g g-] k          KLJj
                       k k-j j

      It should be emphasized that the various probabilities defined
                                                                                       .
in (5—3), (5—4), (5-5), and (5—8) must be calculated explicitly in

order   to apply the general results to particular cases. Thus,        we
use   Theorem 1 to     specify   what probabilities must be computed and
coiibined to get the ncments of a subgraph census.
Theorem 1: Using the notation given above and assuming that a          random

digraph is generated    some specific but completely general stochastic
mechanism the first and second rroments of   defined in (5-2) are given




                                                                                       .
                                                —22—




  (a)
        ECHU)   :()j(u)


  (b) Var(H)                 Cu)                                                     (5-10)
                                   (l-(u))+ ()
                                                                 (()C.(uu)-((u))2]
  (c) Cov(H,H)
                         -
                             ()uv) +                     ()          (k):.,V
                                                                                 -   (5-11)


  Proof: First we prove            (a).
         E(H)      E( HK(u) )                 E(H<(u))
                     K                    K

  but HK(u) is an indicator variable so that its expected value is merely

  its probability of being one, thus

        E(H)        P {<(u)                                Cu)



  proving part (a).

        Since formula (b) is the special case of formula (c) for uv,

  we only prove (c).

        Coy (H, H) Coy ( HK(u),                         HL (v))
                        K       L

                Coy (HK(u), HL(v)).
          K,L


   But Coy (HK(u), HL(v))

        P HK(u) 1 and HL(v)                         -
                                                        P{HK(u)     i) p HL(v)
           PK,L(u,v) -       K     (u)

thus
   Coy (H,H)
                   K,L
                         K,L (u,v)
                                              K,L
                                                            1L
                                                  —23—


                                                         1
                                         -
                                              [( (u)]             (v)
        jO IKLIi                                             ()

                                              -                             (5-12)
        jO ()       () () (uv)                    ()2(U)(V)
                                                                   .




We nc use the fo11iing fact about binomial coefficients:



   jO     ( () ()                                                           (5-13)


Using (5_13)we rry            rewrite   (5—12) as fo1lcis:

    Coy (H H )
               U,   V




          jQ (=          ()    (uv) -         ( jO        () () (u)(v)

         ()             (:) (ic)   [(uv) —         (u)(v)]                  (5—14)



We get (c) from (5-14) and          the      observation that if u v then

since    a k-subg'aph can only be of one isorrDrphism type. We get (b) from
(5-14)   and   the fact that if uv then                  (u,u)
    B.    Moments of a Triad Census

    The fo11ing corollary fol1s inmediately from Theorem 1 in that it
specializes it to k3 -- the triad census. It is almost exactly the same

as Theorem 1 of Holland and Linhardt [1970] except that it a11s a more
general stochastic mechanism to generate the random digraph.
Corollary 1: Under the assumptions of Theorem 1, the first and second
moments of a triad census T are given y:

                                                                                     .
(a) E(T)                (u)                                                  (5-15)
                 ()
                                              2

(b)   Var (Ta)        () (u)   (l-(u)) +
                                           () • () () [(uu)-((u))2]
                                                                               (5-16)



                        -
(c) Ccv (TUTV)
                            () (u)(v) ()
                                       +
                                                  () ()                         (5-17)




      In   Holland and Leinhardt [1970] we derived some of the relevant probabilities
for a particular random digraph that was introduced in Davis and Leinhardt
[1972]. Since we have discussed these derivations extensively elsewhere,
we shall only give a description of the random digraph and the complete
tables of the relevant probabilities.
The UIMAN Random Digraph Distribution: This is the probability dis-
tribution on the set of all digraphs with g nodes which makes all digraphs
with given values of N, A, and N (defined in (14_3), (L_!4) and (L_5))
equally likely. In other words, this is the uniform distribution on the
set of all labeled digraphs having given values of N, A, and N --    hence

the notation UIMAN. One way to generate random digraphs from this dis-
tribution is as follcs. First randomly allocate M mutual pairs to the

() possible pairs. Next randomly allocate A asymmetric pairs to the
                   pairs and then randomly and independently orient the
rerrining ((fl - N)
asymmetric pairs. The result is a random labeled digraph with the given
values of M, A, and N and all such digraphs are equally likely to be
generated by this mechanism.
      A random digraph with the UIMAN distribution possesses certain properties
which simplify the calculation of pK(u), pKL(u,v), (uv) and (u). The
UIMAN distribution on the set of digraphs is "horrDgeneous" in the sense
that it is invariant under permutations of the labels given to the nodes.
Because of this property,
                                              —25—




                                 pK(u) does not depend
                                                       on K so that we have
                                                                                                           .
                                       (u)     p(u)                                               (5—18)

        P {triad involving nodes 1,2,3 is of type u}


Furtherricre,    the probabilities PKL(u,v) only depend on u,v and                   I   K   LI

so that if KrLj
then

                          .(u,v) P(uV)                   .                                        (5-19)


,Finally   it   is also easy to see that for the U I MAN             distribution
                                       .                                                          (5—20)
           p0(u,v)      p1(u,v)


       Corollary 2 suirirrrizes the above discussion.
Corollary 2: For a triad census T from a random diaph with the U I MAN
distribution the means ,variances and covariances are given :
 (a) E(T) ()          p(u)                                                                        (5-21)



 (b)    Var (Ta)        p(u)(l-p(u)) +
                                                     2

                                                         () [(u -             (p(u))2]

                          +           (g-3)   [p2(u,u) -      (p(u))2]                            (5-22)
                                 ()




                                                                                  - (p(u))2]
 (c) Coy (T,T) -              () p(u) p(v) ÷ ()
                                                          2

                                                              (      ) [p0(u,v)
                          +           (g-3)   [p2(u,v) -      p(u)   p(v)],                       (5-23)
                                ()

where

       p(u), p(u,v) and p2(u,v) are given in Tables 5-1, 5-2, and 5-3.
                                              —26--




      In Holland and      Leinhardt [1970]    we illustrated ha some of the values

of p(u), P0(u,v) and p2(u,v) are calculated so we do not repeat these

derivations here. Tables 5-1,2,3 give the formulas for p(u), p0(u,v) and

p2(u,v)
          for the U!MAN distribution, extending the coesponding tables in
Holland   and   Leiithardt [1970]   which only gave values for the intransitive
triad types, i. e., those which contain at least one intransitive configu-
ration.
     In Tables 5-1,2,3, we have used the decending factorial notation in
which           XX-1 (X-k+1).         Fithermore, Tables 5-1,2,3 contain only the
nLunerator for the probabilities. The denomenators are respectivly

D1, D2 and D3 where

                D1 ()                                                            (5_2)

                D2   ()                                                          (5_25)

                D3 ()                                                            (5_26)

                                Tables 5-1,2,3 go about here
      C. Moments of Linear Combinations of a Triad Census
      Once   all the work has been done to generate the means, variances and
covariances for a random triad census T, it is very simple to calculate
the corresponding nürrients of any linear combination, 9. 'T.      It is an
elementary result from probability theory that if 9.'T and stT denote
two linear combinations of the components of a triad census then
                          E(9.'T)
                                                                                 (5_27)

                          Var
                                                                                 (5_28)
and
                          Coy (9.'T, s'T) z           s
                                                                                 (5_29)

where T L(T) is the vector of eected values               of the Tu and   T is
the   covariarice    matrix of T.
      In section 6 we show h to use these results to develop statistical
tests of propositions about local structure in empirical socioniatrices.
                                   -26a-


Table 5-1: Ninnerators for p(u) Under UjMAN   Distribution.
                                                              .
 u                p(u)


003               n(3)

012           3 a n(2)

102           3. m (2)
              3      (2)
021D
              na
              3
021U
              na     (2)


              3      (2)
021C


hiD           3man
111U          3man
              3 (3)
030T

030C


201           3 n m2
              3
120D
              ma     (2)


              3
120U
              ma     (2)


              3      (2)
120C

210           3 am2
300           m(3)




                                                              .
                                                      -2Gb-

 Table 5—2:         Numerator       for p0(u,v) Under UIMAN          Distribution.

                                                  (part 1)

                                                                    102                     021D

003         n (6)


012     3 a                     9 a2n'4

102     3 m                     9 m a n'4                     9m (2) n(Lf)

021D
        3     (2) ('4
                 n
                                9     (3)n(3)                 -ma(2)n(3)
                                                              9                      9     ('4)
                                                                                                  n (2)


021U
        3     (2) ('4)
                    n
                                9      (3)n(3)                    m a(2')n(3)
                                                                                     9     ('4)
                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                         (2)

                                                                                                     (2)
021C
        3     (2) (14)
                    n
                                9      (3) (3)
                                              n               ma (2)n(3)
                                                              9                      9    ('4)
                                                                                                 n


hiD     3man            ('4)
                                9ma(2)n(3)                    9m(2)an (3)            9
                                                                                     -ma (3) (2)
                                                                                            n

11 1U   3man            ('4)
                                9ma(2)n(3)                      (2)
                                                              9rn   an (3)           -ma
                                                                                     9   (3)n(2)


030T
        a
        3     (3)
                    n3          9      ('4)
                                              n (2)           ma (3)n(2)
                                                              9                      9     (5)
                                                                                                         n

        1     (3)n(3)           3
                                              n (2)           -ma(3)n(2)
                                                              3                            (5) n
                                       (If)                                          3
030C


201     3                       9 ma n3                       9                          m(2)a(2)n(2)


120D        ma(2)n(3)           ma (3)n(2)
                                9
                                                              -m(2)a (2)n(2) n-ma
                                                              9              9                   ('4)
                                                                                                             n


120U    ma (2)n(3)
        3
                                ma (3)n(2)
                                9
                                                              -m(2)a (2)n(2) ma
                                                              9              9                   ('4)
                                                                                                     n
120C    ma (2)n(3) ma (3)n(2)
        3                       9
                                                              -m(2)a (2)n(2)
                                                              9
                                                                                     ma n
                                                                                     9       ('4)




210     3 ma n3 9m(2)a (2)n (2) 9m(3) an (2)                                         9    (2)a (3) n


                                                                                     3    (3)a(2)
300     m3 (3)                  3 m3 a n2                     3 m'4 n2                            n
  Table 5—2:      (cont'd)                    —26c-




               021U                  0210
                                            (part 2)


                                                           hiD               "U
                                                                                          .
003


012


102


021D


021U        a(n(2)

021C        (4)n(2)          9    (4)n (2)                 ———




hiD    —ma(3)n(2)            ma (3)n(2)
                             9




                                                                                          .
                                                       m(2)a(2)n(2)

       —ma(3)n(2)
       9
                             ma (3)n(2)
                             9
                                                  9m(2)a (2)n(2)          m(2)a(2)ri(2)

030T   —a n
       16                    a n  (5)
                                                  ma n
                                                  9
                                                                      ma n
                                                                      9      (4)


0300   —a
       16 n                  a n
                             3    (5)
                                                  ma
                                                  3
                                                                      ma (4)
                                                                      3
                                                                         -i
       9
       —m (2) a(2) n(2)          m (2)a (2)n(2)
201                          9
                                                       m3a (2)        9 m3a n2
120D        m a      n       ma n
                             9      (4)
                                                  m
                                                  9
                                                        (2)a(3)n      m (2)a(3) n
                                                                      9



120U        m a     n        ma n
                             9      (4)
                                                  m (2)a(3) n
                                                  9
                                                                      m (2)a(3)
                                                                      9
                                                                                   n


1200   —ma(4)n               ma n
                             9      (4)
                                                  m (2)a(3) n
                                                  9
                                                                      m (2)a(3) n
                                                                      9



210    —m(2)a(3) n
       9
                             m (2)a(3) n
                             9
                                                       m (3)a(2) n        m(3)a(2)n

300    —m(3)a(2) n           m (3)a(2) n
                             3
                                                  3 ma n              3   m an
                                                                                          .
  Table 5—2: (cont'd)                        -26d-



                                           (part 3)

                 030T               030C                     201            120D

003


012


102


021D


021U


021C


111D


11 1U


        9       (6)
030T        a


            a (6)
        3               1         (6)
030C                          a


201
        9   (2)a(3
                        -m(2)a(3) n
                        3
                                                      9    m(4)n(2)


120D    ma
        9         (5)   3
                              m a (5)
                                                      9
                                                      14
                                                           m(3)a(2) n   9    (2) (14)
                                                                                    a

120U
        9
            m a (5)
                        3
                                   a (5)
                                                      9
                                                      14
                                                           m(3)a(2) n   9    (2) (14)
                                                                                    a

120C
        ma
        9        (5)    -3   ma (5)                   9
                                                      2
                                                           m(3)a(2) n   -m(2)a(14)
                                                                        9



210
        9   (2) (14)
                  a     3     (2) (14)
                                    a                 9 m
                                                            (L)
                                                                   an   -m(3)a(3)
                                                                        9




                                                                                   a (2)
300
        3   (3)a(3)     1     (3)a(3)                 3    m (5) n      3   (14)
      Ta,ble 5—2: (cont'd)                —26e-



                                       (part 4)

                120U           120C

 003            ---            ---
 012            ———           ———




102            ——-            —-—


021D           ---            ——-



021U           ———            ———




021C           ——-            ———




hiD

                                                              .
               ———            ———




hllu           ---            ---                 ---   ---
030T           ———            ———




030C           ———            ———




201            ———            ———                 ———




120D           ———            ———                 ———




120U
        -- m(2)a(4)           ———                 ———




120C                                              ———




210                                          9 m4 a2
300
         3   (4) (2)
                a        3   (4)a(2)         3 m5 a     m6
.                                                         .                                              .
                    003                     012                     102                  021D

    003            n (5)

                    (14)
                                                                                                         T
    012     2 an                  a   n3(4a+n-7)

                    (14)                                      mn (3) ('4m+n-7)
    102     2 nfl                 4man (3)
                                                              1                    1   (3)
            1                                                       (2) n (2)                n(a+4n-7)
    021D    -a (2) n (3)          a(2)n(2) (a+n—14)           ma
                                                              1     (2) (2)        1
            1     (2)
                                                                                       (3) n(a+'4n—7)
    021U                n (3)                                             n
                                  a(2)n(2an_                  ma
            1 (2)           (3)                               ma (2) n (2)
    021C                n         a(2nt2) (a+n—4)                                  a3n(a+14n—7)

    hiD     man (3)               man2(2an-14)                man2(2m+n—14)        ma2n(a+2n—'4)
                                                                                                             N.)
    111 U   man (3)               man 2)       2a+n—14)       rnan(2m+n—14)        ma2n(a2n-4)
                                  3                                                3   (14) n
    030T            0
                                       (3) n (2)                     0

                                                                                   1   (14)
                                  1                                   0                       n
    030C            0             -a (3) n (2)

    201     rn
                 (2) n (3)        2m 2    an 2)               2m(2)ri(2)(m+n_14)       man
                                  1   (2)                     1     (2) n(2)       1      (3) n
    120D            0             -ma           n (2)                              ma
                                                              ma
                                  1        (2) n (2)          1     (2) n(2)       1      (3) n
    1201J           0                                         ma                   ma
                                  ma
                                                              1     -(2) (2)       1      (3)
                    0             m a(2)n(2)                              n                       n
    120C                                                      rna                  ma
                                                                                   1   (2) a (2) n
    210                           m (2)   an (2)              2   m(2)a   (2)

                    0                      0                      m (3) n (2)                 0
    300
                                 021C                             hiD                                  1]hU
003


012            ———               ———                              ———                                  ———
                                                                                                                             cn
                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                             ca

102
                                                                                                                         -   (3
                                                                                                                             0
021D                                                                                                                         -
021U

                         1 (3)
021C                          n(a+4n—7)
       an(a+4n—7)        a
hiD ma2n(a+2n-4) 1ma (2) n(a+2n-4) ma(2) n (2) +m (2) an (2) +m (2) a (2) n
                         1
hllU   ma2n(a+2n-4) ma
                             (2) ri(a+2n-4) ma (2) n (2) +m (2) an (2) +m (2) (2)
                                                                             a    n   ma (2) n (2)+m(2)an(2)+m(2)a(2)n
                                                                                                                                  t)
                                                                                                                                  a,
                                             3                                                                                    cT
030T -a        n                 fl                        n
                         a                   ma                                       ma          n

       1 (4)             1 (4)               1      (3)                               1
030C           n                 n                         n
                         a                   jima                                     ma (3) n
       1 (2)             1 (2)
201    -m      a (2) n           a (2) n     m(2)an(m+2n_4)                           m2an(m+2n—4)
                         m
                         1                   1                                        1
120D 1-ma (3) n                                     (2) na+2m-4)                           (2) n(a+2m_4)
                         m a (3) n           ma                                       jima

                         1                   1      (2)                               1    (2)
120U 1-ma (3) n                                            n(a+2m-4)                             n(a+2m-4)
                         m a (3) n           ma                                       ma
       1                                     1      (2)                               1    (2)
120C   -ma (3) n         m a (3) n                         n(a+2rn-4)                            n(a+2m-4)
                                             ma                                       ma
       1 (2) (2)
210    -m      a     n   m (2) a (2) n       m(2) an (m4-2a—4)

300            0                      0      rn
                                                  (3) an
                                                                                      m (3) an




.                                                                       .                                                S
.                                         S                                              .
                                   030C              201                   120D
                030T

    003


    012


    102


    021D


    0210


    021C


    hiD

    1110

           9
    030T         a (5)

           3                   1
    030C         a (5)              a (5)


    201           0                  0          m3 n[m+4n—7]
                               1         (ti)                        ma3[a+4m-7I
    120D   -3   ma (4)                              ma2n        --
                               ma
           3   (4)             1                1               1
    1200   —ma                 -ma (4)          -m (2) a (2)n        ma (fl [a+4m—7]

           3           (4)     1         (4)
    120C                                        m (2) a (2) n   m a3[a+4m—7]
           ma                  ma
                         (3)   1                                1
                                    (2) a (3)   4                   rn
                                                                     (2) a (2) [m+a-4]
    210    •4m (2) a                                m3a n
                                                                1        (3) a (2)
    300            0                            2m (4) n
                        120U                120C              210
    003

    012

    102

    021D

    021U

    021C


    11 1D

    "U                                                                          t\)
                                                                                C,
    030T

    030C

    201

    120D


    120U        m     a3ta+L4m_7]

    120C        m    a[a+tm_7J        in   a'3[a+4m—7]


    210         m(2)a(2)[m+a_t]        2a 2)   rm+a—'4]   m3a[m+a-7J
            1                                             2
                    (3) a (.2)      1-in (3)a (2)
    300     jfl1                                              ma       m5



.                                          .                                .
                                              —27—



6.     Testing Structural Hypotheses
       In this section we make use of the tools developed in the previous
sections in a procedure for testing propositions about local structure in
a sociomatrix. In outline, the procedure has these steps:
     (1) Operationalize the proposition into a hypothesis that a particular
3-configuration will tend to occur or fail to occur in the sociontrix
(this hypothesis will usually be directional).
        (2)    Find the weighting vector which when applied to the triad census

will enumerate        the   critical 3-configuration.

        (3) Use the weighting vector to enumerate the critical 3-configuration

as well as to compute its mean and           variance      for a random triad census.

        (4)    Set up a test statistic that compares the observed arid the
expected number of critical configurations and                use this   discrepancy as a

basis   for testing the structural proposition.
       We discuss each of these steps in turn.

        A. Operationalizing a Structural Proposition
        In this initial step we take a proposition about the structure of a
network       and   translate it,    if possible, into a     prediction about the nuffber
of 3-configurations of a            particular type   in   observed sociomatrices. As

 an   example we consider Mazurts [1971] proposition mentioned earlier in
 section 3A.          We first note that a simple sociomatrix indicating choice or
 non-choice does not represent the strength of the relation so that Mazur' s
 distinction between "friends" and           "close friends" has     to   be made on some

 other basis if this proposition is to be operationalized and tested on

 binary choice data. We follow Mazur's suggestion and                assume that mutual
                                          —28—




dyads    indicate "close friends" while asyrrmetric dyads indicate "friends".

Mazur's   proposition leads us to examine not    one but seven different 3-

configurations.       They all have the reading rule given by:
            ij ji 1k jk           .                                           (6—1)

The first two pairs in the reading rule refer to the pair of individuals
who are designated "close friends", "friends" or neither. The second two
pairs in the reading rule refer to the choice or non-choice of other group

merrers by the pair in question. For example, the configuration that
corresponds to "close friends agreeing on their choices" is given by:


           fij ji 1k jk\                                                      (6—2)
            1    1    1   1

On the other hand "close friends agreeing on their non-choices" is the
configuration:
                 ji 1k jk\            .                                       (6—3)
                              3

                 1    0
                          0)
"Close   friends disagreeing on their choices" is given by either:
                 ji 1k    jk\
                                                                              (5_L)
            1    1    0   1

or

                 ji   1k jk\
                                                                              (6—5)
             1   1    1   0

as mentioned earlier in section 3B. Since the reading rule is understood
here to be the one given in (6-1) we shall use the follciiing shorthand
notation for these configurations: (6-2) is denoted by 1111,       (6-3) by   1100,
                                         —29—




and (6_14) or   (6-5) by 1101/1110. Thus, we only use the 1ier part of the

configuration   matrix and if   there   are two equivalent forir they are
separated by a slash. In this notation Mazur's proposition mekes predictions
about   the folling seven configurations: 1111, 1110, 1101/1110, 1011/0111,

1000/0100,   1010/0101, 1001/0110. The     first   three   deal with agreement and

disagreement anong "close friends" while the second four deal with agree-
ment and disagreement anong "friends".
     N for the sii of the prediction. We propose to compare the
observed number of the seven configurations mentioned above with the
corresponding number expected in a random sociomatrix having the same
number of mutual, asyrrunetric and null dyads. This is the U MAN distribution
for a random    digraph discussed in section 5, and    it appears     to be especially

appropriate   for Mazur' s proposition because they are based on mutual and
asymmetric pairs. In view of the foregoing remerks, we would formulate
Mazur's predictions as given by the second colunui of Table 6-1.
                            Table 6-1 goes about here
     Note that under the UIMAN distribution the seven predictions in Table
6-1 are not independent. For any observed sociorratrix the number of con-
figurations of the first    four   types in Table 6-1, those grouped under
"friends", sum to (g-2)A.       The last three types, that are grouped under
"close friends", sum to   (g-2)M.       These suimtions also apply to the

expected values under the UIMAN distribution. There are therefore only 5

independent predictions. Such considerations must           often   be taken into

consideration    when examining ucre    than one configuration.
                                 -2 9a-

TaMe 6-1: Results of Testing Mazur's Proposition.

                                                           Median T()    for
              Configuration    I'bdel     Predicted sign   -t08 socioutrices
              1011/0111
              1000/0100
                              Aent             +

                                               +
                                                                 2.36
                                                                 1.82
Priends
              1010/0101   '                                    —1.73
                              Disaeemt
          {   1001/0110


              1111                             +
Close
              1100
                              Aent             +
                                                                 3.148

                                                                 1.73
Friends
              1101/1110 }     Disagreement                     —3.81




                                                                               .




                                                                               I
                                            —30—




B.     The Weighting Vector

       this step, we conpute the number of ways each critical configuration
       In

occurs within the 16 triad types. Each resulting set of 16 numbers forn
the elements      of the weighting vector that is applied to the triad            census

to    enumerate   the critical   configuration.    For   example,   consider   the


configuxtion         denoted 1111 above from (6-2).      As we go   through the list
of triad types in Figure 2-2 we see         that this configuration does not occur

in any      triads   until we come to the triad lOU. This triad contains

exactly one configuration of type 1111. Triads 210 and 300 contain,

respectively, 1 and 3 configurations of this type. Hence, the weighting

vector for the 1111 configuration is (0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 3).

Table 6-2 gives the weighting vectors for all of the configurations critical

to    Mazur's proposition.
                                 Table 6-2 goes about here
        The formulas for the mean and variance of the number of these
configurations in a random triad census from the UI MN\T distribution are
 given by fonr&ilas (5-27) and (5-28). A computer program that carries out
 these calculations has been written and is implimented on the TROLL
 interactive computer system of the National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
 C.     Setting up the Test Statistic
        We let       denote the weighting vector for a critical configuration, and

 T denote the triad census vector as usual. Then 'T is the number of times
 the critical configuration occurs in the observed sociomatrix. Under the

 UIMAN distribution        the expected number of these configurations is T where

        is given by Corollary     2   (a). The variance               where T is a
                                    -30a-

Table 6-2: Weighting Vector for Configurations Critical to Mazur's Proposition.


Triad
          1011
          0111
                    1000
                    0100
                              1010
                              0101
                                            1001
                                            0110   1111     1100
                                                                      1101
                                                                      1110
                                                                                  .
 003        0         0         0             0      0        0         0

 012         0        1         0             0      0        0         0

 102         0         0        0             0      0        1         0

 021D        0         0        2             0      0        0         0

 021U        0         2        0             0      0        0         0

 021C        0         1        0             1      0        0         0

 111D        0         0        0             1      0                  0

 111U        0         0        1             0      0        0         1

 030T        1         1        1             0      0        0         0

 030C        0         0        0             3      0        0         0



 120D
                                                                                  •
 120U        0         0        2             0      1        0         0

 120C        1         0        0             1      0        0         1

 210         1         0        0             0      1        0         1

 300         0         0        0             0      3        0         0




                                                                                  .
                                              —31—




16x16 matrix whose main diagonal elements are              given by   Corollary   2(b)
and off-diagonal elements are given          by Corollary 2(c).

The   difference
                  -                                                                       (6-6)

is the discrepancy between the observed and expected nunter of critical
configurations. Under the assumption that the triad census is random
(UIMAN) the test statistic, TCQ),          defined by:


                          —   2.
            T()
                                                                                          (6-7)




has an approximate normal distribution with mean zero and variance one.
Approximate significance           levels for values of T(Q) may      be obtained from
tables of the nor,il distribution. See Holland and Leinhardt [1970]
for some simulation results bearing on the adequacy of this approximation.
       Using a computer program, we have calculated the value of T(2) in
408 socioniatrices     (randomly selected from those collected by Davis and

Leinhardt    [1972])   for the seven critical configurations for Mazur's

proposition. In the last column of Table             6-1   we give the median     value
of    i(L) over these 08 sociomatrices for each of the seven critical

configurations. The results indicate that by and               large   the predictions

for   r(2.) that derive from Mazur's proposition are supported. All of
the median t (2.) values have the predicted sign. Furthernore, Mazur' s
prediction that close friends will agree nre than friends seems to be
substantiated by direct comparison of the median T(2W) values.
                                            —32—



D.     Another Exaule, Transitivity
       Consider the follcMing proposition stated by Davis, Holland and
Leinhart       (1971);   "Interpersonal choices tend to be transitive --   if P
chooses 0 and 0 chooses X, then P is likely to choose X" (p. 309).

Elsewhere (Holland and Leinhardt [1971]), we have described the social

structural consequences of the transitivity of interpersonal affect when

social status is associated with asymmetry and clustering is associated

with mutuality. Here we use our method to explore the proposition's

empirical validity.

       There   are   two critical   configurations, given in (3-2) (intransitivity)
and       (trans:Ltivity). The corresponding weighting vectors are given
      (3-5)

in Table 4-1. Using the 08 sociorrtrices mentioned above we obtained
median T (2.) values
                  of 5.18 for transitivity and -3.89 for intransitivity.
These results support the proposition that interpersonal choices tend to
be transitive.
      Hever, these results and those found for Mazur 'S proposition are
not independent of each other. Indeed, the weighting          vector for trans-

itively    is the componentwise sum of the weighting vector for the
configuration 1011/0111 and two        times the   weighting vector 1111. The
weighting     vector for intransitivity is the sum of the weighting vectors

for configurations        1010/0101 and 1101/1110.

      The transitivity prediction is therefore weaker than Mazur's in that it

involves fewer configurations.

      We   iry view   the very strong observed effect of transitivity as the sum

of two more modest effects corresponding to the configurations 1011/0111

arid 1111 or conversely the effects of these two configurations rry be viewed

as   the result of being     "pulled along" by the very strong transitivity effect.
                                         —33—



7.    Surrinxy and Discussion
      Our purpose has been to describe a method for fornlizing and testing
theoretical propositions about regularities in social structure. The method
involves the use of graph theoretic concepts to restate verbal propositions
about local structure in terrrs of configurations. Although configurations
are relatively simple graph theoretic concepts we shed that they could be
used to represent some important social structural propositions
Arguing that nest theories of structure in interpersonal relations concern
average local properties we proceeded to develop statistical procedures
for testing the tendency of a particular property to hold across a social
network. With these procedures an investigator can determine whether the
discrepancy between the empirical occurrence, and the chance occurrence of
local structure is statistically significant. Some examples were presented
to illustrate the use of the method and its interpretation.
      Sociometric data are quite coirucn. Because of their prevalence and
variety they represent an important and fundamental resource in the study
of structure in interpersonal relations. Hever, these data are complex
and, like all empirical measurements, they contain an unkncn arrcunt of
measurement error. Their inherent complexity and the likely presence of
measurement error significantly reduce their applicability to the study of
global   organization in small social systems. Moreover, such application can

also be questioned from the point of view of the level at which the data

are   collected.   Interpersonal   affect or choice   data, the nest   frequently
collected sociometric data, represent "surveys" of individual attitudes.
                                          —34—




In effect, individuals are asked to provide infonrtion on the nature of
their local
                                                                                         .
               ties. The task each group member     is   presented with is to

judge whether a single link exists from that member to            other group members.

Whatever    overall consistency exists in these sets of responses derives

from local regularities in interpersonal relations. Although some simple

global    rrdels may fit   these data, the data are     rrrre   properly used in the

study of local conditions.
       The method we have described possesses several advantages when used

to study local structure in small-scale social systems. First, it leads

investigators to develop operational constructs which are           amenable to
empirical testing. Many      of   the theoretical propositions advanced by

sociologists and social psychologists concern the behavioral and exper—

imental   consequences   of various arrangements   of         relations.
                                                        interpersonal

However, these propositions are rarely stated with precision and an

absence of ambiguity that would permit them to be tested. Second, the
rrthod focuses attention on the analysis of average local structure in
sociometric data. It thereby exploits the essential feature of these data.
Finally   the method facilitates the analysis of structural tendencies in
large collections of groups. Only through analyses of large collections of
network data will investigators be able to detect general tendencies in
the   structure of social relational systems.




                                                                                         .
                                          —35—




Appendix:    Conditional Uniform Distributions for Random Graphs

Various   considerations   lead us to study random digraphs whose distributions

are   different from and often rrre complicated than the U I MAN distribution
discussed in Section 5. In this appendix we describe some of these dis-
tributions and propose an approxirrtion that may help with some of the rrcre
complicated ones.
A. Examples of Random Digraphs
The Uniform Distribution: This is the basic distribution from which all
the others we discuss here may be obtained by conditioning on particular
statistics of the graph. For the uniform distribution, all labeled digraphs
with g nodes are equally-likely. It is easy to generate the sociomatrix (X1)
for a uniformly distributed random digraph, because the        are independent
zero-one random variables with
                    P{X..l}      2
                                                                                 (A-i)

The   UI C Distribution: This is a simple conditional distribution of the
uniform distribution just described. C defined in (-6) denotes the number
of directed edges in the graph. Thus U C is the uniform distribution con-
ditioned on C. It makes all labeled digraphs with a specified value of C
equally-lixely. It is also easy to generate the sociomatrix for such a
random graph by selecting at random and without replacement C of the g( g-l)

possible ordered pairs of nodes and allocating the C directed edges to them.
In the uniform distribution C is a random variable with a binomial distribution
whereas in the UC distribution C is not random and is fixed at a specified
value.
                                                                                                .
                                             —36—




—
The UI{X. } Distribution: This is the uniform distribution conditioned
        1+

by   the out-degrees. For the U{X1÷} distribution, all labeled digraphs

with the specified out-degrees are equally-likely. To generate
                                                                                 (X1)
from UIX1+} observe that all the rows           of    (X.) are   statistically     inde-

pendent and      that   in the     row we merely need to choose at random and

without replacement X4 columns (excluding the th
                                              i—) for the ones and set
the rest equal to zero. This distribution is an important baseline for
the allocation of choices in a sociogram. By transposing (X1) the UI{X1+
becomes the Ul{X÷.} distribution.          Note that in    the UI{X.+} or the Ul[X+.}
distribution the        value of C is   fixed since

                    C'x÷x÷.1       ]
                                                                                        (A-2)



       The IJ {X. }, {X÷. } Distribution: In this distribution all labeled

digraphs with the specified values of both                  and {X} are equally-
likely. It is a highly non-trivial distribution and               no   simple   way seems
to   be known for generating random graphs with this exact distribution.

Nevertheless,     it is of potential importance in        sociometric data analysis

since   it conditions out both choices-made and choices—received.
       The UIM,fX1+} Distribution:        In this distribution we coithine both
UIMAN and U {X1÷}. We need only specify M and {X1÷} since {X1} fixes C
and N and C fix A. N is determined by M,A and g. This is also a highly
non-trivial distribution and no simple way            is known   for generating graphs
from it. Again, it is of potential importance in sociometry because it
conditions   out both choices-made and mutuality. Indeed, we would have

prefered   to use this     distribution rather than the U MAN but currently are

not able   to.
                                        —37—




     The UIM, {X1},      {X.} Distribution: In     this distribution,    all   digraphs

with the specified values of N,     {X+}, and {X+} are equally-likely.            Again

this is a very difficult distribution to work with and         no   simple way is

known   for   generating graphs from it. Its value to sociorratric data analysis

sterns from the interpretation that    it controls for: (1) choices-rrade
(possibly constrained by the     experimental   technique), (2) choices-received

(a measure of status and isolation) and (3) mutuality         (a   measure of friendship).

        In slmrkry, there are a variety of possible types      of random graphs
besides the UIMAN distribution. We have merely catalogued a few of the
important ones that stem from the notion of the uniform distribution. There
are a host of possibilities for non-uniform distributions but we will not
discuss them here. In a sense, the rin virtue of UIMAN is that it is the
nst highly conditioned uniform distribution that fixes N and A for which
we are currently able to compute the probabilities defined in           Section   5.
B.   Approxirrate Distributions for the Triad Census
While the UMAN distribution      is useful, it   does not control for the out-degrees
(which ny reflect experimental constraints like the fixed-choice procedure)
or the in-degrees (which reflect status and isolation). We are left with the
gnawing possibility that an observed triad census T from real data departs
substantially from its UI MAN expected value T not because there is structure
in the sociogram, but because T does not control for all the simple effects
we would like to condition out in our analysis.
        Since a direct attack on the exact UIM,     {X1÷}
                                                            or UIM,
                                                                            {X+}
distribution appears to be too difficult, at least at present, we propose the

 folling indirect arid approxinte approach which rrakes use of the simple
nature of the conditional distributions for the multivariate noniial.
                                                     —38—




        We observe that T is a sum of loosely correlated indicator variables
(i.e. see      (5-2)   ), and thus it     is plausible that       under various random dis-
tributions T has an approximete multivariate normal distribution for large
values of g. Thus we have approxintely
                         T         (p,       )                                                 (A—3)


for p    and       computed say from U M. Mect we make use               of   the folliing fact.

If T has       the   multivariate norrrl         distribution   in (A—3) and L T is a vector

of linear combinations of the elements of T then:

        E(T      L T = L t)    p   +     L' (L              L (t-p)                            (A-u)

and
        Coy (T       L T L t)            -       L' (L           L                            (A-5)

        Thus   it is fairly simple to approximetely condition T on linear combinations
of its elements. N we make one further approximation, instead of conditioning

on {X.1+} we     condition on the mean, C, and           variance, S2out'   of the {X. }.   While
this is clearly a reduction in the level of conditioning used, it promises to
be useful. For example, if Sutz 0 this means that all the {X1} are equal
(i.e. the fixed - choice procedure). Now we use the result of s?ction that
C and S2out are essentially linear combinations                 of the triad frequencies to

transform the problem to one of conditioning T on some of its linear corrinations.
There are various ways to impliment this approach and only direct empirical
will show us which ones are the nDst useful.




                                                                                                       .
                                             —39—

                                          References

Berelson,    B.R., Lzarsfeld, P.F. and McPhee, W.N. [195L] Voting: A
     Study       of Opinion Forntion in a Presidential Caiaigr Chicago,
     UniverTty of Chicago Press.
Boyle, R.P. [1969] "Algebraic systerr for nornl and hierarchical
     sociogra" Sociometry 32, 99—119.
Cartwright, D. and Harary, F. [1956] "Structural Balance: A generalization
    of Heider's theory" Psych. Review 63, 277-293.
Coleman,    J. S.   [1957] Corrununi-ty   Glencoe, Illinois, Free Press.
                                          Conflict

Davis, J.A., [1963] "Structural balance, mechanical solidarity arid
    interpersonal relations" Am. J. of Soc. 68,   '-t-463.
Davis, J.A. [1967] "Clustering and            structural   balance in graphs"
    Hiin Relations 20, 181-187.
Davis,    J.A.      [1970] "Clustering arid hierarchy in interpersonal relations:
     testing        two graphtheoretical mdels on 742 sociograms" kn. Soc.
     Review 35, 8143_852.
Davis, J.A., Holland, P.W., and Leinhardt, 5. [1971] "Comments on
     Professor Mazur' s hypothesis about interpersonal sentiments"
     Soc. Review 36, 309—311.
Davis, J.A., and Leinhardt, S.   [1972] "The structure of positive inter-
     personal relations in srrll groups" in Sociological Theories in
     Progress, Vol. 2 (edited by J. Berger) Boston, Houghton MiffliT
Flament, C. [1963] "Applications of graph theory to group structure"
    Englewood Cliffs, N.J., Prentice-Hall.
French, J.R.P. [1956] "A forrrl theory of social power" Psych. Review
     63, 181—195.
Harary, F.,   Normen, R. Z. and    Cartwright,      D.   [1965] Structural Models,
     New    York, Wiley.
Heider, F. [1944] "Social Perception and Phenomenal Causality"               Psych.
     Review 51, 358—374.

Heider,   F. [1958] The Psycholog,' of Interpersonal Relations New              York,   Wiley.
                                           _4 Q




Holland, P.W. and Leinhardt, S. [1970] "A method for detecting structure
     in sociometric data" Mi. J. of Soc. 70 492-513.
Holland, P.W. and Leinhardt, S. [1971] "Transitivity in structural nodels
     of small groups." Comparative Group Studies 2, 107-124.

Holland, P.W. and Leinhardt, S.[1972] "Some evidence on the transitivity of
     positive interpensonal sentiment" Am.J. of Soc. 72, 1205-1209.

Holland, P.W. and Leinhardt, S. [1973] "The structural implications of
     measurement error in sociometry" J. Math. Soc. 3, 85-111.

Homans, G.C. [1950] The Hunn Group New York, Harcourt, Brace and World.

Horrns, G.C. [1961] Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms. New York,
     Harcourt, Brace and World.

Katz, E. and Lazarsfeld, P.F. [1955] Personal Influence: The Part Played
     by People in the flai of Mass Communications. Clencoe, Illinois,
     Free Press.

Lazarsfeld, P.F. and Merton, R.K. [l954J "Friendship as a social process:
     a    substantive and methodological analysis" in Freedom and Control in
     Modern    Society pg. 18-66 (edited by N. Berger, T. Abel, and C.H. Page)
     Princeton, N.J.,    Van   Nostrand.
Lipset, S.M., Thow, M.A., and Coleman, J.S. [1956] Union Derrocracy: The
     Internal Politics of the International Typographical Union, Glenco
     Illinois, Free Press.

Lorrain, F. and White, H.C. [1971] "Structural equivalence of individuals
     hi social networks" J. Math. Soc. 1, 49-80.

Mazur, A. [1971] "Comments on Davis Graph Model" Am. Socio. Review ,
     308—311.

Moon, J.W. [1968] Topics on Tournements. New York, Holt, Rinehart
    and Winston.

Moreno, J.L. [1934] Who Shall Survive? Washington, D.C., Nervous and
     Mental Disease Pub. Co.

Moreno, J.L. et al.     [1960] The Sociometry Reader. Clencoe, Illinois,
     Free Press.

Nadel, S.F. [1957] The Theory of Social Structure-London, Cohen and West.




                                                                                 .
                                    —Ll—




Radcliff-Brown, A.R. [l9O] "On social structure" J. Royal Anthro.
    Inst. 70, 1—12.
White,   H.C. [1963] An Anatorrj of Kinship: Matheutica1 Models    for
     Structures of Cumulated Roles. New Jersey,   Prentice-Hall.
