                      -*--
                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE DISTRIBUTION OF EARNINGS AN]) HUMAN WEALTH
                                                *
                       IN   A LIFE CYCLE CONTEXT


                              Lee A. Lillard




                    Working Paper No.      47



CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research. Inc.
         204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, California 94305




                             July, 1974
                  Preliminary; Not for Quotation

      NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
 number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
 permission.

      This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
 publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
 by the Board of Directors.



This Essay is to appear in an NBER—Income and Wealth Conference Volume
entitled "The Distribution of Economic Well Being."
                    THE DISTRIBUTION OF EARNINGS AND HUMAN WEALTH
                               IN A LIFE CYCLE CONTEXT

                                          by
                                    L. A. Lillard*




                                 INTR)DUCTION AND SUMMARY

       Economists   have   long been interested in individual earnings differ-

ences and in the dispersion of earnings within populations. Recent de-

velopment of explicit theoretical and empirical earnings functions front

life cycle human capital investment models increases the potential to

explain existing earnings distributions and to predict changes in it.

Life cycle models suggest that current earnings are not a good index of

well—being if choices about interteinporal transfers are available. Under

certain conditions the present value of earnings net of investments in

human capital, human wealth, is an index of economic well-being. The

purpose of this paper is to outline a set of conditions under which

human wealth is an index of well-being in a life cycle as prefatory to

empirical estimates earnings and human wealth distributions for the

1960 Census population. Some tentative remarks on the interpretation



   *
    This research was sponsored by NSF and U.S. Department of Labor
grants to the NBER. I have benefited front the conmtents of T. D.
Wallace and Pinis Welch. This is not an official NBER publication
since it has not been reviewed by the Board of Directors. I want to
thank Christy Wilson for drawing the original figures.
                                           —2—


 of economic well—being in a life cycle context when these conditions are

 not    met. The basic conditions which allow human wealth to index well-

 being include the existence of loan market for
                                                        consumption expenditures,
 a fixed leisure—work time pattern, and no consumption
                                                                 of education or
 investment.      If   these are   relaxed appropriate adjustments must   be made
 to human wealth.
         The   basic earnings equation used to predict earnings and       human
wealth    is estimated on the NBER-Thorndjke sample described later.
Earnings are a function of age, schooling and         ability.    This earnings
function is used to predict earnings and human wealth distributions for
the 1960 Census population based on the joint distribution of age,
schooling, and ability based on age and schooling data from the 1960
Census of Population and ability data within schooling classes from the
NBER-Thorndike sample.

     The purpose of this exercise is essentially to point out how earnings
functions, which have been studied quite extensively, can be made more
useful. That is by predicting humAn wealth and by generating earnings
distribution. Researchers often state "If the distribution of such and
such    an independent variable had been this, then      ... ." These statements can
be considered more formally as I am trying to illustrate here. Even if the
Thorndike sample isn't like the 1960 census (differences are noted
                                                                   later), the
earnings function estimated from it can reproduce the general characteristics

of   the 1960 census observed earnings distribution. In another previous
paper   I have presented in more detail the statistical distribution theory.

necessary to go from the joint density of a population with respect to

those characteristics which determine earnings through the estimated earnings
function to a predicted earnings distribution. Even without any restrictive
assumptions such   as log—normality   the predicted distributions are
positively   skewed and the moments for subpopulations Buch as schooling

and age groups behave similarly in actual and predicted distributions.

The many caveats are pointed out in the paper.



    Predicted earnings distributions are derived for the overall population,

for schooling classes, for age groups, and for ability classes. Both the

actual distribution and the distribution of earnings corrected for variation

not explained by age, schooling, and ability are presented for each along

with selected summary statistics and Lorenz Curves. The predicted dis-

tributions reproduce the characteristics of the actual distributions for the

1960 Census population quite well except for differences which can be explained

between the 1960 Census population and NBER—Thorndike sample. This section

may be characterized as answering "What would be the distribution of earnings

of employed men if they were like the men in the NBER—Thorndike sample?"



        Recognizing the   degree of   "fit" between predicted and observed 1960

 Census earnings distributions and the reason for it we then proceed to
• predict the distributions of mean human wealth based on the same equations.
 This section attempts to estimate "What would be the distribution of the
 expected value of human wealth for employed men in the 1960 Census if they
 were   like the NBER-Thorndike sample?" Detailed mean human wealth     distri-
 butions and selected statistics are presented assuming a retirement age
 of sixty—six for several rates of discount. The sensitivity of the se-
 lected statistics, especially the mean, to discount rate and retirement
 age assumptions are then considered. Finally, some rough estimates of
 the variance of human wealth rather than the variance of the mean, are
 constructed.
                                            —4—




          A lower bound on     the   variance of human wealth is     defined   as the
 variance    in the present value of predicted earnings plus an error

 component which is completely transitory            and   independent from period      to
 period.    An upper   bound   is defined    as the   variance   of the present value
of  predicted earnings plus a completely persistent error component which
 is constant over the life cycle but varies randomly over individuals
independently    of the level of ability
                                      and schooling. Intermediate cases
can be considered as combinations of these when the transitory and per
sistent variations     are independent.

         We study the effect of schooling level, of ability level on the

distributions and on measures of inequality. These estimates are espe-

cially sensitive to discount rate assumptions. The effect of increased

schooling level, for example, is to increase mean human wealth at discount

rates below    some level    and     to decrease   mean human   wealth   at discount   rates
above that    level.   If this rate is below what we believe to be appropriate

discount rate, say the rate appropriate to consumption loans or the real

rate    of return on physical assets, then the discrepancy could be             accounted

for by, for example, the consumption value of schooling or education dis-

cussed earlier. In this case then the human wealth measure is not a good

index   of economic well-being and the distribution of mean human wealth

not a good   measure   of the distribution of mean economic well—being.                We

may gain    some insight into the partial effect of other           attributes such
as   ability if they don't affect the consumption value of schooling.

Ability    increases the mean human wealth almost uniformly. Some infer-
ences are made about the effect of retirement age on mean human wealth
but these results are tenuous due to the limited             upper age range in the

sample.
                                        —5—



               MEASURING ECONOMIC WELL-BEING IN A LIFE CYCLE CONTEXT

      The life cycle    model is   developed by   assuming an   individual maximizes

lifetime   utility represented by an intertemporal utility function1 within

his opportunity set. Three components of the opportunity set are             distin-
guished: endowment, market opportunities, and productive opportunities.

All of these are relevant to an index of economic well being.

      Human   capital   investment models2 assume the individual has a homoge—

nous, across individuals and units within an individual, initial endowment

of human capital, E, which can be rented in the labor market at the

constant rate R per unit per unit time. This stock of human           capital   is

subject to a given constant exogenous rate of deterioration 6, but the

opportunity is available to use purchased inputs D, at price, P, and own

human capital K to produce new human capital according to the production

function Q(K, D). The net change in the stock of human capital at any

point in time or age is then represented by Ea =                Da) - SEa•    These
                                                       Q(Ka
conditions relate to endowment and productive possibilities. Other

endowments might include an initial endowment of non—human capital, an




   'The individual is also assumed to have perfect knowledge of himself
and the world and faces no uncertainties.


   2Many aspects of the following discussion are considered in more de-
tail in the growing     literature on
                                   this subject including Rosen (1973),
Rosen (1972), Mincer (1973), Stafford and Cohen (1973), Stafford and
Stephan (1972), Hecianan (1973), Smith (1973), Weiss (1971), Razin (197fl.
The original works of Becker (1962, 1967) and Ben-Porath (1967) are
obviously important.
                                          —6—


 exogenous time stream of receipts or debts, and an       exogenous   time stream
 of educational inputs)
          Utility maximizing behavior is clearly influenced by the existence

 or availability of market opportunities for intertempora]. transfer of

 funds. When such funds are available
                                            clearly earnings in a given time
 period cannot be considered an index of well-being.

          There are many possible sets of assumptions. Consider market

 opportunities as they affect consumption, investment in human capital

 and interperiod transfers of non-human wealth. The possibility of

 borrowing and loaning funds, endowed or earned, expands the permissible

 set of time paths of investment and
                                          consumption decisions. For example,
 there may be no market opportunities for
                                               borrowing or lending at all,
in which case the individual must
                                        finance current investment in human
and/or non-human capital and consumption out of current market earnings

and exogenous receipts.

         It is illustrative to introduce the
                                                concept of perfectly separable
market opportunjtje       That   is, funds borrowed for one purpose, consump-

tion, investment in human    capital,   or investment in non-human capital,
cannot   be   used for any other purpose. This is primarily   introduced to
capture   the notion that investment in human capital accesses a different

funds market because (1) human capital is embodied in the individual thus




   1The effect of educational doles on the length of the
                                                         schooling period
are considered by Wallace and Ihnen (1972).




                                                                                    .
                                                            —7—




not   subject   to confiscation which would imply a higher borrowing rate and
(2) there exists government subsidized loan programs available only for
educational investment at a lower rate. The nature of a perfectly

separable funds market for financing direct educational expenditures,

P D, will then affect only productive possibilities. Many additional

constraints may also be imposed on the model such as compulsory school

attendance,     and various school subsidy formulas.
         Define:

                           = R     .                              Earning capacity at age a
                                       Ea

                   Y
                       a
                           — R(E
                                a
                                        -   K
                                                a
                                                    )             Gross   earnings at age a

                   NY = R(E
                     a     a
                                        - Ka ) -        P   D
                                                             a    Earnings at age a net of
                                                                  direct educational invest-
                                                                  ment

                   I       = RK        + P D                      Total investment in human
                       a         a               a
                                                                  capital at age a
                   N       =                                      Age at which working life
                                                                  and life cycle end,
                                                                  exogenous

                   MW      =   f
                                 N
                                       e   r                      Human wealth,  present value
                               t=O
                                                NYt dt            of net earnings discounted
                                                                  at a rate dependent upon
                                                                  market opportunities

         This development of the human capital model has ignored one sense of
the   time concept and has implicitly assumed that human capital is embodied

in the individual so that time and human capital enter the human capital

production function in the same way. That is, Q(Ka Da)
                                                                                     Q(SEa Da)
where S is the fraction of total time allocated to the production of new

human capital. An equivalent model can be developed in terms of the use
                                         —8—



of   time. A fuller discussion of the time interpretation is attempted in

Ben—Porath (1967), Ghez (1972), Heckman (1974), and Lillard (1973).

         The relevant index of lifetime economic well-being is lifetime

utility. Consider a pedagogical construction under which human wealth

defined as the present value of earnings net of educational investment

is a relevant measure of economic well—being and the effect of failure

to satisfy those conditions.


                   Human   Wealth   As An Index of Lifetime Well-Being

         Human wealth is an index of economic well-being when the individual

behaves in such a way as to maximize the present value of net earnings

and there are no exogenous endowments of initial wealth or time stream

of receipts or debts. The individual then maximizes his lifetime

utility    by arranging intertemporal consumption in an optimal manner sub-
ject to the wealth constraint represented by human wealth. When exogenous
endowments are present but do not affect the       criteria   of maximizing human
wealth   their present value (positive for a time stream of receipts and

negative   for a time stream of debts) should be added to the wealth

constraint and correspondingly to the index of economic well-being.

       Under what conditions then will an individual behave in such a way

as to maximize human wealth. We have already assumed the individual has

perfect knowledge of himself and the world and faces no uncertainties.

There is a fixed constant amount of time in each period to be allocated

to either the labor   market   to produce earnings or to human    capital



                                                                                    .
                                        —9—


production.1 The utility function of the individual does not include as

arguments either the stock of human capital or the use of time allocated

to either the labor market or human capital production. This condition

excludes the possibility that either investment or work is a more desir-

able activity, that obtaining education or going to school could be a

consumption activity, and that the individual might derive utility

directly from being more educated or highly trained. The individual has

available a source of unlimited borrowing and lending at a constant rate

of interest, r, for the purpose of consumption. This source of funds may

or may not be available to finance educational expenditures as long as

the loan markets are perfectly separable as defined earlier. If the un-

limited funds are available for human capital investment then the funds

markets   need not be separable and   the model corresponds to the Ben—

Porath (1967)   specification. However, the loan market for human capital
may contain any sort of imperfection as long as it is separable. This
loan market may include low interest loans from parents or government

agencies, high interest loans due to the embodied nature of human capital,

or in the extreme no loan market for human capital investment expenditures



   1.
    Time spent in on—the—job training is considered in human capital pro-
duction, as is investment time off-the-job, rather than in the labor mar-
ket. The distinction of where investment occurs on or off the job has
no implication for total investment, assuming a single production function,
but does have empirical implications for the interpretation of earnings per
unit time for time intervals within a period. They may represent net or
gross earnings or even earning capacity. More detail on this issue is con-
sidered in Lillard (1974).
                                    — 10 —




at   all. Under these conditions clearly the relevant rate of discount of

net earnings is the interest rate, r, on loans for consumption purposes.

       The particular life cycle of earnings model specified by these

conditions, assuming no loan market for direct educational expenditures

and a Cobb—Douglas production function1 is capable of being fully solved

analytically which illustrates the simultaneity of schooling and earnings

while providing an exact functional form for earnings and human wealth.

This solution is exposited fully in Lillard (1973) and only summary

results are presented here.

       The solution implies that in the early period the individual special-

izes in the production of new human capital, full time schooling, using

all of his earning capacity for investment.2 The period of specialization

is


                              0<a<a*

where a* denotes the age at which the individual stops specializing and

begins investing only a fraction of his earning capacity. Specialization

ends when earning capacity ceases to be an effective constraint on invest-

ment. One implication of assuming no loan market for educational



                  8i B2
   1Q(Ka , Da )  K D
                 a   a
                        such that (8 + B ) c(0, 1) and B >
                                    1    2               1
                                                             0.   It is
also assumed in the equation presented here that óc(O, 1).


      general proof that if specialization occurs, it occurs in the initial
periods is provided by Ishikawa (1973)




                                                                               .
                                        — 11 —




expenditures,    and the only qualitative    difference   from   the   Ben-Porath per-

fect loan market case, is the prediction of positive labor force partici-

pation during the period of specialization. The individual supplies a

constant fraction1 of his human capital to the market to finance expendi-

tures for direct educational expenditures, i.e., R(E —                   P D•
                                                                 Ka)
         Specialization with no loan market meaxis investing exactly all of

earnings capacity in the form of foregone earnings and purchased inputs.

Specialization with the same perfect loan market available mean using all

of human capital in production and borrowing to finance purchased inputs.

There are many intermediate assumptions including availability of special

loan markets, scholarships, etc.2 which may be available only during the

period of specialization or formal full—time schooling. The effect of

these conditions are summarized in the stock of human capital, earning

capacity, at a*. This earning capacity at a* depends upon injtial earn-

ing capacity,         It is important   to   note that the solution for earn-

ings after the period of specialization take earning capacity as a* as a

datum,   both earnings and a* are endogenous state variables and any
exogenous change which affects earnings will also affect the length of
time in specialization and both must be considered jointly.


  1The constant fraction result is due to the Cobb-Douglas productions
function.

  2Becker (1967) provides    a discussion of loan markets.
                                    — 12 —




       The length of the period of specialization is endogenous to the model.

The optimum age to stop specializing in production and begin positive net

earning is that point where the investment paths of the two regions cross.

That is, the individual will invest according to the rule K and D for
                                                         a      a
non-specialization except when he is constrained by his earning capacity

during which period he will invest all of his earnings capacity. The

solution for a* as a function of the parameters and initial endowment of

human capital, but not age, is an implicit simultaneous structural re-

lationship which must be satisfied for each solution. The implicit

solution for a* must be considered simultaneously with earnings function

to make any inferences. The expression allows inferences about the

direction of effect of each characteristic on the length of the period of

specialization.

       For the particular solution reported in Lillard (1974) the length

of the specialization period varies directly with N, R, and B and in-

versely with E, P and r. The effect of all other characteristics is
             1.
ambiguous.

       For the rest of the life cycle, after the period of specialization

ends, a* < a < N, the individual invests some fraction of his earning

capacity in producing more human capital. Neither foregone earnings nor

direct educational expenditures and thus investment in human capital is




    'For a more detailed discussion of these implicit partials see Wallace
and Ihnen (1972).




                                                                                .
                                   — l3   —




a function of the initial stock of human capital E0.2 Gross investment

declines with age after the period of specialization reaching zero at

retirement age2 N. Earning capacity, observed earnings, and net earn-

ings at any age after a* depend upon the stock of human capital and the

investments at that age. All of these results for the specific solution

are presented in greater detail in Lillard (1974).

      Given these assumptions so that human wealth is an index of well-

being what then does human wealth depend upon. As we have noted it de-

pends upon access to borrowing funds to finance human capital investment.

Clearly access to such a loan market expands investment possibilities and

enhances human wealth. Also individuals may differ in the efficiency

with which human capital is produced, the productjon parameters $

and 2 in the specific model above. More efficiency in producing new

human capital clearly increases human wealth. An empirical counterpart

to B is introduced later.

      An increase in the retirement age, N, or a decline in the rate of

interest will clearly increase human wealth. A decline in the rate at

which human capital deteriorates,6 ,   will   clearly increase human wealth.

Individuals may differ in some or all of these parameters. For empirical




   'Even though the level of investment is not a function of initial earn-
ing capacity the fraction of earning capacity invested, I /RE will be
since earning capacity is.
                                                            a a

         result obtains from the assumption of no bequest and no con-
struction on the objective function at N.
                                   — 14 —




purposes we will asse that they differ only in ability representing effi-

ciency of production and schooling representing a*. The effect of in-

creased schooling on human wealth is less clear since it represents the

effect of all other differences between individuals and these differences

must satisfy the implicit simultaneous schooling relationship.




                                                                            .
                                  — 15 —




             When Human Capital Is Not An Index of Well-Being



      The life cycle model   makes it   clear that when individual inter-

temporal choice is available individual period earnings are a myopic

measure of well—being. Under certain conditions when intertemporal

consumption choices are perfectly free human wealth is a measure of

lifetime well-being and individual period earnings observations and

the age-earnings profile itself merely illustrates the optimal timing

of a separable process. When these very stringent conditions are not

met the problem of indexing well-being falls ultimately back to con-

siderations of the intertemporal utility function. Human wealth and

the lifetime pattern of earnings become variables of choice. Con-

structing an index based on observable values becomes extremely com-

plex. The relevant models of life cycle behavior have not yet been

fully developed or analyzed. The problem is not solved here but

relaxation of certain conditions one at a time may lend some addi-

tional insight into the problem. Let us begin with relatively simple

deviations with the clearest implications.

      The first potential problem is that schooling or education or

the level of investment in human capital may enter the utility func-

tion directly. Alternatively utility may be a function of the stock

of human capital held by the individual, say as a status measure or

by affecting the efficiency of consumption, see Michael (1972). In

these cases an investment in human capital yields returns not
                                             — 24 —




      30.0
                                                                              .
 ¼)




'Li
      20.0




      10.0




                                                                              .
             17                         37            +7       57         6
                                                                    /GE


             Figure 1.c.   (continued, page 3). Cubic, S—16.




                                                                              .
                                 — 17 —




individual   unambiguously better off even if he chooses a lower value

of human wealth than an individual beginning with less. This does

not get us very far empirically but is meant as food for thought.

       Another obvious omitted concept is non—human wealth which must

be included in any wealth calculations. The existence of initial

non-human wealth clearly affects the access of the individual to

funds for financing educational investments.

       The effect of risk and uncertainty on investment in human capital

is considered briefly by Levhari and Weiss (1973) and Razin (1973).

Again the problem is exceedingly difficult and clear implications are

few.

       These tenuous statements are meant only as caveats in the inter-

pretation of the empirical estimates which follow.
                                   — 18 —




                  1960 CENSUS: PREDICTED EARNINGS DISTRIBUTIONS
                      AND THE DISTRIBUTION OP HUMAN WEALTH


      The previous sections considered the appropriateness of certain mea-

sures of economic well-being. This section considers the distribution of

well-being if it is measured by either earnings or human wealth. Both

the overall distributions and distributions within schooling and ability

classes and age classes where appropriate will be considered. The format

is to consider an earnings equation estimated using the NBER-Thorndike

sample data then to predict aggregate   earnings distributions for the
1960 Census. The estimated age-earnings equations are a function of

schooling and ability levels. This section may be characterized as

answering "What would be the distribution of earnings of the men in the

NBER-Thorndike sample if they had the distribution of age and schooling

present in the 1960 Census?" or "What would be the distribution of earn-

ings of employed men in 1960 if they were like the men in the NBER-

Thorndike sample?" As will be pointed out later, several caveats are in

order to use one group to predict the other. Predicted and actual 1960

distributions are compared when possible.

      Recognizing the degree of "fit" between predicted and observed 1960

Census earnings distributions and the reason for it we then proceed to

predict the distributions of mean human wealth based on the same equations.

This section attempts to estimate "What would be the distribution of the ex-

pected value of human wealth" either "of the men in the NBER-Thorndike sample

if they had the schooling distribution present in the 1960 Census?" or "of




                                                                                .
                                      — 19 —




employed men in the 1960 Census if they were like the NBER-Thorndike sample?"

Detailed mean human wealth distributions and selected statistics are pre-

sented assuming a retirement age of sixty-six for several rates of discount.

The sensitivity of the selected statistics, especially the mean, to dis-

count rate and retirement age assumptions are then considered. Finally,

some rough estimates of the variance of human wealth rather than the

variance of the mean, are constructed.

      A lower bound on the variance of human wealth is defined as the

variance in the present value of predicted earnings plus an error compo-

nent which is completely transitory and independent from period to period.

An upper bound is defined as the variance of the present value of pre-

dicted earnings plus a completely persistent error component which is

constant over the life cycle but varies randomly over individuals

independently of the level of ability and schooling. Intermediate cases

can be considered as combinations of these when the transitory and per-

sistent variations are independent.

      The primary conclusions are that aggregate earnings distributions

can be reproduced reasonably well even with the crude calculations made

here and that it is possible to generate estimates of human wealth dis-

tributions. In doing so we can study the effect of schooling level,

of ability level on the distributions and on measures of

inequality. These estimates are especially sensitive to discount rate

assumptions. The effect of increased schooling level, for example, is

to increase mean human wealth at discount rates below some level and
                                      — 20 —




 to   decrease mean human wealth at discount rates above that level. The

 cutoff rate is in the neighborhood of 5.5 per cent. If 5.5 per cent is

 below what we believe to be the appropriate discount rate, say the rate

 appropriate to consumption loans or the real rate of return on physical

 assets, then the discrepancy could be accounted for by, for example, the

 consumption value of schooling or education discussed earlier. In this

 case then the human wealth measure is not a good index of economic

 well-being and the distribution of mean human wealth not a good measure

 of the distribution of mean economic well—being. We may gain some in-

 sight into the partial effect of other attributes such as ability if

 they don't affect the consumption value of schooling.   Ability increases
 the mean human wealth almost uniformly. Some inferences are made about

the effect of retirement age on mean human wealth but these results are

tenuous due to the limited upper age range in the sample.


                A Specific Earnings Function and Estimates

        It is well founded theoretically and empirically that earnings de-

pend upon schooling, ability, and age or experience1 The earnings

function estimated and used here results from a life cycle of earnings

model which is discussed elsewhere in detail along with the empirical

estimates.2 The estimated earnings function is cubic in age, quadratic

in schooling, and cubic in ability, including all interactions. This




   1See for a review, Mincer (1970, JEL).


   2Lillard "Human Capital Life Cycle of Earnings Models: A Specific
Solution, and Estimation," NBER Working Paper No. 4.

                                                                             S
                                              — 21 —




is the "best equation in the sense that the age, schooling, and ability
polynr4 ale       were determined by error variance criteria •1        The estimated

earnings function is

    Y(A,S,B)         —   21108.50        —   392l.20A       +    877.25S           + 148.O2SA

+     206.09A2       —     79420S2       +      6.87SA2     +    116.42S2A         —    7.82S2A2

— 45197.OOB          +   11015.OOBA      +   472l.4OBS      —   1820.BOBSA         —   594.938k2

+    1065.008s2 +           83.5].BSA2   —    122.O5BS2A           8.56BS2A2

+ 28134.OOB          —    6738.40B2A     —   5035.20B2s     +   1435.2OB2SA        +   371.38B2A2

—     240.65B2S2 —          72.59B2SA2 +        5.86B2s2A +         0.99B2S2A2

—         2.99A3     —        0.31A3S    +      0.15A3S2    +       9.09BA3        —    l.04BA3S
—         0.17BA3S2—          5.74B2A3 +        l.04B2A3S +         0.03B2A3S2.2

where A =,   age, S = years, and B =     ability   index.

The resulting age—earnings profiles are            presented    in Figures 1 for various

ability     and   schooling   levels.' Both   schooling   and   ability raise   earnings

at every age in the life cycle after     some initial perioI.3 Earnings esti-
mated     beyond age fifty—six are a pure prediction in the sense that there are
no   individuals in the sample beyond that age. The resulting estimates of


     1Additional polynomial terms were added until          they   failed to significantly
reduce error variance.
     22
      R— . 2759.
                   Age and schooling in this equation are years beyond age six-
teen. No individual in the sample had less than a high school education.
Caution should be taken for predicting below this schooling level, especially
late in the life cycle. The estimates are based on observation of 15,578 age—
earnings points from 4,956 individuals. The upper age range of the sample is
54 years and the age earnings profiles turn down sharply because there are
four men who are three to four years older than the rest of the sample, older
when applying in 1943, who have unusually low earnings. All predictions of
earnings are restricted as closely as possible to the age range observed.

     3Again these results are discussed in detail in Lillard (1973).
                                             — 22   —




    x1U
    33.0
                                                                                        .
w


    20.0:




    'a,




    8.0
                                                                                        .
          17                                            47           57



            Figure - L.a. Cubic EsH mited -Age--Earnings Profiles .Basedon -the NBER-
                          Thorridike Sample for Several Schooling Levels at the
                         Average Ability Level.

            1ote: All earnings are in 1957—59 dollars.




                                                                                        S
                                              — 23 —




      33.0
'I,
0
z
z
Ui
      20.0




      ie.e




      0.0                                                                     66
                         27            37              4.7        57
                                                                         Ma

             Figure 1.b. Cubic estimated age-earnings profiles based on the NBER-
                          Thorndike sample for average ability and one standard
                         deviation (.25) above and below, for high school grad-
                         uates (S—1.2) and college graduates (S—].6). S12, cubic.
                                             — 24 —




      30.0
                                                                              .
 ¼)




'Li
      20.0




      10.0




                                                                              .
             17                         37            +7       57         6
                                                                    /GE


             Figure 1.c.   (continued, page 3). Cubic, S—16.




                                                                              .
                                      — 25   —




human wealth defined as the present value of predicted earnings are pre-

sented in Figures 2 for discount rates of 4 and 6 per cent)

       Consider   the characteristics of the NBER-Thorndike sample which may
make it different from the general population described in the 1960 Census.
The NBER-Thorndike sample is based on a group of males volunteering for
Air Force pilot, navigator, and bonibadier programs in the last half of
1943. These volunteers were given initial screening tests     and a   set of
seventeen   tests to measure various abilities2 in 1943. Thorndike and

Hagen sent a questionnaire to a sample of 17,000 of these men in 1955

which included a question on 1955 earnings. The NBER sent to a subset

of these a subsequent questionnaire in 1969 which included additional

questions on earnings in later years and questions on schooling and

initial job earnings.

        The data includes five separate approximately equally spaced points3

on the age—income profile as well as the year of initial job, year of




   1Due to the data limitations in age mentioned earlier for Human Wealth
predictions it was assumed the earnings profiles are flat after the end
of the sample range where the profiles peak. I prefer this to either the
quadratic or linear profile estimates. For example, in the quadratic
estimates the profiles rise parabolically since the convexity at early ages
dominates the concavity at older ages, which is even more unrealistic.


     2Theability index used in this paper Is the first principal component
of   a subset of the ability test scores corresponding approximately to EQ
type attributes. The effect of each individual ability measure and      their
interactions on earnings and schooling is currently under investigation.


   3Any observation which might cause special problems Is omitted. These
include those individuals disabled, unemployed, in the military, or who
is a pilot at his major occupation. Particular year observations for an
individual are omitted if for example the year of initial job was ques-
tionable.
                                    - 26   —




      x1ø
                                                                              .
                                                              I, =I.50

1I-                R C3                                       3:. I.LS




               TT
'U

                                                              13        .15
                                                                        .50



                                                             B t.5o
                   R:.O5
      125.                                                   13     l.uo
                                                             i3:.
                                                             6: .5

                   R=.o7
                        I                      I
                                                   —--- -
                                                             t3• .25
                                                             c
                                                                    I
                                                                   •• U
                                                             13= .5o
                                                                              .
             12.       13    14-     IS     16    17    18
                                      EAI.S OF ¶c.l4ooL



              Figure   2.a. Present value of predicted observed earn-
                            ings from the estimated qudat3c age-
                            earnings profiles based on the NBER
                            Thorndike sample. As a function of school-
                            ing. (N—66). Discounted at 3 per cent,
                            5 per cent, and 7 per cent.




                                                                              .
                                        — 27   —




     2'5


I-
'U                                                                           SIl
     200.



                                                                             s I1s
                                                                                 IL
     125.                                                                        "4
      S 'IL.


      IS i2
      5:14
      S a(
           Sb


      50
                .50           .15                          1.2.5          1.50
                                                        A3IL ITT



                Figure 2.b. Present value of predicted observed earnings as a
                             function of ability from the estimated -quadratic
                            age—earnings profiles based on the NBER-Thorndike
                             sample. (N.66). Discounted at both 4 per cent
                             and 6 per cent.
                                    — 28 —




last   full-time schooling, years of schooling and seventeen separate measures

of ability. The age—income points are approximately initial job, 1955, 1960,

1964, and 1968. The individuals in the Thorndike sample differ from the

U.S. male population as a whole in several ways.1 First the sample includes

a high ability group. All of the men completed high school of high school

equivalency examinations, and passed the initial screening for the Air Force

flight program. Their general health was better than the general population2

in 1969. They were more homogenous in height and weight due to military

qualifications. They seem to have a high degree of self confidence, self

reliance and risk preference. They tend to be entrepreneurs, an unusual 20

per cent work longer hours. Some of these factors may however be related

to the high ability. The observed age range is nineteen to fifty—seven

years but with less than 1 per cent outside the range nineteen to fifty—

five. The cubic earnings equation is quite a poor prediction above this

range since predicted earnings drop rapidly to large negative values;

therefore, earnings are assumed constant at their peak level after the

peak occurs.3




   1Many of these comments originated with T. F.   Juster   who directed the
data collection for the NBER.

   2The modal response was excellent with 57 per cent, 38 per cent were
good, 3 per cent fair, and less than 1 per cent each were poor or non-
response.

   3when mean earnings predicted distributions are derived without this
assumption (and negative earnings are not counted in relative frequencies)
about 10 per cent of total frequency is lost primarily from high school-
ing, low ability, and late age groups. Three, fifteen, eighteen, and
twenty—seven per cent are lost within schooling classes 12, 13—15, 16, and
17+, respectively. Four, eight, twenty, and thirty—eight per cent are lost
within age groups 30—34, 35—44, 45—54, and 55—64, respectively. Thirty—
three and fourteen per cent are lost within the lowest and second lowest
(both below average) ability groups, respectively.
                                      — 29   —




           Earnings Distributions from the Estimated Earnings Function
        The distribution of earnings derives from the distribution of the

population with respect to age, ability, and schooling. Our predictions

use 1960 United States Census of Population data on the distribution of

the United States population of males eighteen years old and over by

labor force status, years of school completed,     and   age to predict earn-

ings distributions based on the estimated earnings function.1 A general

framework for translating the    joint   density of age and   characteristics
which   determine earnings through the earnings function into earnings or
human wealth density is presented in Lillard (1973).
        Since the earnings   function predicts earnings only after the end

of   full-time schooling, the distribution of the population by age and

schooling is taken only for persons employed and in the civilian labor

force. The joint and marginal distributions of age and schooling are

presented   in Table 1. Since all persons in the NBER—Thorndike sample
have at least a high school     education, predictions are restricted to

that population. That is, the distribution of yearly earnings is pre-

dicted for persons who are between the ages of eighteen and sixty-four,

have at least a high school education and are employed.2 The




   1U.S. Census of Population: 1960 (Final Report PC(a)—5A) Subject Re-
ports, School Enrollment: Personal and Family Characteristics of Per-
sons Enrolled in School or College and of Persons Not Enrolled (U.S.
Bureau of the Census, 1963, Table 4, page 54).

   2The age is extended to forty-four because it corresponds to the
closest Census of Population age classification 35—64 years old. The
distributions do include persons employed while going to school full
time and are correspondingly incorrectly estimated.
                                             Table 1
Joint and Marginal Distributions of Age and Schooling for Employed Males Eighteen to Sixty—four
     Years of Age with At Least a High School Education From the 1970 Census of Population.




                                   Years   of Schooling
                     12            13—15            16           17+           Marginal

  18—19             .0247                                                      .0247
 20—21              .0280          .0146                                       .0426
 22—24              .0455          .0182           .0080                       .0716
  25—29             .0803          .0313           .0215        .0148          .1480

  30—34             .0793          .0306           .0241        .0194          .1534
  35—44             .1670          .0560           .0361        .0330          .2920
 45—54              .0980          .0405           .0218        .0216          .1819

 55—64              .0399          .0227           .0123        .0108          .0858

 Schooling
 Marginal.          .5628          .2139           .1237        .0996         1.0




                                                S
                                    — 31 —




distribution   of the population with respect to ability is assumed to be

the   same as the NBER—Thorndike sample on which the earning function was
estimated since no ability data are reported in the 1960 Census of
Population. Statistics for the distribution of ability by schooling
class   used is presented in Table 2.1 For calculation of predicted yearly

income, it is assumed that all individuals in an age or schooling class

are at the midpoint of that class.2

        Yearly earnings are calculated for each age, schooling, ability

combination corresponding to midpoints of class intervals. Each calcu-

lated yearly income assumes the relative frequency of the corresponding

age, schooling, ability combination. The relative frequency of any

(A, B, S) combination is calculated as the joint relative frequency of

the age, schooling combination reported by the Census of Population

times the relative frequency of the ability level within that schooling

class.3 These relative frequencies are then sunned into relative




      1Forty ability intervals were actually used in calculations.

   2Any assumption about how observations are distributions within re-
ported class intervals is arbitrary. This assumption facilitates calcu-
lation of earnings but adds a source of error in the predicted distribu-
tion of earnings. The predicted relative frequencies are created in a
discrete rather than a continuous manner.

   3Assuming this distribution of ability is a source of error in the
predicted distribution to the extent that the distribution of ability
of Air Force pilot and navigator school candidates in 1943 is differ-
ent from the distribution of ability of employed males in 1960.
                          — 32 —




                                                          .
                        TABLE   2
Selected Statistics for the Distribution of the Ability
  Index Overall and by Schooling Level from the NBER-
   Thorndjke Sample for Schooling Interval Midpoints



                                             Standard
                          Mean               Deviation


Overall                   1.00                  .25


By Schooling

  12                       .910                 .219
  14                       .971                 .229
 16                       1.063                 .255
 18                       1.071                 .261




                                                          .
                                      — 33 —




               of yearly earnings for intervals of a thousand dollars.1
frequencies
     The resulting predicted overall distribution of earnings and the

predicted distribution for various subpopulations effectively represent

distributions of mean earnings allowing no variation around the pre-

dicted value. However, only about 28 per cent of the variation in earn-

ings is explained by variation in age, schooling, and ability.

      Consider the problem of correcting the distribution of earnings

for variation not accounted for by variation in age, schooling, and

ability. The error variance of the estimating equation is ct     = 36593472.

(standard error =    6049.25).   It is assumed that the errors are identi-

cally and independently2 distributed with mean zero and standard devia-

tion 6049.25. The obvious first order approximation is to simply correct

the standard deviations of the various distributions by simply using, for

example,


           =                [Y(A,S,B)] =               (Y(A,S,B)] +
                /arAS,B                    /VarA,S,B



    1The equal intervals of $1,000 is used to allow the greatest perspective
 and skewness since the discrete and widely spaced midpoints of the age and
 schooling intervals distort the continuity of the predicted distribution.
 The predicted distributions with unequal interval lengths for higher incomes
 used in Census of Population tabulations are presented later for comparisons
 with the actual distributions calculated from Census of Population data.

    2Each individual observations error is distributed independently of age,
 schooling, ability and the error in any other observation.
                                    — 34 —




This   correction is unsatisfactory because of the possibility of negative

earnings and it is desirable to see the effect on other statistics than

the variance. Another simple approximate procedure based on the trun-

cated normal is used to construct the distributions themselves, then

selected statistics are calculated from these distributjons) This

procedure is not entirely satisfactory either since the truncation in-

creases the mean and decreases the dispersion, but it allows a crude

approximation. The probability density for any individual age, school-

ing, ability combination is calculated as before but the density is

allocated to earnings intervals according to the above normal distri-

bution centered on the midpoint of the interval in which the predicted

value falls. This is an admittedly crude but simple correction. Better

corrections can no doubt be obtained through more complex calculations.

The interval in which the predicted earnings value falls receives an

incremental relative frequency of .0662 times the relative frequency of

that age, schooling, ability combination. Intervals adjoining the cen-

tral interval receive an incremental relative frequency of .0643 times

the relative frequency of (A, S, B) each, and so forth until all relative

frequency of the error is exhausted.

       Finally, the actual distribution of earnings for employed males

sixteen to sixty-four years old with at least a high school education




   1All interval probabilities are corrected according to the truncated
normal so that only positive earnings are counted and the total rela-
tive frequency of all positive earnings is unity.




                                                                             .
                                   — 35 —




is   calculated from more general distributions reported in the 1960 Census

of Population.

        All three overall earnings distributions and the corresponding

Lorenz Curves are presented in Figures 3.      Selected statistics and re-

lative frequency tables are included in the tables of individual type

distribution subsections.

        The major caveats may be summarized as follows. The NBER—Thorndike

sample and the population of employed males in 1960 differ in several ways

the most important of which is the high level of ability present in the

NBER-Thorndike sample. Even though ability distributions by schooling

class are used, the distribution of ability especially in lower school-

ing classes will overstate ability relative to the actual distribution

in the 1960 population. The 1960 population is heavily concentrated at

lower levels of schooling especially high school which is at the lower

end   of the range of observation for the Thorndike sample and thus subject
to    less confidence in estimation.   Interval midpoints with respect to
schooling   are used for schooling classes 13—15 (14) and 17+ (18). More

precise information about the distribution within these intervals would

sharpen the prediction.

         Predictions beyond age fifty—six are made assuming earnings con-

stant after peak earnings. This is necessary due to the data limita-

tions in the NBER-Thorndike sample. The age distribution used from the

1960 Census assumes individuals are at the midpoint of age intervals

that increase in length from two years at early ages to ten at late ages.
                                 — 37 —




                                                        Fraction of Earnings
                                                                         1.0



                                                                          .9




                                                                          .8



                                                                          .7




                                                                          .6




                                                                          .5



                                                                          .4




                                                                          .3




                                                                             .2




                                                                             .1



                                                                              0
0     .1     .2      .3     .4      .5     .6      .7   .8      .9     1.0

                          Fraction of Population




Figure 3b. (continued, page 2)
                                               — 38 —




                                                                                                                   .

Cumulative Frequencies
1 .00  H-                                 q     -. -4 :t:-        -                                --'4-4.   —.
                             -
 .90                                                         ii       'H:.
                                                                                      :fl:tf   1


 .75

 .60

 .45    FThrt,_   Fi

 - In
            L!.                                                       H -f-+   H -l
                                                                                                     -f


                                                                                                                   .
           'II         J-J

  1If&t1                                  FI                                          ftft±ft
                                 iH4 intt-t LLI
                                     4-

   0 i-Eft1L
                                                                                               45             50

                                          Earnings (X103)




        Figure 3.c. (continued, page 3)




                                                                                                                   .
                                          — 39   —




Approximately   10 per   cent   of the 1960 population falls in the least reliable

age interval 55-64.

        The unequal intervals also cause problems in comparing predicted and

actual earnings distributions. Predicted distributions can be made for

any   interval groups and are made for equal $1,000 intervals here. The
Census of Population earnings distributions are unequal beyond $7,000.
Statistics   are computed using interval midpoints and will vary with differ-

ent groupings. The interval midpoint 40,000 is used for the interval > 15

in the Census of Population while equal 1,000 intervals up to 90,000 are

used for predicted distributions.

        Several important differences remain. The 1960 Census figures are

for total income while the predicted figures are for earnings in the labor
market. There may be important differences in weeks worked during the
year,   and hours worked during the     week between the   sample and the popula-

tion. There are indications that the men in the NBER-Thorndike sample

tend to work longer hours and to spend less time unemployed. Another very

important difference is that the 1960 Census figures include employed

students while these persons are excluded in estimating the earnings func-

tion. This contributes to the large relative frequency of very low income

at early ages in the actual Census distribution. For example, 53 per cent

of eighteen and nineteen year olds earned less than $1,000. These are

likely to be employed students.
                                         — 40 -




                       Predicted   Mean Earnings Distributions

        These earnings distributions are derived by transforming probability

density from three-dimensional (age, schooling, ability) space through

the estimated earnings function into the earnings dimension. Since age,

schooling, and ability are not the only characteristics of an individual

which determine earnings, these may be termed expected or mean earnings

distributions. They are the distribution of the expected value of earn-

ings.

        Selected statistics relating to the earnings distributions are

presented in Table 3. The relative frequency distributions and Lorenz

Curves are in Figure 4.


  Predicted Earnings Distributions Corrected for Unexplained Variation

        These earnings distributions are mean earnings distrIbutions cor—

rected for variation in earnings not explained by age, schooling, and

ability. Instead of transforming density from (age, schooling, ability)-

space into a single earnings point it is spread over the positive real

line in a manner proportional to the normal probability density with its

center at the predicted mean value and standard deviation equal to the

estimated standard error of the regression.

        Selected statistics are presented in Table 4.    Relative frequency

distributions and Lorenz Curves are presented in Figure 5.




                                                                               .
  .                                                    .                                                  .
                                                 TABLE 3
             Selected Statistics for Predicted Mean Earnings Distributions for nployed Males
                   Eighteen to Sixty—Six With At Least a High School Education Based on
                               an Earnings Function from the NBER-TH Sample


                                                    Standard        Coeff.         Skew—        Cmi
                      Mean           Median         Deviation       of Var.        ness         Coeff.

Overall              9,182          8,545           3,530             .38            .86            .21


By Schooling
  12                 8,188          8,214           2,412             .29            .50            .16
  14                 9,478         10,246           3,344             .35            .11            .20
  16                               11,188           4,281             .40            .20            .23
                    10,607
  18                               12,799           5,185             .42            .03            .24
                    12,391

By Age                                                                                              .03
  19                 5,679          5,582             506             .09          3.95                       I-.
  21                 5,556          5,518             503             .09          2.57             .03
                                                      585             .11          1.52             .04
  23                 5,457          5,455
  27                 5,528          5,504             484             .09          2.35             03
                                                      622             .09          1.24             .04
  32                 7,011          6,921
                                                    1,632             .16            .99            .09
  39                 9,992          9,617
                                                    2,681             .20           1.08            .11
  49                13,283         12,479
                                                    2,599             .19           1.51            .10
  59                13,833         12,917


By Ability                                                                                          .17
  <.75                              8,313           2,537             .30            .34
                     8,359
                                                    3,062             .35            .65            .19
   .75—1.00          8,732          8,310
                                                    3,738             .39            .62            .22
  1.00—1.25          9,474          9,223
                                                    4,892             .44            .51            .25
       >1.25        11,241         10,739



Note:     Skewness is measured by the square root of E(X-X)3/S3. Coefficient of variation is SIX.
          The ability index is distributed with mean 1.0 and standard deviation .25.
Relative Frequenc
   .31
                                                           ll1
                                                                                                          .
                                                                        444                   -1--

                                                            UiiW
   .2 I t tU14t11T1Tm                        -
                                                 1HTH H H- IH+H
                                                                      12 Years School

    1




    0


   .3


   .2    11
                                                                      14 Years School
   .1
            itft
    0


   .3


    .2
                                                                                                          .
            ftftP
    .1                                                                16 Years School
                I rTT
                                                                              TflC


    0                                                            I1


    .3


    .2


    .1
                                 T1•
                                 ti- 1Th-H -
                                         HI
                                                            r,t_        18 Years School



                                         rn
        0
                        5   10          15       20   25    30     35          40        45          50
                                                                              Earnings   (X103)
            Figure 4.a. Predicted Mean Earnings distributions by schooling class,
                         age group, and ability class, and the corresponding lorenz
                            curves.
Relative Fre uency
                                                             - 46   —
                                                             444414 fl-T T



       IA
                         14      HH-H-+-fff-f-H-                                           III          IITI
  .3




                                                                                                                          .
                                                                 I
                         4-4-4
                                 4±tTh1ThTh4II                                           ABILITY
  .2                                                                                    I-T m4JT4fnTm
                                                                             -1-




                T4
  .1                                                                                     < .75


   0




  .3




                                                                                         .75 —   1.00
                                                                                                        —
   0
         I

                                                                                                                          .
         -T-L
         +-!


  .3




  .2

                                                                                                   HI
                                                                                        1.00 — 1.25
  .1



   0




  .3




  .2


                                                                                            F
  .1                                                                                     > 1.25
                                                                                                               '44




  0                  5             10              15   20      25      30         35       40      45               50
                                                                                          Earnings (X103)

       Figure 4.e. (continued, page 5, by ability class)
                                                                — 47 —




                                                                                       Fraction of Earnings
1       t                                                                                        i1- 1
                I111
                  I   TJ_JJ_U_JJI II        I




.9                         Ability

                      c .75

.8                    .75 -       1.00
                      1.00 —       1.25
.7                    >    1.25


.6


            1

.5




    4   H-




.3




.2




.1
                                                H


    0                 .1               .2           .3   .4        .5      .6     .7       .8     .9     1.0

                                                              Fraction of Population




            Figure 4.f. (continued, page 6, lorenz curves by ability class)
                                                TABLE 4
  Selected Statistics for Predicted Mean Earnings Distributions Corrected for Unexplained Variation



                                                 Standard         Coeff.         Skew-        Gini
                   Mean           Median         Deviation        of Var.        Ness         Coeff.


Overall           10,201         9,652           5,971             .59             .53          .33

By Schooling
  12              9,343          8,883           5,433             .58             .48          .33
  14             10,423          9,989           5,902             .57             .42          .32
  16             11,435         10,959           6,447             .56             .42          .32
  18             13,041         12,663           7,102             .54            .34           .31


By Age
  19              7,535          7,0].&          4,703             .62            .57           .35
  21              7,460          6,935           4,678             .63            .58           .35
  23              7,403          6,871           4,663             .63             .59          .35
  27              7,442          6,917           4,672             .63            .58           .35
  32              8,394          7,955           4,959             .59            .49           .33
  39             10,658         10,373           5,574             .52            .33           .30
  49             13,538         13,336           6,257             .46            .24           .26
  59             14,032         13,859           6,283             .45            .24           .25


By Ability
  <.75            9,443          9,125           5,527             .59            .46           .33
   .75—1.00       9,813          9,311           5,716             .58            .50           .33
  1.00—1.25      10,457          9,912           6,081             .58            .50           .33
       >1.25     12,015         11,420           6,864             .57            .48           .33




.                                                  .                                                   .
                                                          — 51 —


Relative Frequency                                                                              £
           —rI r I r t

                                                                          Age (Actual)
        If
   .1                                                                     fft
                                                                              27 Years

    0I




   .1!:
                                                                              32 Years
                                 I—


    0I




   .2


   .1


    0
         •r-     ti-ti--
                           1
                                                                              39 Years




    .1                                                                        I
                                                                              49 Years


    0



    .2
            Th
                       1
    .1
            ii-±L                                                             59 Years
            - -4-+
                               1fl                                      III
                                          1-11-H-I-fLi


                                     10   15         20      25    30    35        40      45       50
        0                  5
                                                                                  Earnings (X103)

            Figure S.c. (continued, page 3, by age)
                                                      — 53 —



Relative Frequency

                                                                                                       Ability

  .1
                                                                                           LIIItLL1HIHftII
                                                                                                        < .75
                                                                                           [-1-1


   0



  .3


       hltil
         -
             1tH tti
  .2




  .1



   0   IIIui                                                                                  .75 —      1.00




  .3




  .2




  .1



   0
       U                                                                                       1.00 — 1.25



           414
  .3




  .21
                     II
                                                                                                                 ri-f        H
                                                                                                                   Ii
   .1 H     tt1 H r'1     1r
                           lU IEB.
                                   i   r   tt_Uifl_UItLL   Ti TJ____. 1:_T_4._4_T—4——-'—           I    ii       Li I

                               I
                                                                                                       > 1.25

   0         5       10            15           20         25           30             35                40             45       50
                                                                                                         Earnings (X103)

       Figure 5.e. (continued, page 5, by ability class)
                                     — 55—




                       Actual Earnings Distributions

       These earnings distributions are those actually observed in the 1960

  Census. Again they include total income and include employed students.

  Selected statistics are presented in Table 5. Relative frequencies

  Lorenz Curves are presented in Figure 6.

                 Comparison of Mean Earnings, Corrected Earnings,
                        and Actual Earnings Distributions

       It should be remembered than any comparisons between predicted and

  actual distributions are subject to the qualifications implied by earlier

  comments. Another important factor in comparing actual and predicted

  statistics is the unequal 1960 Census income intervals, especially the

  open ended interval "greater than $15,000." Better comparisons could be

  obtained from more detailed intervals since the selected statistic estimates

  are quite sensitive to the interval midpoint chosen for the "greater than

  $15,000" interval.


      Both the mean   and   corrected earnings distributions display the gen-

eral characteristic of the actual distribution but tend to "overstate"

earnings. All of the distributions display positive skewness, and have

center and dispersion positively related to age and schooling. The pre-

dicted distributions also indicate increased center and dispersion with

increased ability. The distributions corrected for unexplained variation

tend to "overcorrect" in the sense that the resulting distributions are

more smooth than the actual distribution.

      The mean earnings distributions obviously have less dispersion than

either the corrected or actual distributions, and the corrected distributions

 tend to overpredict mean earning relative to the actual distribution, especially

 at young ages. The procedure used for "correcting" the mean earnings dis—
                                                TABLE 5
             Selected Statistics for the Actual Distribution of Earnings for Employed Males
              Between the Ages Eighteen and Sixty-Four With At Least a High School Degree


                                                    Standard         Coeff.         Skew-        Cmi
                      Mean           Median         Deviation        of Var.        ness         Coeff.


Overall              6,429          5,358           5,356             .83           2.24           .39

By Schooling
   12                5,346          4,933           3,696             .69           1.42           .34
  13—15              6,181          5,212           5,464             .88           1.47           .42
   16                8,756          6,424           7,650             .87           1.48           .39
   17+              12,334          7,258          12,475            1.01           1.26           .47


ByAge
  18—19              1,399            993           1,315             .94           3.36           .43
  20—21              2,313          1,889           1,774             .77                          .39
                                                                                    2.16
  22—24              4,023          4,109           2,299             .57           1.03           .31
  25—29              5,092          4,884           2,726             .54           1.62           .27
  30—34              6,674          5,940           3,839             .58           2.01           .28
  35—44              7,900          6,471           5,482             .69           2.09           .33
  45—54              9,050          6,529           8,006             .88           2.01           .40
  55—64              9,704          6,164          10,424            1.07           1.99



Note:    The interval means for the open—ended interval, 15,000 and above, are calculated
                                                                                          separately
         for each class by the Lorenz procedure.




  .                                                   .                                                   .
                                                                             — 57 —

Relative Frequency
.2
                                                                                      III ii   I   I_IJ_J_L_LJ




.1                                      -7-
                                                                                                   12 Years School



 0


.3

                      .I
                           -
                                         i-        4




                                                                                                      I! 1
.2
                                        1
                  H
.1    •—--j       r
                                                                 I                                  14 Years School
                                                                     i_i I




 0            •


                              tL-ii
                                1 t                    t
                  L4
 .3

 .2
      4t 4f4                                           J-7 __I




 '                                      4—H -H


                                                            ____
                                                            L1
                                                                                                     1.6    Years School
                                                                               i I +II.
 0                     I
                           I t1


      t'n;
                       --I-             1T

 .3
      t-t tt-
      4I
      -Ht1; t
 .2
      tr1 T       --r-f
      -H—f-t- -i---H
                                                                                                      18 Years School
 .1
                                                        I

 0     IT1                    .11   1                                                                            T14'4jH'ftj4
                              5               10           15        20        25     3035
                                                                                                                           Earnings
                                                                                                                             (x103)
                   Figure 6.a.                     Actual distributions of total income reported in the
                                                   1960 Census of Population by schooling and age group,
                                                   and the corresponding lorenz curves.
                                              — 58 —




                                                                                    Fraction         of Earnings
                                                                                                                          .
:             _____                                                                             i]
.8
                  12                __
                  14       Years
a                 16       Years — — —
                  18       Years _.__                                                                           -




                           H




 3        I                                                 i__




.2                U
                                     -                  _
                                                                                                            -




                                          -

                                                                                                -.
.1                                                                                                                  --
                                                                       -
                                               F
                                                                                -
                                                                                       f               -




o         .1          .2       .3        .4        .5             .6       .7              .8          .9           1.0
                                         Fraction of Population



     Figure 6.. (continued, page 2, lorenz curves by schooling)



                                                                                                                          S
                                                                                                                         — 59 —
Relative            Frequency                                                                                                         __________________
                                  r:
        ____                                                                                                                             AGE

    :                                                                                            ii?                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                       J



    o   -                                                     -

                                                                                                 -j
                                                                                                                                           27Years



   .2                   i:
        -

                -- -1:J+                                                             -
                                                                                                                                           32       Years



   :
                                                                                                                                                                      F
   .2                                                                                                                                       f
                                                                                                                                                    :



                                                                                                                                           39       Years
                                                          :r1                                          J

                                                                                                                         :
    :                                                     .                                                                                                                           LII
                        -
                        —                                                                              .
                                                                                                           -4
                                                                                                                -                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                      III
                        -                                                                                                                 --lu-i rIj_IiI_FU1_Jj I I I I f I
                                                                                                                                                            -I


                                                  ; ..-.
                    .
                                                                                                                                                -
                              *          .-                                                  —
                                                                                                                                                                   EI1I
                                                                                                                                                        TJIIIILIIIIII1I
    2                                                                                                                                                   [1III1I1I11IILL1
                                                                                                                                                           LLJ]LILLLLL]
                                                                      -
                -
                                                              -                                        -                          -                     I11I,l111111111111
                                                                                                                                                              Fl UJ TFFJ FFF1
                                                                                                                                                             LI I ILl LLFUITFJ



    1                                                                                                                                     49 Years

                                                  -
                                                                                             :

    o                                                                 -.                                                                                                  [Fill I
            I
                            -_t_r-
                                1 I  -
                                                      -
                                                      -           -
                                                                           1                                                                                                      II Ill
                                                                                                                                                                                  I_FLU
                                                                                                                                                                              -



                                                                                                                                                                                   JJILI

                                              -
                                                                      --       -         -                                                                                I


        -H
        1                                                                  r                                        -
   .1   1                                                                          tif           rrri                        r            59        Years
            4                        1                                                                                    1




   o                                     5                    10                         15                         20       25   30           35                40                     45   50

                                                                                                                                                                 Earnings (X103)
        Figure                                6.c. (continued, page 3, by age)
                                             — 60   —




                                                                      Fraction of Earnings
                                                                                               .
1.0
                              III   I




.9                            AGE
                                                                                H-
                      18—19   Years                                            ftH:it±
.8
                      22—24 Years — —

.7
                      35—44   Years
                      45—54 Years
                                                                               jt4t
.6



.5
                      55—64 Years


                                                    .Ui m
.4                                                                                             .
.3



.2



.1




 0          .1       .2        .3       .4     .5       .6       .7       .8     .9      1.0

                                        Fraction of Population




      Figure 6.d.   (continued, page 4, lorenz curves by age)


                                                                                               S
                                    61




tribution to account for error variation seems to be inadequate. Evidence

cited later with respect to human wealth will indicate that the error is

not purely transitory, but has a persistent element that is related to age.

That is, there are unobserved variables which may be uncorrelated with

schooling and ability but which are not uncorrelated with age. An indi-

vidual's profile may lie wholly above or wholly below the estimated profile

and this is not captured in the correction to earnings distribution. Further

evidence indicates that the distribution of this persistent component of

earnings is itself positively., skewed ihich would further enhance the positive

skewness of earnings as evidenced by the underprediction of positive

skewness in the predicted as opposed to actual earnings distributions.

These problems could be partially alleviated by a more complete accounting of

the variation in earnings than is present in this earning function. It should

be remembered, however, that a source of the discrepancy in skewness is

the large number of employed students at very low income level. The students'

problem also partially explains the overprediction of the mean at young ages.

For example, note the $l000—$2000 mean income of eighteen through twenty—

one year olds. Fully employed males should have mean earnings greater than

this even at young ages. The inclusion of these students will also pull down

the mean of the overall actual distribution and the mean of the lower schooling

groups. It should be noted, also, that the correction procedure by truncating

the normal distribution at zero earnings and using conditional densities causes

the corrected means to be too large.

      Consider the properties of these distributions in more detail. With

respect to central tendency, both the mean and median are overstated by the
                                       — 62   —




predicted    distribution. Even so, the mean and median move in the right

direction between age and schooling classes. The mean increases within

higher schooling classes for both predicted and actual distributions.

Mean and median earnings rise continuously with age in the actual dis-

tributions but decline very slightly before rising continuously after age

twenty—four in both predicted distributions. The dip in mean earnings is

clearly evident in the age—earnings profiles in Figure la. In the actual

distribution this property would be hidden by the inclusion of employed

yount students with very low earnings. Both mean and median earnings are

predicte to rise sharply as the ability level of a subgroup rises. Again

the high ability level of the NBER—Thorndike sample itself is a source of

the overstatement of earnings. It should be noted that the overall mean of

the population is a weighted average' of individual subgroup means, whether

grouped age, schooling, or ability.

         Dispersion is overstated in the corrected predicted distribution when

measured by the standard deviation but understated when measured by the co-

efficient of variation. The standard deviation increases continuously with school-


ing. As age increases it dips slightly before age twenty-four in the

predicted distributions then rises continuously as it does throughout in

the actual distribution. It is interesting to note here that the variance

of overall earnings is the sum   of   the average of the variances of the sub-

groups   and the variance of average earnings of subgroups.2

      Another   characteristic of earnings distributions widely discussed

in the literature is concentration represented by the Lorenz Curve and




   1The weights are obviously the relative frequency of the subgroups.


         the average, of variances, and the variance, of averages, are
calculated weighted by the relative frequency of the subgroups. Formally
Var(Y) — E (Var(Y subgroup)]   + Var (E(Y subgroup)].
                                       — 63   —




its   summary statistic the Gini coefficient) The Gini coefficient is

roughly the same between the corrected predicted and actual distri-

butions except that the predicted distributions always understate in-

equality at the extremes of age and schooling and overstates it in the

middle range. This is partially caused by the large unequal income intervals

in the actual distributions. Since the Lorenz Curve is approximated by

joining chords, the Gini is always understated but the understatement is much

larger for the actual distributions.


   1The Gini coefficient is the area between the diagonal and the Lorenz
Curve relative to the area of the triangle, one-half. A larger Gini
coefficient implies more inequality. The extremes are zero when every
individual get an equal share of total income and one when one individ-
ual holds total income.
    An alternative interpretation of the Gini coefficient is the mean
absolute difference between all possible pairs of values relative to their
mean, i.e.

                    + +
                   f I      x   -Y   f(X) F(Y) dX dY

                               2X
X and Y represent all possible pairs of values, earnings, and the numerator
is the coefficient of mean difference. The mean difference due to Gini
(1912) is dependent on the dispersion of the values among themselves and
not on deviations from the mean as in the case of the standard deviation
and thus coefficient variation. The Lorenz Curve and Gini coefficient are
unambiguous measures of concentration only if the Lorenz Curves do not
cross. An infinite number of Lorenz Curves may have the same Gini concen-
tration coefficient if they cross. If two Lorenz Curves cross once, say
at the point (.7, .3) and have the same Gini coefficient the population
underlying the Lorenz Curve which is beneath in the region bounded by
(0,)), (0, .3), (.7, 0), and (.7, .3) may be said to have income distri-
buted more unequally among low income holders (lower 70 per cent) than
among high income holders relative to the other population. This says
nothing about location of high and low, only about the concentration of
low relative to high income holders. This may be thought of as if popu-
lations have the same Gini coefficient, and thus their Lorenz Curves must
cross, and the same variance and mean, the population with the largest
positive skew will have its Lorenz Curve above the other in the lower
earnings region.
                                     — 64 —



      The predicted distributions tend to indicate less skewness than the

actual distribution but this statistic is very sensitive to the unequal

broad earnings classes in the actual distribution and the results are not

directly comparable. This statistic, as mentioned is especially sensitive

to the normality assumption used for the correction.


                   Predicted Human Wealth Distributions from the
                            Estimated Earnings Function

       The purpose   of this section is to predict the distribution of human

 wealth overall, by schooling class and by ability class for several inter-

 est rates and retirement ages. Human wealth is defined here as the present

 value of earnings net of educational or human capital investments over the

 individual's lifetime. The earnings function and corresponding age—

 earnings profiles estimated from the NSER—Thorndike sample correspond to

 an earnings somewhere between net and gross values depending upon what

 fraction of investment is obtained on—the—job. The empirical measure of

 mean human wealth is then the integral of the discounted estimated earn-

 ings function with respect to age from the end of formal schooling to the

 retirement age.

       Since the estimated earnings function corresponds to mean earnings

 the estimated human wealth corresponds accordingly to the mean present

 value of observed earnings. Since the mean error for any age is zero

 and the estimation error is assumed to be uncorrelated with age, school-

 ing or ability, the expected discounted sum of errors over the life

 cycle is also zero.     That is,




                                                                               .
                                       — 65 —




            PV(S, B) — PV(S, B) +          I
                                            N

                                          a—S
                                                e   u(a, S, B) da



                                            N
            where            PV(S, B) —    I era Y(a, S, B) da
                                          a—S


            so that          E [PV(S, B)] = PV(S, B)


The predicted distributions presented in this section are the distributions

of RV(S, B) and thus correspond to mean human wealth distributions. This

should be carefully noted in observing the small measures of dispersion

and inequality. Corrections for other sources of variation are considered

later. The means    should   be unbiased estimates but the variation should be

interpreted as variation in the mean, which obviously has much less dis-

persion. Thus overall variation is due to differences in expected human

wealth due to schooling and ability. Variation within a subgroup, say

schooling, is due to differences in expected human wealth due to the other

factor, ability.

      Everyone in the population is assumed to have the same discount rate

and the same workIng life, but individuals differ in schooling and ability.

Density is transformed from two-dimensional (schooling, ability) - space

into human wealth - space through the integral function. The same school-

ing and ability distribution and midpoints are used as before. Detailed

selected statistics for mean human wealth are presented in Tables 6     ,   7   ,



and 8 for the overall population and for schooling and ability subgroups
                                                — 66 —




                                               TABLE 6
         Selected Statistics       for
                                    the Predicted Distribution of Human Wealth for the Overall
                 Population, by Schooling Class and by Ability Class for Several Rates of
                                   Discount Assuming Retirement Age 66


                   Discount                                  Standard    Coeff.        Skew—       Cmi
                     Rate           Mean      Median         Deviation   of Var.       ness        Coeff.


Overall               .03        198,240    193,759          15,264,       .08         2.08    -    .04
                      .04        154,150    150,940           9,762        .06         2.75         .03
                      .05        121,943    120,145           6,236        .05         3.23         .02
                      .06         97,965     97,846           4,651        .05         2.66         .02
                      .07         79,948     80,847           4,479        .06         1.09         .03

By Schooling
  12                  .03        190,969    189,523           7,262        .04         3.14         .02
  13—15                          197,873    194,327           8,932        .05         1.89         .02
  16                             211,515    206,880          15,669        .07         1.24         .04
  17+                            223,619    221,086          20,058        .09          .74         .05

  12                  .04        150,781    149,527           5,501        .04         4.72         .02
  13—15                          153,052    150,484           6,152        .04         2.16         .02
  16                             160,407    156,880          11,277        .07         1.36         .04
  17+                            167,770    165,086          15,646        .09         1.14         .05

  12                  .05        121,389    120,418           3,850        .03     .   8.25         .01
  13—15                          120,215    118,660           4,525        .04         2.00         .02
  16                             123,504    120,880           8,480        .07         1.22         .04
  17+                            126,852    125,086          11,740        .09         1.07         .05
  12                  .06         99,121     98,727           3,078        .03      11.28           .01
  13—15                           6,294      95,422           2,960        .03       2.28           .01
  16                              96,145     94,457          6,226         .06         1.34         .03
  17+                             97,282     96,454          8,851         .09          .97         .05
  12                  .07         82,418     82,023           2,562        .03      13.72           .01
  13—15                           77,941     77,352           1,961        .03       2.60           .01
  16                              75,866     74,464          4,662         06        1.39           .03
  17+                           _75,367      74,454      -   6,651,        .09          .98         .05

By Ability
  <•75                .03        186,977    184,817           7,085        .04         9.13         .01
   .75—1.00                      191,716    190,109           6,136        .03         1.49        .02
  1.00—1.25                      202,595    197,755          11,113        .05         1.45        .03
       >1.25                     227,941    224,668          19,376        .09          .82        .05

  <.75                .04        147,298    146,791           5,565        .04      14.35          .01
   .75.1.00                      149,638    149,141           2,685        .02       2.00          .01
  1.00—1.25                      156,840    155,143           6,063        .04         1.58        .02
         >1.25                   174,308    171,107          13,006        .07         1.70        .04

  <.75                .05        118,572    118,841           5,184        .04      11.81          .01
   .75—1.00                      118,824    118,930           1,729        .01       —.26          .01
  1.00—1.25                      123,440    123,058           3,269        .03       1.24          .01
       >1.25
                            -
                                 134,963    132,833           8,120        .06         2.05        .03
  ).75                .06         96,133     96,774           5,438        .06         7.26        .02
   .75—1.00                       96,214     96,943           2,977        .03      —1.00          .02
  1.00—1.25                       98,501     98,776           2,506        .03       —.19          .01-
      >1.25                      106,223    105,131           5,135        .05       2.16          .02

  <.75                .07         79,640     80,835           5,744        .07       4.00          .03
   .75—1.00                       78,755     80,461           3,883        .05      —1.13          .03
  1.00—1.25                       80,159     82,073           3,631,       .05       —.39          .02
         >1.25                    84,605     84,128           3,922,       .05       1.41          .02
                                               — 67 —



                                             TABLE 7
         Selected    Statistics for the Predicted Distribution of Human Wealth for the Overall
                 Population, by Schooling Class and by Ability Class for Several Rates of
                                   Discount Assuming Retirement Age 70


                  Discount                                   Standard        Coeff.      Skew—       Cmi
                     Rate        Mean        Median          Deviation       of Var.     ness        Coeff.

Overall               .03     209,484       203,889          l6,950               .08    1.88         .04
                      .04     160,869       157,917          10,836               .07    2.76         .03
                      .05     125,808       l24,273           6,758               .05    3.28         .02
                      .06     100,418        99,998           4,824               .05    2.83         .02
                      .07      81,344        82,554.          4,506               .06    1.28         .03

By Schooling
  12                  .03-    201,220       200,474           7,942               .04   2.06          .02
  13—15                       208,862       204,833           9,893               .05   1.85          .02
  16                          224,597       220,880          17,033               .08   1.17          .04
  17+                         238,737       237,086          20,755               .09    .49          .05
  12                  .04     156,768       155,527           5,744               .04   4.24          .02
  13—15                       159,899       157,662           6,552               .04   2.03          .02
  16                          168,283       164,880          12,202               .07   1.26          .04
  17+                         176,915       175,086      -   17,064               .10   1.44          .05
  12                  .05     124,801       124,371           4,216               .03   6.62          .01
  13—15                       124,152       122,479           4,581               .04   2.04          .02
  16                          127,971       125,430           8,737               .07    1.33         .04
  17+                         132,369       131,086          12,532               .09    1.26         .05
  12                  .06     101,397       100,877           3,279               .03    9.34         .01
  13—15                        98,578        97,478           3,019               .03    2.24         .01
  16                           99,109        97,430           6487                .07    1.35         .03
  17+                         100,464        99,086           9,267               .09   1.18          .05
  12                  .07      83,774        83,291           2,496               .03   15.61         .01
  13—15                        78,973        78,435           2,464               .03    1.72         .01
  16                          77,730         76,464           4,773               .06   1.30          .03
  17+                         77,193         76,454           6,969           -
                                                                                  .09   1.10          .05
                                                                         -


Byjbility
  <.75                .03     196,139       193,229           7,501               .04   6.05          .02
   .75—1.00                   202,428       200,830           7,106               .04   1.77          .02
  1.00—1.25                   214,749       209,755          12,740               .06    1.39         .03
         >1.25                241,548       238,668          21.040               .09     .56         .05

  <.75                .04     152,865       151,645           5,688               .04   13.68         .01
   .75—1.00                   155,971       155,370           3,098               .02    1.88         .01
  1.00—1.25                   164,088       161,479           6,845               .04    1.74         .02
         >1.25                182,621       179,588          15,039               .08    1.83         .04
  <.75                .05     121,265       121,070           5,088               .04   13.36         .01
    .75—1.00                  ].22,693      122,561           1,873               .02     .65         .01
  1.00—1.25                   127,566       126,937           3,490               .03    1.47         .01
         >1.25                139,773       136,833           9,257               .07    2.30         .03
  <.75                .06      98,261        98,774           5,226               .05    8.29    -
                                                                                                      .02
   .75—1.00                    98,396        98,943           2,724               .03   —1.06         .01
  1.00—1.25                   101,250       101,678           2,702               .03    —.20         .01
      >1.25                   109,291       107,821           5,537               .05    2.85         .02

  <.75                .07      81,234        82,648           5,679               .07    4.19         .03
   .75—1.00                    79,987        82,368           4,051               .05    —.88         .03
  1.00—1.25                    81,478        82,121           3,194               .04    —.26         .02
         >1.25                 86,629        86,128           4,035               .05    1.74         .02
                                              — 68 —


                                                TABLE 8
         Selected  Statistics for the predicted Distribution of Human Wealth for the Overall
               Population, by Schooling Class and by Ability Class for Several Rates of
                                 Discount Assuming Retirement Age N(S)


                 Discount                                      Standard    Coeff.            Skew—       Cmi
                    Rate          Mean      Median             Deviation   of Var.           ness        Coeff.



                                202,736   196,074              18,243        .09             1.95         .04
Overall              .03
                                          153,159              11,451        .07             2.77         .03
                     .04        156,950
                     .05                  121,659               6,925        .06             3.41         .02
                                123,653
                                           98,590               4,803        .05             3.16         .02
                     .06         98,887
                     .07                   81,106               4,345        .05             1.60         .03
                                 80,423

By Schooling
                                                                7,587        .04             2.48         .02
  12                 .03        193,662   192,990
  13—15                         200,873   197,066               9,342        .05             1.83         .02
  16                            218,248   214,880              16,304        .07             1.20         .04
  17+                           238,737   237,086              20,755        .09               .49        .05

  12                 .04        149,053   147,672               5,757        .04             13.14        .01
  13—15                         152,212   151,192               3,996        .03              2.36        .01
  16                            159,845   156,777               8,313        .05              1.76        .03.
                                          174,776              16,261        .09              1.75        .05
  17+                           178,992
  12                 .05        122,403   121,705               4,080        .03             7.25         .01
                                          119,928               4,223        .03             2.35         .02
  13—15                         121,573
  16                            125,920   123,430               8,553        .07         .
                                                                                              1.36        .04
                                          131,086              12,532.       .09              1.26        .05
  17+                           132,369
  12                 .06         99,705    99,202               3,171        .03             10.23        .01
  13—15                          96,699    95,623               2,991        .03              2.23        .01
  16                             97,682    95,605               6,412        .07              1.34        .03
  17+                           100,464    99,086               9,267.       .09              1.18        .05

  12                 .07         82,658    82,393               2,626        .03             12.74        .01
  13—15                          78,010    77,386               2,067        .03              2.52        .01
                                           75,605               4,695        .06              1.54        .03
  16                             77,032
  17+                            77,193    76,454          -
                                                                6,969        .09              1.10
                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                          .05

By Ability

   .75               .03        189,966   186,817               8,337        .04              5.62        .02
   .75—1.00                     195,552   193,638               9,006.       .05              2.00        .02
  1.00—1.25                     207,867   201,755              15,046        .07              1.55        .04
      >1.25                 .
                                234,869   230,440              23,534        .10               .67        .06


  (.75               .04        149,053   147.672               5,757        .04             13.14        .01
   .75—1.00                     152,212   151,192               3,996        .03              2.36        .01
                                159,845   156,777               8,313        .05              1.76        .03
  1.00—1.25
                                          174,776              16.261        .09              1.75        .05
       '1.25                    178,992

                                          119,037               4,914        .04             14.82        .01
   .75                .05       119,297
                                          120,356               1,797        .01               .79        .01
   75—1.00                      120,541
                                          124,176               4,106        .03              1.70        .02
  1.00-1.25                     125,321
                                                               10,018         .07             2.08        .04
      >1.25                     137,616   134,300

                      .06                   97,183              5,122         .05             8.75        .02
  <.75                           96,849
                                                                2,457         .03             —.76        .01
   .75—1.00                      96,881     97,913
                                                                2,710         .03             —.03        .01
  1.00—1.25                      99,608     99,912
                                                                5,939         .06             2.57        .03
       >1.25                    107,891    106,278

                      .07        79,873     80,835              5,434.        .07             4.94        .03
   (.75
                                 79,214     80,615.              3,653        .05             —.84        .02
    .75—1.00                                                                         .




                                 80,553     82,073               3,202        .04             —.30        .02
   1.00—1.25
                                 85,822     85,776.
                                                       -
                                                                4,273.        .05             1.55        .03
        '1.25
                                     — 69 —




for   discount rates three through seven and retirement ages sixty—six and

seventy and a retirement age that is a function of schooling level. The

expected retirement ages as a function of schooling level, N(S), are taken

from Mincer (1973) and are reproduced in Table 9.

        The relative frequency distributions for discount rates three,

five, and seven per cent and retirement age sixty—six are presented

in Figures 7.

        The most striking result is that there is much less inequality in

mean human wealth than in mean earnings. Both the coefficient of vari-

ation and the Gini coefficient drop drastically. To the extent that

perfect capital markets for consumption are available to everyone the

human wealth variation is a more appropriate index of the variation in

expected economic well—being.

        The clearest result of a more detailed study of the effect of

schooling, ability, retirement age and the discount rate is that an

increased retirement age unambiguously raises mean human   wealth,   see

Figure 8, and an increased discount rate unambiguously lowers it, see

Figure 9.     It is interesting to note that a 1 per cent change in the

rate of discount, within the range three to seven, has a much larger

affect on mean human wealth than an increase of four years in retire-

ment age from sixty-six to seventy. As expected retirement age has an

increasingly smaller effect at higher discount rates but the rate of

discount has an increasingly greater effect for later retirement ages.
                            — 70 —




                                               .
                  TABLE 9

Estimated Average Retirement Age by Years of
         Schooling from Mincer (1973)



 Years of               Estimated Average
 Schooling               Retirement Age



      8                         65

     9—11                       66

      12                        67

    13—15                       67

      16                        68

      17+                       70




                                               .
                                                            — 72 —




                                                                                                                 .
9


                                                -;

.8




.7
                 1
.6                       -4




.5

                                                                         -
 4
                                                                             I

                                                                                        -
                                                      -                                 -



.3              --
                                            -
            -
                                       tH
        -
.2


.1-
        j            -
                                   I                                 -

                                                                                 -H

                                                                                  H-:
      H--

 o              .1            .2         .3           .4      .5             .6             .7   .8   .9   1.0

                                                     Fraction of Population



     Figure 7.b. (continued, page 2, lorenz curves for overall population)

     Note: R = .04 is coincident with R = .03, and R = .06 lies between R = .05
     and R = .07 (coincident with R = .05).
                                               — 73 —




Relative Frequency
.2



.1




 0



.2




.1




 0



.2




.1



 0




.2




.1



 0
     1                                                                            290
                                                                  Human Wealth (Xl03)


         Figure 7.c. (continued, page 3, by schooling, R = .03)
                                                    — 74 —




                                                                                                    .
                                                                      Fraction of Human Wealth
1.0
                     LI_EIJ1F11   I I




 .9                  Schooling

               12 Years                                                    tmt     -



                                                                           tttU 4lmi44
  8
                16   Years                                                 uWLU j 1JttI     UL--


                18 Years
 .7


 .6




                                                                                                    .
 .5


 .4


 .3




 .2


 .1


  0
      I.
      1   lJ    -

               .1         .2            .3     .4     .5     .6

                                             Fraction of Population
                                                                      .7      .8       .9     1.0



      Figure 7.d. (continued, page 4, lorenz curves by schooling, R = .03)

      Note: The curve for 14 years schooling lies between 12 years
      and 16 years.
                                                                                                    .
                                                                                             — 75 —




Relative         Frequency
                         •'                                                                                         ILIiIIllIiIIlliIIiI
                  1
            -
                 4-                                                                                                         Ability
            :1




  .2              :
                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                             < .75

  .l                  :       L4                                           J


                                                                                                I                        L1I[
                                                                                         1




                          LI
                                                                                                                         :
                      TrI:                                                                                                   .75   —   1.00
                                             4

                                                                                                      {

   ;
                                                           -
                                                                                                                         1.00      —   1.25

                                                                                                                                                     H


  0                   +-4-     1-j
                                   -
                                                                       -    -                                                            +f+4-
                 It                                    -           -           -                                                                 4-1
  .2 --l -tH+                                                                                                                                    II
                                                                                                                                                   F
                          -                                        -
        TT IHH                               T                                                                                                   -i—i


                                                                                                                             > 1.25
                                                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                                                         4-f
                                                           -
                              H1         F
        -             -                                -
                                                               t
                                                                       -           -                                                             F
  0     _}*                                                                                                 -+       -                   _



  180             190              200           210           220                     230          240   250            260    270    280      290
                                                                                                                            Human Wealth (X103)

       Figure 7.e. (continued, page 5, by ability, R = .03)
                                           — 76 —




                                                                                             .
                                                               Fraction of Huzran   Wealth
1.0



                    Ability                                                         i11-"
              <    .75
              .75 —      1.00                            Hf+fT-f
              1.00 — 1.25           liii IllliIIi_Ilitt±fTt±
                                                                                Ifl3U
      I;Ift   > 1.25
                                                                                IIE

 .6                                                                     Ifi1ff1 U4
 .5




 .4



 .3
                                1j
 .2



 .1

                  TJT    'j
                                                        .6         .7   .8      .T0
                                 Fraction of Population



      Figure 7f (continued, page 6, lorenz curves by ability, R = .03)


                                                                                             .
                                                      — 78 —




'.(
                                                                                            Fraction of Human Wealth
                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                  I
                     schooling                                                                                            mL
                                                                                                    I
                12   Years
                                                                                                                   ILi 4f
                                                                                                             -1-
                                                                                                -
.8
                16   Years
       1        18 Yars




 :'
.7      1
                                                                                                                                q




                                                                      &111T I
                                                                  - Vt
                                                  -                                                                         r
                                                                                                                      -
            I
                                         I
                                                              -
                     I




.2          I
                                 LI    LL4                    -                    --
      -                                                                            -L       :


                                             I
                                                                               -
                                                                                        1


                                                                           -                            L
                                       -J               ---           -f
                                                                                   -

 0              .1       .2       .3         .4          .5                .6               .7              .8       ..9        1.0
                                        Fraction of Population

      Figure    7.h. (continued, page 8, lorenz curves by schooling, R =                                             .05)
      Note: The curve for 14 years schooling is between those for 12 years
      and 16 years.

                                                                                                                                      .
                                            — 81 —
Relative Frequency
    .2

              -    Nftf1.
    .1
                  -flIlltt'                                18 Years School




                       N
                   ijJfttfft II                                                 L
                                                                                        4




                  49+j
     0

                                                               t
    .3




    .2

                                                           16 Years School

    .1




     0

          ff 4 tt4

    .2    1-li -

                                                           14 Years School
    .1


              r             i L1:
     0



    .5
              tttT                                         If

                                                                            H
                                                                                +
                   I                                                    t           I


                                                                       Er
    .4
                                                                                1 .1-
                                                           12 Years School
    .3



    .2
                                                           t
                        T                                          1


    .1



    0
         60            70
                            4J
                   in± ii:m :i
                                  80   90   100      110   120            130     140    150
                                                                       Human Wealth (X103)

         Figure 7.k. (continued, page 11, by schooling, R = .07)
                                    — 83 —




Relative Frequency




 .2




 .1




  0

 .2




 .1




 0

 .2



.1




 0

.2




.1



 0
      66     76      86     96      106      116   126       136    146    156
                                                         Human Wealth (X103)


      Figure l.xn.   (continued, page 13, by ability, R =   .07)
                                         — 85 —




Mean Human   Wealth   (X103)


210.
                                     -
                                             1
                                                              -   R.O3
190



170                                                               U
                                                                  R.04 ___
                                                                           H
150



130
                                                                  R.05

110            -

                                                                  R=.06
 90

                                                                   R.Q7
 70
             T64               6                                      ________
                                                        RET!REMNT AGE _______




             Figure   8.   Overall Mean Human Wealth as a function of
                           retirement age for several rates of discount.
                                                 — 86 —




                                                                                                            .
Mean Human Wealth Q1O)
                                                             it I H F—I—H—I Iii II H—FH—1-{-i—14-1—H—Ii-H
 210

                                                                           N- 70
 190
                                                                             N(s) —-—_____

                                                                           N—66       ______
 170 :      -I-




       -F-f
 150   -f

                  -L
 130



 110
       -±
        -I1
                  ,
                  II
                       -U

                       H
                                                                                                            .
 90



 70
                  .03            .04             .05             .06                       .07

                                                                                    Discount Rate




                   Figure 9,,   Overall Mean Human Wealth as a function of the
                                discount rate for retirement ages 66 and 70 and
                                retirement age as a function of schooling level, N(S).



                                                                                                            .
                                      — 87 -




        The effect of the discount rate on variation in human wealth is more

ambiguous and is intimately related to the effect of schooling       on   human

wealth.    It is important to note that due to the year of foregone earnings

and the short initial period of lower earnings associated with more school-

ing, increased schooling does not unambiguously increase predicted human

wealth or mean human wealth averaged over ability levels. Predicted

human wealth increases with increased schooling only if the discount rate

is below the internal rate of return) Figures 10 and 11 clearly illus-

trates this result for mean human wealth at various schooling levels.

The reversal occurs at approximately 5.75 per cent except that high school

graduates pass those with some college at approximately 4.5 per cent. The

effect of schooling declines as the discount rate increases up to the

crossover then has a negative effect on mean human wealth. Thus an in-

creased rate of discount decreases variation up to about 6 per cent at

which point   it causes the variation within ability groups, due to school-
ing, to increase. That is, at high discount rates schooling differences

cause variation but because of its increasing negative effect on human

wealth.

        The effect of increased ability is to unambiguously increase mean

human wealth as illustrated in Figures 12 and 13. The magnitude of the

effect of ability declines at higher discount rates since the returns to

higher ability come late in the life cycle.




      1More detailed comments on calculations of an   internal   rate of return
for   the NBER-Thorndike data based on both log equations and present value
equalization are presented in   Lillard   (1974).
                                            — 88 —




                                                                                            .
Mean   Human Wealth (X103)
 230                                                     ___________________________

 210                                                             Schooling
                                                             12 Years
           -
                                                             l4Years——-.—
 190
                                                             16 Years

 170                                                         18 Years——-—--


 150


 130
                                                 -
                                                                                            .
                       -                                                            -




  90                                                                    -



         HH                  -                       I




  70
               .03               .04       .05             .06                 .07
                                                                            Discount Rate


        Figure   10. Mean Human Wealth by schooling level as a function
                      of the rate of discount for retirement age 66.




                                                                                            .
                                                    — 89 —




Mean Human Wealth (X103)
    250

          N — 70
    230                       :
                                                                                                                  R              .03
          N—66
   210



   190



   170                                                                                                            R—.04


   150                                     !
                                                                                                              IilI 1W 1
                                                                                                                          -1—1—I-I--li


                                                                                                                  LI   I 11FFI II
                                                                                                                                     II
                                                                                                                  l I I I I I I I I
                                                                                                                            -1-nIL 1

   130                                                                                                            R—.05
                   —                                                 -
                                                                              -

                                                                                  -       -
                                                                                              IJJ III       11111       ITJFH I
                                                                                                       I      -             I 1—ti
                                                                                                                         - 1111
                                                                                                                       I I I I



                                                                                              -             1111-1-1-111-Il
   1 10                                                      -
                                                                 -
                                                                         -r           -
                                                                                                       I               i1JII1FI
                                                                                                  i_I_I_I_I_IJ_I_]_I_I_L_11  lit
                                                                                                   lI 111111 I I 1_LILII_Jil
                                                             -



                                                                                                     I li1 11      11 II III
                                                                                                                  R—.06
    90
                                                                                                                            -             j-..   .


                                    -                                                                             R—.07
    70                                                                                                                           -

                                                                                                                                                     di
              12                  14                 16                           18
                                        Schooling




           Figure 11 .     Mean human wealth as a function of schooling level
                           for several discount rate and retirement age combinations
                                         — 90 —




                                                                                  .
Mean Human Wealth (X103)
   230



   210



   190



  170



  150



  130                                                                             .
  110



   90



   70
            .03            .04            .05           .06           .07
                                                                  Discount Rate




          Figure 12. Mean human wealth by ability class as a function of
                      the rate of discount for retirement age 66.




                                                                                  .
                                              — 91 —




Mean Human Wealth (X103)
  250
                N70
  230           N—66                                                     R .03

                1-

  210



  190

                                                                         R=.04
  170




                                                       I
                                                                         R    05
  ::


  110                                                                     R .06


   90
                                                                          R.07

   70
                     1            2              3             4

                                       Ability




        Figure 13.       Mean human wealth as a function of ability class for
                         several discount rate and retirement age combinations.

        Note: The numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 represent ability classes. They have
        an order but no scale. Care should be taken in interpreting the figure.
        1   —    < .75
        2   —    .75 — 1.00
        3   —    1.00 — 1.25
        4   —    > 1.25
                                       — 92 —



      The human wealth distributions are corrected for error variation by

decomposing the error into purely random or transitory and persistent

components. A lower bound on the variance of human wealth is defined as

the variance of the present value of predicted earnings plus an error

component which is completely transitory and independent from period to

period. An upper bound is defined as the variance of the present value

of predicted earnings plus a completely persistent error component which

is constant over the life cycle but varies randomly over individuals

independently of the level of ability and schooling. Intermediate cases

can be considered as combinations of these when the transitory and per-

sistent variations are independent. The upper and lower bounds allow no

comparisons of inequality in human wealth versus earnings since human wealth

coefficient of variation lower bound lies below and the human wealth

coefficient of variation upper bound lies above the earnings coefficient

of variation. The answer lies in the "persistence" of the error over an

individual's lifetime. The standard deviation of the persistent component

is estimated and used to estimate standard deviation and coefficient of

variation for human wealth. Corresponding estimates are also made by

calculating the actual present value of the residuals for each individual.

      Consider the more general combination of these two variance components.


              Y.
               1
                    (a,   S, B) =   Y(a,   S., B.) +
                                            1    i.
                                                        6i + n.ia
where i indicates individual.

       The error components 6 and n             are   assumed independent of each other

and over i and are uncorrelated with a, S, and B; therefore "(O,a) and

 n" (0,     I) where I is the number of age points specified. We still

obtain

                   [Y(a, S, B))       Y(a, S, B)


and       E6(PV(S B)) = PV(S, B) —               .rN e ;(a,     S, B) da.
                                                a—S
                                               — 93   —




Consider   the variance for fixed values of schooling, that is for both
ability   and   schooling     fixed or simply within a schooling class.




        Var6
                (PV(S,B)] —
                              Var6( a—Sf 6eda + f
                                                           a—S


                                    N                      N
                         —
                              E6(a—S     6ecia        +         naeaca]2
                                                          a—S



                         =               6edaJ2 +
                               E6fl(as                     E6[f

                                             N                   N
                              + 2E6((     I      6eda) C I n erada)J
                                                             a
                                         a=S                    a—S


                                                                      N
                         =
                               a(e       - e)2/r2 + E(
                                                                   a—S
                                                                          fla512
Since   6 and n are   independent

                         =
                               cce       —
                                             e)2/r2 + a2(e2 — e2rS)/2r
since
                                   N                              N
                              E(a=S      'adaj2 2r a—S e_21ada.
Similarly,



    Var
       B,,    (PV(s))     Var (V(S,B)J + a2(e rS —
                             B                          e)2/r2
                                              2 —2rS   — e-2rN J/2r.
                                        +    a(e

However, when schooling varies as within ability classes or in the overall

distribution we must take an expected value with respect to the lower

limit of the present value integral.



      Var
          S,6,n
                  (PV(B)] = VarS (PV(S,B)J + a2(E (e2rS) —
                                                 S
                                                               2e E(e)   +   e2]/r2
                                         +
                                             a(E(e2XS)
                                                           —   e2]/2r.

The lower bound obtains when a = 0 and the upper bound obtains when a2 = 0
                                                                                      S
for a given total variation a + a2 from the estimated earning function.

The coefficients of the variance components are presented in Table 9 for

discount rates 3 through 7 percent and retirement ages sixty—six. The

upper and lower bounds on variance of human wealth overall and within

subgroups are presented in Table 10. The corresponding coefficients of

variation are presented in Table 11.




                                                                                      .
                                       — 95    —




                                     TABLE 9
          Error Variance Lower and Upper Bound Correction Factors
                          for Retirement Age 66
                                    (lower bound)
                                    (upper bound)

                                                   Discount Rate
                       .03             .04              .05            .06        .07


Overall, (ES(e2rS) -       e2]/2r and Esters - e]2/r2
                     12.7594          9.3207           7.1006         5.5911     4.5180
                    514.3049        341.5083         234.0726       165.1963   119.7322


                    -2rS-e-2rN0/2r     and (e
                                               -rS—e-rN         2
By schooling, Ce

  12                 13.9522         10.4229           8.1199         6.5346     5.3919
                    573.8171        387.8743         270.7686       194.6646   143.7127

  14                 12.2807          8.8479           6.6358         5.1359     4.0736
                    489.5750        321.1340         217.0589       150.8151   107.4442

  16                 10.7982          7.5058           5.4207         4.0356     3.0771
                    416.3503        265.1138         173.5719       116.6002    80.1921

  18                  9.4833          6.3622           4.4259         3.1701     2.3241
                    352.8105        218.1631         138.4082        89.9325    59.7336



By Ability, (ESIB(e2) —             e2)/2r
                       -2rS                  -rS      -rN      —2rN    2
                              ) -                           + e
       and
                 (ESIB(e            2E(e        ) e                 )/r


  <.75               13.2224          9.7462            7.4921        5.9515     4.8501
                    537:3420        359.3718          248.1428      176.4407   128.8384

   .75—1.00          12.9530          9.4981            7.2633        5.7404     4.6552
                    523.9226        348.9463          239.9150      169.8519   123.4912

  1.00—1.25          12.5895          9.1648            6.9576        5.4597     4.3971
                    505.8616        334.9714          228.9324      161.0955   116.4171

         >1.25       11.8130          8.4522            6.3029        4.8578     3.8432
                    467.2546        305.0703          205.4099      142.3217   101.2336
                                             - 96   —




         Lower and
                                             TABLE      10
                      Upper Bounds on the Standard Deviation of Human Wealth
                         and the Standard Deviation of the Mean                                    .
                                                              Discount Rate
                                   .03                  .04        .05           .06      .07

Mean
  Overall                       15,264              9,762       6,236         4,651     4,479.09

  By Schooling   12              7,262           5,501           3,850        3,078     2,562.40
                 14              8,932           6,152           4,525        2,960     1,961.16
                 16             15,669          11,277           8,480        6,226     4,662.79
                 18             20,058          15,646          11,740        8,851     6,651.07

  By Ability     <.75           7,085            5,565           5,184        5,438     5,744.34
                  .75—1.00      6,136            2,685           1,729        2,977     3,883.49
                 1.00—1.25     11,113            6,063           3,269        2,506     3,631.12
                      >1.25    19,376           13,006           8,120        5,135     3,922.32

Lower Bound                              .



  Overall                       26,456          20,890          17,284        15,041   13,616.00

  By Schooling   12
                 14
                               23,734
                               23,004
                                                20,290
                                                19,017
                                                                17,662
                                                                16,227
                                                                          15,767
                                                                          14,025
                                                                                       14,279.00
                                                                                       12,366.00
                                                                                                   S
                 16            25,311           20,046          16,440    13,655       11,591.00
                 18            27,374           21,855          17,314    13,941       11,370.00

  By Ability     <.75          23,110           19,688          17,351    15,728       14,508.00
                  .75—1.00     22,620           18,836          16,394    14,796       13,617.00
                 1.00—1.25     24,170           19,291          16,288    14,355       13,194.00
                      >1.25    28,421           21,874          17,222    14,288       12,491.00

Upper Bound
  Overall                      138,033         112,215          92,760    77,889       66,344.00

  By Schooling   12            145,089         119,264         99,615     84,457.      72,564.00
                 14            134,146         108,578         89,238     74,348       62,734.00
                 16            124,424          99,139         80,147     65,617       54,371.00
                 18            115,382          90,709         72,130     58,O46       47,224.00

  By Ability     <.75         140,404          114,811         95,432     80,537       68,903.00
                  .75—1.00    138,599          113,033         93,714     78,894       67,335.00
                 1.00—1.25    136,509          110,881         91,587     76,820       65,370.00




                                                                                                   .
                      >1.25   132,189          106,455         87,078     72,349       60,991.00


Note: The assumptions underlying these bounds are outlined in the text.
                                    — 97 —




                                  TABLE 11
       Coefficient of Variation for Mean, Lower Bound and     Upper Bound
                       for Human Wealth Distributions

                                                   Discount Rate

                                    .03      .04        .05        .06      .07



Mean

       Overall                      .08      .06        .05        .05      .06

       By Schooling 12              .04      .04        .03        .03      .03
                     14             .05      .04        .04        .03      .03
                     16             .07      .07        .07        .06      .06
                     18             .09      .09        .09        .09      .09

       By Ability    <.75           .04      .04        .04        .06      .07
                      .75—1.00      .03      .02        .01        .03      .05
                     1.00—1.25      .05      .04        .03        .03      .05
                          >1.25     .09      .07        .06        .05      .05


Lower Bound

       Overall                      .13      .14        .14        .15      .17

       By Schooling 12              .12      .13        .15        .16      .17
                     14             .12      .12        .13        .15      .16
                     16             .12      .12        .13        .14      .15
                     18             .12      .13        .14        .14      .15

       By Ability    <.75           .12      .13        .15        .16      .18
                      .75—1.00      .12      .13        .14        .15      .17
                     1.00—1.25      .12      .12        .13        .15      .16
                          >1.25     .12      .13        .13        .13      .15


Upper Bound

       Overall                      .70      .73        .76        .80      .83

       By Schooling 12              .76      .79        .82        .85      .88
                     14             .68      .71        .74        .77      .80
                     16             .59      .62        .65        .68      .72
                     18             .52      .54        .57        .60      .63

       By Ability     .75           .75      .78        .80        .84      .87
                      .75—1.00      .72      .76        .79        .82      .85
                     1.00—1.25      .67      .71        .74        .78      .82
                          1.25      .58      .61        .65        .68      .72
                                   — 97a —



 Both the standard deviation and the coefficient of variation
                                                              differ widely
 between the lower and upper bound. The inequality in mean or expected
                                                                                      S
 human wealth is much less than either the lower bound or upper bound.

 This indicates that the error component is very important in determining

 human wealth inequality and indicates that the persistent component is

very important in determining inequality in human wealth. We can note,

however, that inequality in mean values before correcting for error

variation is much less for human wealth than for earnings———in the overall

values the difference being 38 percent for earnings as opposed to about 5 or

6 percent for human wealth. When the correction for error variation is made

the lower and upper bound on the coefficient variation for human wealth

brackets the coefficient of variation for either the predicted distribution

of earnings or the actual coefficient of variation observed for earnings.

It is necessary, then, to estimate the variance of the persistent component

in revising our estimate of the standard deviation and coefficient of

variation of human wealth.

      The standard deviation of the persistent component of the error term

is estimated in the following way. For each individual, of the roughly-

5,000 in the sample, the persistent component is measured as that value of

a constant error, deviation from the predicted profile, such that the present value

of deviations from it, the purely transitory part, is zero, i.e.,


                             =    ()_ra

The standard deviation of the error term is $6,048 and the standard deviation

of the persistent component, a6, is roughly $4,000 depending on the discount

rate. The corresponding estimates of the standard deviation and coefficient

of variation of human wealth based upon this estimate of the standard

deviation of the persistent component are presented in Table 12 under
                                                                                      S
                                          — 97b —


                                   TABLE 12
                Estimated Standard Deviation of Human Wealth
                        and Coefficient of Variation



                                        Discount Rate
                         .03            .04          .05      .06      .07

               STANDARD DEVIATION OF ThE PERSISTENT COMPONENT
                        4102           3943         3799     3671     3559

                STANDARD DEVIATION OF HUMAN WEALTh
       Directly Estimated from Present Value of Sample Residuals
Overall             98,760         78,292      62,640      50,612   41,319

          Estimated for 1960 Census Groups Using
Overall             95,617         74,847       59,795     48,764   40,562

By Schooling
  12                99,938         79,254       64,061     52,772   44,233
  14                92,539         72,234       57,455     46,483   38,245
  16                8,4l4          66,391       51,941     41,279   33,339
  18                80,800         61,410       47,266     36,933   29,270

By Ability
  <.75              96,730         76,318       61,443     50,456   42,208
   .75—1.00         95,461         75,056       60,220     49,309   41,124
  1.00—1.25         94,274         73,747       58,906     48,003   39,918
      >1.25         92,056         71,351       56,312     45,358   37,283

                         COEFFICIENT OF VARIATION
          From Direct Estimate
Overall                  .49            .50          .51      .51      .51

          From Estimate Using
Overall                  .47            .48          .48      .49      .50

By Schooling
  12                     .52            .53          .52      .53      .54
  14                     .46            .47          .47      .48      .49
  16                     .40            .42          .41      .42      .43
  18                     .34            .34          .36      .37      .38

By Ability
  <.75                   .51            .51          .52      .52      .53
   .75—1.00              .49            .49          .50      .51      .52
  1.00—1.25              .45            .46          .47      .48      .50
       >1.25             .39            .40          .41      .42      .43



Note: a             =          6,048
           p
                                 — 97 —


the heading "Estimated for 1960 Census Groups Using as."

      Corresponding estimates are made by calculating the actual present

value of the residuals in the sample and inflating them to the equivalent

of a working life of observations1, and taking the standard deviation.

These are presented as the "directly estimated" values also presented

in Table 12. These estimates correspond quite closely to those of the

previous procedure and are larger probably because of the more schooling

present in the Thorndike sample than the 1960 census of population.

      The estimated inequality in human wealth is slightly less than the

inequality in the predicted earnings distributions corrected for unexplained

variations, the coefficient of variation being 60 percent for earnings and

50 percent for human wealth. The actual distribution of earnings are even

more unequally distributed with the coefficient of variation of 83 percent.

It should be noted that the coefficient of variation for the actual dis-

tribution of earnings is larger than even the upper bound of the coefficient

of variation for the human wealth distributions.

      These crude estimates seem to indicate that human wealth is more equally

distributed over individuals than is earnings, but that the variation in

these measures due to other factors than schooling and ability are quite

important and that much further analysis is necessary to really pinpoint

sources of human wealth inequality. This analysis is meant to be

suggestive of the procedure by which more precise implications can be

obtained. This general type of analysis can be carried out using any




       maximum of five and an average of 3.2 age—earnings points are observed.
These are then inflated by the factor (N—S)/No. of Points. These estimates
are slightly different from the others in that the underlying schooling dis-
tribution is that of the Thorndike sample rather than the 1960 Census population.
                                — 91d —




earnings function describing age earnings profiles, or alternatively
experience earnings profiles, as a function of characteristics for

which data is available on the joint distribution of those characteristics.
                                     - 98   -




                                 REFERENCES




Becker,   G., 1964. Human Capital. Columbia University Press, New York.

Becker, G., 1967. Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income.
   W.S. Woytinsky Lecture No. 1, Departhent of Economics, Institute of
   Public Administration, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Becker, G. and B.R. Chiswick., 1966. Education and the Distribution of
   Earnings. American Economic Review LVI (2) :358—369.

Ben-Porath, Y., 1967. The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle
   of Earnings. Journal of Political Economy 75 (4):352-365.

Ghez, G. and G.S. Becker, 1974. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over
   the Life Cycle, NBER book forthcoming.

Haley, W.J.., 1973. Human Capital: The Choice Between Investment and Income,
   American Economic Review, December.

Heckman, J.J., 1974. "Estimates of a Human Capital Production Function
   Embedded in a Life Cycle Model of Labor Supply," in Economic Decision
   Making in a Life Cycle Context, with L.A. Lillard and J.P. Smith,
   NBER book (in Staff review).

Ishikawa, T., 1973. A Simple Jevonian Model of Educational Investment
   Revisited, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Discussion Paper 289,
   April.

Johnson, T., 1970. Returns from Investment in Human Capital. American
   Economic Review LX (4):546-560.

Levhari, D. and Y. Weiss, 1972. The Effect of Risk on Investment in Human
   Capital, Foerder Institute for Economic Research, Tel Aviv University,
   October.

Lillard, L.A., 1973. "Human Capital Life Cycle of Earnings Models: A
   Specific Solution and Estimation," in Economic Decision Making in a Life
   Cycle Context with J.P. Smith and J. Heckman, NBER book (in Staff review).

Lillard, L.A., 1973. From Age-Earnings Profiles to the Distribution of
   Earnings and Human Wealth, NBER Working Paper No. 9, September.
                                      - 99   —




                            REFERENcES (continued)



Mincer, J., 1970. "The Distribution of Labor Incomes: A Survey with
   Special Reference to the Human Capital Approach," Journal of Economic
   Literature VIII (1) :1-26.

Mincer, J., 1973. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, NBER book,
   forthcoming.

Morgan, 3., 1962. "The Anatomy of Income Distributions," Review of
   Economics and Statistics, August.

Razin, A., 1973. On Investment in Human Capital Under Uncertainty,
   University of Minnesota, mimeograph, March

Rosen, S., 1973. Income Generating Functions and Capital. Accumulation,
   Harvard Institute of Economic Research, Discussion Paper 306, June.

Rosen, S., 1972. Measuring the Obsolesence of Knowledge, University of
   Rochester, mimeograph working paper, June.

Schultz, T.W., 1971. Investment in Human Capital: The Role of Education
   and of Research, Free Press, New York.

Smith, James P., 1973. "Life Cycle Allocation of Time in a Family Context,"
   in Economic Decision Making in a Life Cycle Context, with L.A. Lillard
   and 3. Heckman, NBER book (in Staff review).

Stafford, F.P. and P.E. Stephan, 1973. Labor, Leisure, and Training Over
   the Life Cycle, Working Paper, Georgia State University, November.

Stafford, F. P. and Cohen, 1973. A Life Cycle Model of the Household's
   Time Allocation, Working Paper, University of Michigan, June.

Taubman, P. and T. Wales, 1972. Mental Ability and Higher Educational
   Attainment in the Twentieth Century, Carnegie Commission Technical
   Report.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1963. Census of Population: 1960. Final
   Report PC(2)—5A. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

Welch, F., 1970. "The NBER Approach to Human Resource Problems," NBER
   monograph.
