                     NBER Workinq Paper Series

                            No. 48, 1974




PROTECTION PND COMPETITIVENESS IN EGYPTIAN AGRICTJLTUPE P1ND INDUSTRY

                                 by

                   Bent Hansen and Karim Nashashibi




                               Contents


  I. Definitions

 II. Agriculture, ERPs and DRCs

III. Agriculture, Estimates of Acreage Response FunctionS

 IV. Industry, EPPs and DRCs

  V.   Industry, International Comparisons
       Cement
       Phosphate Fertilizers
       Nitrogenous Fertilizers
       Rubber Tires
       Paper
       Conclusions
Apoendix
                                          TABLES




I.         Cement: Cost Coefficients, Labor Productivity and Capital Productivity
             in Four Countries
II.        Cost Coitonents in Superphosphate Production
III.       Comparative Costs of Nitroaen Fertilizer Production in India and Egypt
            in 1964—65
IV.        Costs and Other Characteristics of Rubber Tire Production
V.         Labor Productivity in Integrated Paper and Pulp Mills


     3..   Effective Rates of Protection (EPP) and Domestic Resource Costs (DRC)
             forMajor Field Crops, 1961, 1963, and 1964
     2 .  Major Field Crops: Output, Value Added, and Returns to Capital and
            Management, 1961 (Domestic and International Prices)
     3.   Major Field Crops: Output, Value Added, and Returns to Capital and
            Management, 1963 (Domestic and International Prices)
     4.   Major Field Crops: Output, Value Added, and Returns to Capital and
            Management, 1964 (Domestic and International Prices)
     5..  Major Field Crops: Costs of Traded and Nontraded Produced Inputs (Domestic
            and International Prices) and of Primary Inputs (Actual and Imputed
            Market Prices), 1961
     6.   Ma-icr Field Crops: Costs of Traded and Nontraded Produced Inputs (Domestic
            and International Prices) and of Primary Inputs (Actual and Imputed
            Market Prices), 1963
     7.   Major Field Crops: Costs of Traded and Nontraded Produced Inputs (Domestic
            and International Prices) and of Primary Inputs (Actual and Imputed
            Market Prices), 1964
     .8.  Calculation of DRC per U.S. $, 1961
     9.   Calculation of DRC per U.S. $, 1963
     10. Calculation of DRC per U.S. $, 1964
     11. Crop Areas, 1913—1969
     12. Crop Yields per 100 Feddan, 1913—1960
     13. Ex-Farm Prices of Crops, 1913—1960
     14.   Labor and Water Input, 1912-1968
     15.  Crop Yields, M'T/Feddan, 1961-69
     16. Ex—Farm Domestic Prices of Crops, 1960—1969
     17. International Prices of Crops, 1961—69
     18. Cotton Textile Industry, 1956-70: Costs and Revenues at Current Domestic
            and International Prices
     19. Domestic and International Unit Values of Cotton Yarn., Fabrics, and Lint,
            1956—70
     20. Sugar Industry: Costs and Revenues at Current Domestic and International
            Prices
     2].. Cement Industry: Revenues   and Costs at Current Domestic Prices
                              TABLES (cont'd.)




22. Cement Industry: Revenues and Costs at International Prices
23. Phosphate Fertilizers: Value and Cost of Production at Current Domestic
       Prices
24. Nitrogenous Fertilizers: Revenues and Costs at Current Domestic Prices
25. Fertilizer Industry: Costs arid Revenues at Current International Prices
26. Tire Industry: Revenues and Costs at Current Domestic Prices
27. Paper Industry; Costs and Revenues at Domestic and International Prices,
       1962—63
28.  Steel Industry: Revenues and Costs of the Heiwan Plant at Domestic and
       and International Prices, 1964—65
29. Automobile Industry: Costs and Revenues at Domestic and International
      Prices, 1963—64
                        PRCI'ECTION AND CONPETITIVENESS IN
                        EGYPTIAN AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRY

                                        by
                        Bent Hansen and Karim Nashashibi*


      This paper contains the basic statistical material upon which Effective
Rates    of Protection (ERPs), Domestic Resource Costs (DRCs), and crop acreage

responses    were calculated by the authors for their volume on Egypt      in   the

NBER project Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development. This material,

which includes some comparisons of Egyptian costs of production with those of

other countries for a number of conimodities, is too extensive for that volume,

in which interest is focused on the end results of the calculations. The

underlying data, however, are     not   easily accessible: some of them took us a

long time to gather, and readers might want to work on the data themselves
for further research in this field. We also felt that readers should be in
a position to evaluate our calculations.
         In agriculture it was possible to estimate EPPs and DRCs for fourteen
crops in 1961 and 1963, and for ten crops in 1964. 1962 had to be left out
because the official exchange rate changed in the middle of the agricultural
year, and for several crops it was uncertain which rate should be applied in
converting Egyptian pounds to U.s. dollars, or vice versa. In manufacturing,
major industries were studies for as many years as possible between 1954 and
1970, but for some industries data were available only for one single year.
In all cases our choice of coverage (crops and industries as         well as years)

was   dictated by the availability of data.




*   We   thank   Khairy Tourk for computational and   statistical   assistance.
                                        —2—




I. DEFINITIONS

       The effective rate of protection (EPP) is defined as


             DVAom -    DVAt
                               xlOO
                     DVAt
                       1


where DVA stands for domestic value added, including nontraded produced

inputs. DVA is thus equal to total value of output minus produced traded

inputs, all in terms of domestic currency. Dom indicates estimate at domestic

prices, mt      at   international prices (in domestic currency), while i denotes

crop or industry.

       Domestic   resource costs, or, DRC, are defined as the sum of labor costs,

rental of land, and       "normal" gross returns to capital, plus the   value of

nontraded produced inputs minus nontraded outputs, all expressed in domestic

currency. DRC per U.S. dollar then follows directly through division by

dollar value of traded output minus traded inputs, at international prices

in terms of U.S. dollars.



II. AGRICULTURE, EP.Ps, AND DRCs

       The data used in calculating the ERPs arid DRCs are reproduced in the

Appendix, Tables 2A-2C and 3A—3C. The calculations of the DRCs are presented

in Tables 4A—4C. The results are summarized in Appendix Table 1.

       For   output,   acreaqes, yields, and domestic prices, data were obtained

from   publications of the Ministry of Agriculture. These (for outputs, acreages,
and   yields) are known to be quite reliable and of satisfactory quality for

our purpose. Domestic prices seem to be ex—farm; thus, the cotton price is for
                                       —3—




unginned     cotton (cotton seeds with lint). Output of by—products such as straw
and stalks is included; for certain crops (wheat, in particular) this changes
the picture substantially. In the case of peanuts1 and chick—peas, straw was
not   included for 1961; so that year the output values for these crops are

somewhat too low for that year.

        In   estimating output values at international prices we encountered some
difficulties.       As far as possible exuort prices f.o.b. or import prices c.i.f.

in   domestic currency were obtained from Egyptian trade statistics. In some
cases    (cottonseed, refined sugar) international prices in terms of U.S. dol-

lars, obtained from FAQ publications,        had to be   used; they were   then converted
to   domestic currency via the official exchange rate. Heterogeneity of com-

modities gave rise to difficulties. Thus, Egyptian cotton in 1961 had 9

varieties with 13 grades, each with its own price; some varieties and grades

were not exported (or imported) and      thus had   no observable international price.

We   had to rely here on the Egyptian Cotton Commission' s published prices for
exports, which may not include all handling costs in Egypt and thus fall short
of export price f.o.b. For nonexported varieties, prices were imputed on
the basis of the export price for comarab1e varieties. Weighted averages
were then calculated. Some agricultural outputs had been both exported and
imported, and typically the export price f.o.b. was higher than the import
price c.i.f. In some cases this was due to exports of superior qualities

       'Note a problem of interpretation here. In the official Egyptian publi-
cations the word ful soudani is used; its meaning in colloquial Arabic is
invariably peanuts. The official translation into French is arachide, which
in colloquial French can mean both peanuts and groundnuts, but botanically
means groundnuts. The offical translation into English is groundnuts. We
have assumed that the item included peanuts only; but if groundnuts are meant,
or an aggregate of the two, our calculations for this item on the basis of
international prices may not be correct.
                                      —4—




and imports of inferior qualities; but it may also be a question of seasonal

price differences. The authors proceeded on the premise that commodities

actually exported should be evaluated at export prices f.o.b. and the rest at

c.i.f. or other international prices. Since domestic prices were apparently

ex-farm, estimates at international prices somehow had to take into account

domestic trade and transport margins. On the basis of average prices for

cotton   at Alexandria and at ginning xn.ills, it was calculated that trade and
transport margins were about 10 per cent of the output value for cotton, and
this margin was applied to all crops;2 the actual margin, however, may differ
substantially from crop to crop. It was included in domestic resource costs
among the nontradable produced inputs (see below).

     The cost of estimates are based on the   Ministry   of Agriculture's calcu-

lations of costs per feddan for individual crops for the years 1961 to 1964.

The Ministry's calculations are based on extensive yearly surveys of actual

costs, taking into consideration farm size, location, composition of produc-

tion, etcetera. Economists who have been given the opportunity to scrutinize

the surveys3 consider them representative and reliable. Their main deficiency

is that they classify costs in items that are not always clearly defined (at

least in the available sources), and that the published classification is not

fully appropriate for our purpose. (For the years before 1961 and after 1964

the classification is by agricultural operation —— and thus useless from our

particular point of view.) Our breakdown of costs on tradables and nontradables


         Hansen, "Egyptian Cotton: The Margin between Ex-Farm Prices and
Alexandria Spot Prices," unpublished paper, March 4, 1972; E.R.J. Owen (in
Cotton and the Egyptian Economy, 1820-1914, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1969, p.
229) reports information from the time of World War I that points to a margin
between 9 and 16 per cent. But a margin of 25 per cent is also mentioned.
These margins do not include interest on loans extended by middlemen.
     3A.M. Mohieddin, unpublished thesis, London, 1966.
                                        -.5—




is for that reason somewhat dubious. Possible errors at this point are fortu-
nately too small to affect the estimates of either the     ERPs or DRCs seriously.

There is no breakdown of costs on quantities and prices of inputs. The cost
estimates seem to be at "delivered at farm" prices.
        In estimating costs of produced inputs "at international prices," non—
tradables were singled out and      takenat their value at domestic prices. Trad-
ables   were divided into three groups -— seeds, chemical fertilizers, and the

item    "irrigation," which was identified with fuel for pumps. Seed costs were
adjusted    in proportion to the ratio   between domestic and   international prices

for grain of the crop in question; for cane, the domestic price was used.

chemical    fertilizer   costs were adjusted on the basis of the ratio of domestic

prices to (a) import prices c.i.f. for nitrates and (b) export prices f.o.b.

for   phosphates, respectively. "Irrigation" costs were adjusted on the basis
of   the ratio between domestic fuel prices and fuel prices f.o.b. Kuwait. For

costs in sugar processing, see below.

        Concerningcosts for inputs of primary factors, labor input was evaluated
by   the Ministry at going market wages for rural laborers, while land rentals were at
the official maximum rents. There is no official estimate of capital costs,
presumabiy because they are fixed costs in relation to individual crops and
difficult   to   distribute by crop. Oniy private costs are included in the of-

ficial estimates.

        Labor costs were taken directly from the ministry's estimates and are

therefore at going market wages. The estimates of land rentals were obtained

by   adjusting upward the ministry's estimates of official maximum rentals in
proportion to the increase in total output value of agriculture from 1949 to
the year' in question. The official maximum rentals are based on assessments
                                          —6—




 for tax purposes in 1949 and should, in principle, be equal to market rentals
 that year. It was then further assumed that free market rentals would be pro-
portional to total output value for all crops (Cobb-Douglas, at given input of
 labor and     land);   rentals per feddan per crop differ as between crops, but the
difference seems mainly to reflect the length of the growing period for the
various crops.
        Normal gross returns to capital were assuied to be E 12 per cultivated
feddan per year in 1961, which would amount to about E 70 million for agri—
culture as a whole. For 1963 the figure was increased by 20 per cent, and
for    1964, by 32 per cent.
        We   were led to the figure of E 12 by the following considerations. To

indicate possible orders of maqnitude for interest and depreciation costs, we

assumed the (private) capital-value added ratio in agriculture to be one. No

reliable estimates of the agricultural capital—output ratio exist. Capital

in agriculture consists mainly of the irrigation and drainage system (largely

public) and the animals. The capital sunk into irrigation and drainage is,

however, hardly distinguishable from land, and part of interest on capital is

thus included in the cateqory "rent of land." But the value of the animals

alone    may be of the same order of magnitude as that of agricultural output
value.       Thus, at 10 per cent interest, total interest costs in 1960 should

have amounted to about E 40 million.

       Depreciation relating to replacement of animals, not included in output

and value added, can be disregarded. There is some private machinery (pumps,

motors, tractors), and maintenance and depreciation on such capital amounted

to iE 3.9 million in l965. Interest on capital and depreciation         should thus

       4B. Hansen and K. Nashashibi, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic
ment, Vol. IV: Egypt, Chapter 6.
                                      —7—




amount   to   about E 45 million; including public     costs,   we may reach about

LE 60 million per year.5 Part of this amount       should,      however, be considered

as costs in animal production. But we might, on the other hand,            add interest

on   the value of "goods in process" —— that    is, crops growing     in the fields.
With two crops per year, the (discounted) value of the growing crops should
at   any time   be about E 200 million.     Interest   on that amount   means another
.E 20 million —— hence the figure of E 70 million "normal" capital costs,
which is probably on the high side, unless an interest rate of 10 per cent             is

much   below the "normal" rate. With a cultivated area of about 6 million feddan,
the "normal" capital costs thus amount to about LE 12 per cultivated feddan
per year.
     "Normal" capital costs per crop are calculated in proportion to the
time a   crop occupies the land; if it    is six months,    "normal" capital costs

would   be LE 6 per feddan for this crop. For capital        costs in sugar processing,

see    ppendix, Table 13 C.
       We emphasize, finally, that all our estimates are averages for agriculture
as a whole. It was not possible to break down the calculations by region or
farm size, or to study the production margin, where relationships may differ
completely from the averages.     For sugar cane, special estimates were made,

however, to allow for regional differences.6



III. AGRICULTURE: ESTIMATES OF ACREAGE RESPONSE FUNCTIONS

       Appendix   A of our volume on Egypt contains the results of the statistical
estimates of acreage response functions for major Egyptian           crops, 1913   to 1961.

       5.
       6lbid., chapter 8.
                                          —8--




 The data upon which these estimates are based appear in the appendix Tables

 5 to 12 below. Sources and explanations are given in footnotes to the indi-

vidual     tables.


IV.   INDUSTRY: EPPs ND DRCs

      The data used in calculating the EPPs and DRCs for the ten industries

selected in this study are listed in Tables 13A—13K. The results are shown

in Table 13.

      We had no single consistent systematic source of data at our disposal.

A highly disaggregated input-output table could have filled this requirement;7

such a table was not available, however. Instead, we had to use data derived

from industrial surveys conducted either at the industry level        or at the
single     firm level.

      1.     The industry surveys were   conducted   by the Central Agency for

General Mobilization and Statistics (CAGMS) through questionnaires and stir—

vey teams in an      attempt   to study production and cost developments. The term

"industxv is loosely defined, but usually encompasses large firms (fifty

workers and over) in a given industrial activity, such as cement or phosphate

fertilizers.     These surveys present detailed breakdowns of all inputs used,
including spare parts, as well as accounts of inventories, indirect taxes,
subsidies, and profits. They do not, however, provide any details on actual
capital    replacement, financial structure, or relationships with the Ministry

of Industry, particularly with respect to exports, imports of inputs,        and
foreign    exchange flows. This is the source we used for cotton spinning and

      7Since relatively accurate DRC calculations require the identification
of virtually all produced inputs (in terms of quantity and value), it is
doubtful whether any standard national input-output table would really suf-
fice for the purpose at hand.
                                        —9—




weaving, sugar, cement, phosphate fertilizers, nitrogenous fertilizers, and

automobiles.
       The advantage of the industrywide approach is, of course, that we are

not restricted to the conditions of a single plant but obtain an average

measure of efficiency and competitiveness. Moreover, data compiled at vari-

ous points   in time for the same    industry bring   in the effects of "embodied"
technological   change accompanying the addition of new plants. The auestion
of how resources have been utilized on the averagn in an industry is inter-
esting in itself. On the other hand, performance in the most efficient units
should also be considered in an appraisal of profitability in import substi-
tution and   exports.   When the   industry consists of   a   few modern firms   (as

in    the case of cement and fertilizers), average and top efficiency may not

differ   much and our DRC computations would underestimate the performance of
the   most efficient units   to   only a minor extent. But when the sources aggre-
gate a large number of firms (as in the case of cotton soinning and weaving),
the difference between the average and the top may be considerable. Indeed,
the statistics for the cotton textiles industry lump together the large,
modern plants of Mehalla el Kobra and the small firms         with   antiquated equip-
ment. Thus, in interpreting our results for the cotton textiles industry
one should bear in mind that they may significantly underrate the profita-
bility and competitiveness of the modern integrated spinning and weaving units.
       Generally, it could be said that the more homogeneous the output and the
fewer the firms included in the survey, the more reliable the data. Thus,
it is difficult to assign international prices to a heterogeneous output. A
nturber of industries (pharmaceuticals, metal products, tobacco) had to be
left out from our study for this reason. From comparisons with other sources
                                         —10—




(e.g., Yearbook, Federation of Industries), we found the CAGMS data source

to be fairly reliable, particularly for industries with a relatively simple

structure of outputs and inputs.

        2.    A second type of source was used for the evaluation of the rubber
tires plant         (Transport and Engineering Company), the Helwan Steel plant, and

the paper factory (RAKTA). It consists of unpublished papers

from a       series of courses on industrial development given by    the Institute of

National Planning, Cairo, which frequently required participants to present

an    analysis   of the performance of specific industrial firms.      These papers
represent a valuable source of information and are available in the library
of the Institute. Their main drawback is that cost categories are not stan—
dardized      and     are subject to varying interpretation.
                    hence

       In our tabulations ex—factory unit values were used in lieu of published
domestic      prices, since the latter usually include transport and    handling
margins.8       Whenever possible, we attempted to get equivalent international

prices on a c.i.f. basis at        Egyptian ports. Such prices were obtained either
from   the Egyptian Trading Organization, which collects quotations in foreicn

currencies directly from foreign exporters for a wide variety of products,

or, in the case of easily identifiable conmiodities, from trade statistics.

In   some cases (such as steel), we used f.o.b. export prices published by the
United Nations, OECD, and other international organizations and added freight
margins obtained from freight conferences to obtain prices on a c.i.f. Alex-
andria basis. For a number of manufactured traded inputs, international prices
were obtained by reducing the domestic unit value by the appropriate tariff

       81fl some     cases, the ex—factory   prices may not have been the market clear-
ing   prices. But shortages were usually temporary and could not be taken into
account.
                                      —11—




and the so—called statistical tax, which in reality is an import surcharge
levied on most goods. In the case of export industries (textiles), we used
export prices c.i.f. European ports as well as the f.o.b. export prices.
        Nontraded goods   were evaluated at their actual domestic prices, but in

the case of electricity produced with fuel oil, a reduction was made cor-

responding to the substantial difference between domestic          and c.i.f.   prices

of   fuel oil.
        Joint   products were included as much   as   possible in the estimates of

DRCs,    and in   some cases (e.g., molasses in the sugar industry) this procedure

improvedprofitability significantly. Some industries (e.g., cement) enjoyed
revenues from sales of special services (transportation) which had to be in-
cluded since their costs were not distinguishable in the input breakdown.
Where an industry operated at less than full capacity, we computed DRCs at
full capacity utilization (usually defined as 90 per cent utilization) by a
linear extrapolation      of outputs, produced inputs, and, in most cases, labor.

Profitability was assumed to increase only through better utilization of

capital, a conservative assumption that tends to underestimate the overall

benefits    of higher-capacity utilization.
        Capital   is usually evaluated at historical costs minus     actual   deprecia-

tion charges. This method did       not   pose serious problems in cases where the

plant's construction was of recent origin (tires, paper, steel, automobiles)

but may have led to underestimates of        "normal" returns to capital in the case
of   cement, fertilizer, and textile plants, which were constructed or recon-

structed in the late 1940s. In the sugar industry, where much of the equip-

ment was of a pre—Worid War II vintage, capital was estimated at replacement

cost.
                                       —12—




       "Normal"   returns to capital (before taxes) were assumed to be 10 per cent.
Our basis for this assumption is the average return of 143 joint stock corn—

panies for 1958 and 1959 -— 10 per cent and 11 per cent, respectively.9 Since

depreciation allowances were computed on the historical costs of assets, the

rates of return in 1958 and 1959 may have been somewhat lower. However,

investments were much higher in the first half of the 1960s than in the pre-

ceding period     and capital was scarcer. On the other hand, many investments
were   financed from Communist countries at low interest rates, and some foreiqn

funds were directed to specific projects (such as the High Dam and the current

steel expansion). In such cases, it is the actual interest rate that is rele-

vant to evaluating profitability of a given industry, provided the capital

equipment supplied by the lender is priced at c.i.f. quotations from the

cheapest alternative sources. Any      price   differential is in effect an interest

charge, and   has   to be seen as part of the overall bilateral trade agreement

with the country in question)° We do not have sufficient information on the

actual terms of financing for most     of   the industries included in this study.

Hence we propose to experiment with two additional rates of return, 5 per

cent and 15 per cent, which should provide us with a range that surely must

have   included the "natural" rate of return within it.
       Returns to labor only pose problems insofar as average wages were raised
above labor's social opportunity cost by the nationalizations, the statutory
minimum wages and    the   employment drive of 1961. Empirically, it is not

feasible to correct for such     discrepancies, particularly because these may

       9Economic Bulletin, National Bank of Egypt, 1960, t,.

     10See Karirn Nashashibi, "Bilateral Trade as a Development Instrument under
Global Trade Restrictions," NBER Working Paper 54, New York, 1974.
                                      —13—




differ   with   skill categories. On the other hand, we have noted instances

of overeinployment (in textiles and    steel,    for example), maintained a long

time after the employment drive, partly because the industries were not at

liberty   to release excess labor. To the extent that labor was redundant
because of this rather than because of bad management, DRCs         should   be ad-
justed downward    accordingly. This circumstance is another reason which leads

us to   suspect that the textile industry and particularly its modern, large—
scale units may be much more     competitive    than our DRC estimates indicate.
nother problem in evaluating labor remuneration is the treatment accorded
by statistics to the workers' share of profits and to payments to old age
pension funds. Since 1961 wage data are broken down into four categories:
wages, salaries, social services, and insurance and savings. "Social ser-
vices" means the usual fringe benefits, such as free transportation to and
from the plant, paid holidays, and free medical care. These certainly rep-
resent a cost to the firm. "Insurance and savings" consists of old age
pension fund contributions and retained employee profit shares. By            and

large these charges do not represent a social resource cost. Hence, we have
viewed them as a tax on profits and have excluded them from resource cost

evaluation.



V.   INDUSTRY:     INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS

        Indentifying the factors that have contributed to the competitiveness
of Egyptian industry or the lack of it is a natural sequel to the foregoing
evaluation. According to the theory of comparative advantage one expects
Egypt to excell in labor-intensive industries. In         terms   of the theory of
effective tariffs, this would suggest that Eqypt would have an advantage in
                                        —14—




lines of production with a high share of labor in value added. A large
component of nontraded goods in       value added should also be an advantage since
such   goods tend to be labor—intensive. We shall make an attempt to throw

some   light   on these hypotheses by selecting from our industries activities

producing   homogeneous goods and comparing their costs with those incurred in
other countries (both developing and       developed)   in the   production   of the
same goods. Comparisons have been made for cement, phosphate fertilizers,

nitrogenous    fertilizers, rubber tires, and paper for countries with compara-
ble cost data. Data were obtained from the tJNIDO publication Profile of
Manufacturing    Establishments.

       Cement production in Eqypt was found to be highly competitive. Compari-

sons of EgvDtian costs data with those of India, Israel, and France are shown

in Table I. Since the data refer       to plants concentrating on     standard Port-

land   cement, reasons of comparability prompted us to use Eqyptian cost          data

for   1960 rather than   for   1965—66, by which time diversification had reduced
the share of Portland cement to two—thirds of total Eqyptian output. With
the   production mix virtually identical for all four countries, costs per unit

of   output were calculated for variable material inputs, labor, and machinery.
In addition, labor productivity, capital productivity, and          the   capital-labor
ratio were computed, together with ex—factory prices. In Eqypt,             Israel, and

India,   multiple   exchange rate systems were in effect at that time. Exchange

rates were chosen to reflect the fact that domestic cement prices in India

and Israel fell roughly to the level of the international cement price (taken

here as Egytian export price of $11 per ton) so that for that particular com-

modity, the exchange rate would be an equilibrium rate." Thus, absolute
                                             —15—




                                            TPBLE   I

                     Cement:      Cost Coefficients, Labor Productivity
                         and   Capital Productivity in Four Countries




Cost coefficients                                Egypt       India   Israel       France
  (U.S. $    per ton of cement)                      1960     1964    1964         1964
  Energy                                            2.96      3.01        3.44      3.43
  Variable material inputs                          2.56      1.30        3.03      4.72
  Wage bill                                         1.09      0.93        2.47      1.55
  Total material input and labor cost               6.61      5.24        7.94      9.60
Wages per hour
  (U.S. $)                                          0.35      0.11        1.14      1.71
Labor productivity
  (kg. per man—hour)                             321        122      460         1100
Capital productivity
  (kg.   per U.S. $ for   machinery)             228        224       62          164
Capital-labor    ratio
  (U.S. $ per   man—hour)                           1.40      0.54        7.41      6.70
Unit value of    cement
  (U.S. $)                                          7.61     10.96    11.66        12.53
Egyptian   export price
  (U.S. $)                                          11.00
Exchange rate
  (domestic currency per U.S. $)                    0.435     7.57        4.20      5.0




     Note: Averages are as follows: five plants in India with an average scale
of operations of 400,000 tons; two plants in Israel with average capacity of 500,
000 tons; two plants in France with average capacity of 700,000 tons; four in
Egyot with average capacity per factory of 600,000 tons. Capacity utilization
exceeds in all cases 90 per cent. Capital values refer to book values of machine-
ry and equipment after depreciation. For Egypt the exchange rate is the official
rate after the devaluation of 1962.
     Source: Data on Egypt: The Cement Industry, Central Agency for General
Mobilization and Statistics (CAGNS), Cairo; Data on India, France, Israel: Profile
of Manufacturing Establishments, Vol. I, United Nations, 1967, p. 182-199.
                                      —16—




cost levels reflect the cost shares of the various input components at the

international price of cement. Eventually, these exchange rates were adopted

virtually unchanged by the countries concerned under general devaluation

measures. For Egypt, the official rate after the devaluation of 1962 was

used to make the 1960 cost data comparable to the 1964 data for other coun-
tries.
       U

     Cement production depends heavily on bulky raw materials like limestone,

which, in effect, is a nontraded commodity. It is also a large consumer of

energy, mostly fuel oil in Egypt but also coal and       electricity   in India and

France.     The value of energy consumed per ton of cement does not vary much

among the four countries. But costs     per ton of the   other   variable material

inputs    reveal substitution differences. In this respect the countries can
be ranked according to their relative labor abundance as reflected by the
wage rate. India has the lowest materials cost per unit of cement produced,
followed by Eqypt, France, and Israel. The differences may be attributed to
the costs of extracting the raw material component (limestone, clay, gypsum),
where highly labor-intensive, low-skill techniques can      be used. But they
may also depend to some extent on the location of raw material deposits and

factories.    When   it comes to cement production proper, which demands more
highly-skilled   labor, the Indian advantage   in reduced. Labor costs per ton

of cement produced appear    to be roughly the saxte in Egypt as in India. Labor
productivity is much higher in    Egypt, but the far   lower   wages in   India com-
pensate for   the difference. The higher labor productivity in Egypt is clearly

     11Note that if a higher exchange rate had been chosen for Egypt (e.g.,
the rate of 61 piasters per u.s. dollar suggested by the i' in 1966), the
dollar values at domestic prices in Table I would be lower.
                                                 —17—




    related to the much higher capital-labor ratio in that country. In France, a very
    high capital-labor ratio results in lower capital productivity and a high labor
    productivity. Labor costs are nonetheless higher than in Egypt because French
    wages are relatively high. In Israel, there seems to be overcapitalization, as
I
    labor productivity     is less than   half of that in France   at a higher   captial inten-
    sity, and     labor costs are considerably higher than in France; the explanation seems

    to be underutilization of capacity in Israel.

           For our purposes, the comparisons between Egypt and India are the most in-

    teresting. Disregarding inadequate valuations of capital that might bias the

    results, the striking fact is that with a capital-labor ratio two and a half times

    thatof India, Egypt's capital productivity is roughly the same, and her labor
    productivity is three times larger. With the same productivity of capita], but a
    much higher     productivity of labor, production is clearly more efficient in Egypt
    than   in   India. Two possible explanations come to mind:
      1. The technology used in Egypt might be superior to that        used in India    although

    capital      (at historical values) per ton of cement produced is the same. However,
    the simnie and     standardized   nature of the technology of cement production would
    render little weight to this explanation. Moreover, the average age of equipment
    seems to be about the same in the two countries; in both some plants were erected
    in   the 1920s and additional     units added   after World War II. What may   give some
    weight      to the argument is the difference in scale of operations. The average plant

    in Egypt has an annual capacity of 600,000 tons, as against 400,000 tons           in India.
    However, the resulting difference in cost of production hardly exceeds 10 per cent
    and cannot explain away the equality in capital productivity.12


           12united Nations, Industrialization and Productivity, Bulletin No. 8, 1964,
    Table VII.
                                                 —18—




       2. Another possible explanation is related to the quality of labor in the
cement industries of the two countries. Better management, engineering staff, and
workers     in Egypt   might   result   in a larger product per unit   of   capital than   in
India. The      difference     in quality of labor between     Egypt and India   could be tested

by looking at the distribution of the labor force by educational              level. As a
matter of fact, Egypt has a higher proportion of             engineers among its ernpioyeed
(1.03 per cent) than India (0.62          per cent) •13 For    France the corresponding figure
is 1.64 per cent. On the other hand, India has a higher proportion of workers
with   high school diplomas (12.8 per cent, compared with 3.5 per cent). However,

the relative skill of the production worker should not be a determining factor

with respect to overall capital productivity in this type of industry -- the ef-

ficiency of capital utilization in industries like cement, fertilizers, and oil

refining    depends mainly on engineering supervision and organization of           production.

The production process is continuous and          to    a large degree automated; moreover,

and   most imoortant, the specifications of the product are constant. Hence, pro-
duction does not require frequent intervention on the part of the worker in shaping

the   final product (as in the metal industries) or manipulation of a variety of
machine tools, the proper functioning of which depends            very much on the worker's

skill.

       Phosphate Fertilizers

       In   this industry it is difficult to find comparable data for the various
countries because output structures are often characterized by joint products, and
inputs   differ widely from plant to plant, depending upon the processed used in


     13The relative abundance of engineering skills at low cost in Egypt stems
from a long-established educational system oriented toward applied sciences (engi-
neering, medicine, agronomy).
                                             —20—




                                                                                      15
labor advantage, which accounts for the difference in raw materials cost.
"other inputs" consist mainly of energy requirements, repair and maintenance
work and other services. Labor charges are small in this capital—intensive
industry and can do little to offset a raw materials disadvantage. The virtual
equality in labor costs in the two       countries   despite higher wage rates in Yugo-
slavia is probably related to much       higher capital charaes in Yugoslavia, where

the value of machinery    and equipment    per unit   of   output is more than twice as

large   as in Egypt. Thus, substitution of labor for capital appears to have taken
place in Egypt relative to Yugoslavia and low wages may, in this way, have helped
to   give Egypt   an overall   factor cost advantage.


      Nitrogenous Fertilizers

      To give an impression of relative costs, we compare the Eqvptian industry

with a calcium axnmonium nitrate plant in India; both depend          upon the   same electro-

lytic process for hydrogen reduction)6 The exchange rates of the two countries
may, of course, be overvalued to a different degree and the inputs may bear dif'-

ferent rates of protection. Nevertheless, the relative cost structure is informa—
tive.


      15The   difference would have been even larger if pyrites had been imported
by Yugoslavia rather than mined domestically.

      16Profile of Manufacturing Establishments, op. cit., pp. 524—525.
                                               —21—




                                           TABLE III


                   Comparative Costs of Nitrogen Fertilizer Production
                               in   India and Eqypt in 1964-65
                                     ($ per nitrogen unit)




                                               India
                                    calcimt axrunoniimi nitrates                  b
                                          20.5 per cent                    Egypt


Energy                                        69.3                         49.9

Other material inputs                         79.4                         83.2

Wage cost                                     24.5                         32.9



Exchange rate per U.S. $                   Ps 4.74                          0.437


       aSource. Profile of Manufacturing Establishments, Vol. , UNIDO,            pp. 524-525.
       bott     mix   is shown in Table 13G.


      Total   variable costs of production in the two countries were quite similar.
Note, however, that capacity utilization in India (95 per cent) was higher than
in Egypt (80 per cent). Arid while average wages in India appear to be one third
lower than in Egypt, wage costs per nitrogen unit at equal capacity utilization

would probably have been the same in both countries. The significant          difference
is   in energy costs, a simple consequence of a lower electricity price in Egypt

($2.71 per mwh against $3.69 per mwh in India), with physical input of electricity

per unit of nitrogen almost the same. The low price of electricity is thus one of

the facto that contribute to make Egypt's nitrogenous          fertilizer industry rela-
tively competitive.
                                            —24—




data on paper mills in other countries reveals a very low level of labor producti-
vity in the Egyptian plant. Experience with other Egyptian industries during this
period   suggests that overstaffing depressed average productivity. The share of

wage costs in output value (at international prices) is low, however, and compares

favorably with the European example in Table V. Thus, if overstaffing did, in fact,

                                           TABLE V


                Labor Productivity in Integrated Paper       and Pulp Mills
                                (kilograms of paper)


                                                Per $ of Fixed    Share of Wage Costs
                       Labor Productivity        Eauipment at     in Output Value at
                          Per Man—Hour         Replacement Costs International Prices

Egypt                          6.4                    1.2
                               8•2a                   1.5
                                                                              140a
                                                                              11.5
India I                        3. 5                  ——
                                                                              20. 5
India II                       9.0                    ——                      13.4
Mexico                        59.0                                             ——
                                                      1'9b
Middle Europe                 64.0                    5.4                     12.3


     Note: India I (1965) produces a large variety of paper, which partly ac-
counts for its low labor productivity; India II (1964) produces newsprint; Mexico
(1967), mostly printing and writing paper. The latter plant is highly competitive
at world prices and is engaged in exports. All plants worked close to full capa-
city utilization, with the exception of India I, which operated at 75 per cent
capacity utilization. See Profile of Manufacturing Establishments, Vol. I, UNIDO,
pp. 120—23, 996—1002.
     aA full capacity utilization.
     bAt domestic prices.
     CCapital   at fire insurance value.

occur, it cannot explain the Egyptian plant's inefficiency. Rather, the explana-
tion appears to be —— starting—up costs notwithstanding -- the low skill level of
                                                   —25—




workers and possibly also the inexperience of management. Together with capacity

utilization skill of the operatives is, indeed, critical in this industry and may

account for most of the differences in efficiency. Much responsibility rests

with    plant   engineers and   foremen   in   securing   the prescribed specifications of the

paper    in the beating and mixing departments and with operatives in handling so-
phisticated     and costly equipment. The relatively automatic production process

may only work after a long experimental period in which output mix is adapted to

both the quality of raw materials used and           the   demands of the market. Once

control    over paper specifications is achieved and the production process mastered,
productivity should rise substantially. Whether this will happen remains to be
seen.
        Conclusions
        The following conclusions emerge from the preceding cost comparisons.

        1. Egypt has an   advantage in industries using substantial aiunts of non—
traded    goods. This advantage deénds upon low labor costs incurred in the ex-
traction   of the nontraded input (cement), on savings in transportation costs for

a bulky material (phosphates), or savings in nontraded resources such as hydro-

electric power or natural gas (nitrate fertilizers).

        2. Labor costs in Egyot in all of the industries surveyed compare favorably

with those of higher-income countries. At the same time, labor productivity is

relatively high in Egyptian industries like cement, phosphates, nitrates, and

rubber tires. Here a combination of low labor costs              and a   relatively high level

of skills seems to have given Egypt an advantage. Indeed, the rubber               tire experi-
ence indicates     that even if most material inputs are imported (provided they are

high—value inputs bearing low freight margins), a relatively labor-intensive
                                          —26—




import-substituting industry may be competitive.
     3.     The skill constraint is in the steel and paper industries. Insufficiency
of skill appears on the organizational and engineering levels as well as in manual
labor. 18




     18Cairo's small private machine tool shops employ a large nulTiber of skilled
operatives, but, by and large, the wages and other incentives offered in the
public enterprises have failed to attract skilled labor.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I-             1- CD
                                                                                                     tI-IH)I-.)CD C) CI-H-.14 CD              Cl)c-I-     CD (/2    0 H)                               0 c-I-CD C)                              •       tn                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4-'..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cl                      CD.   (j      H-Qi                CD Cl)-     0                 C) CD                C)   0            Cl) Cl-(I)                              C)
                                                                                                                                                   H3   0 'I               CU -J.       0 'I             '-xlH-          4—'               C)   'I0 C                    H' 'U0" H'                            'U a'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cl               '-0a''U-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I--'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C/) c-1- H- C)                     CD   Cl)   0 'I C)                        CD         C)   0     C/) c-I- C/)                              C-i                  I-'-   U]    CT-,      U)                   Ct'   H                 w     H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              H' 'U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a-—)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         )                                                                                             '-.0
                                                                                                                                             t:)                C) c-I- 1—'-                            CU                                H)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I--'   '-0 a'4:-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                                                              c-I- CC)                                              C)             CD-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ci)                     CD               H                     CD-H-                              4---                                 H-
                                                                                                                                                              00 c1- CD C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   F—'         CD-                     (11        C)F-'                Cl                                          C) 4—'CDCl H-
                                                                                                                                                                                       H-CD                      11                                                Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0                                      Cl)               ClCCi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CD                     Cl                  c-I-                 Cl                      Cl'
                                                                                                                                                                    U CD         /IC)                                                                          'I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c-I-              CD- CD             CU               c-'       CU             CD                      CD-                        Cl' Cl Ct'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                              (DO       C+-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cl)     Cl)                CI-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0                                                     - U)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   'ZI
                                                                                                                                             H' -1)   0 H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C/)                                        C-4-                                                   CI-ClCi)H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0                    (-f-      Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                 I—'          a'-                    H' -0C.                                       Cl)/IClH '-H-0CU-                                                    Ci-'-c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        c-I-              cl-Cl-   CU          C/)
                                                               0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /I/I I-1cnF"O•-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 )Cl)Cl3C)
C))1                      (Ci                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  00Cl'H-   C/)                                                                                                            /I/I CUQ
                                            IC)
                                                                                                                                               I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ii) '-I 'i)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H-'t
                                                                                                                                                                            II '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0)/I                                                           if)
                   o                 0!
                               c-I-I/I
                                                        —'10
                                                               H'                                     Cn CD      CD   ClC/)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I:!)
                                                                                                                                                                                       N)
            C)0

                   F'- C) CD
                         II
                                                                                                                                               N)0"-                                   NQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N) 'U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N)      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N)                                                                L,J                                                                         )      0'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    III                 *                                                                                            'U                                                                N)                                                                          N)0'
        Z H F-'                      CD C+
                                                                                                                                               H' C&D
                                                                                                                                                                              I               I—'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Li JI                                                      '-0                                                               -Cl'-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4:- 'JI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -                *                                                               *
                                                                                                                                                                            I                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                              N)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     J1tOj)
        '-cj CV c'i                         c     Cl)                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '—'l)   0"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4-                                                                                 \,
                                                                                                                                                                                       \JiN)                               • CU                                           I--' CZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '-7,                                                      0)0)'U—--)
        CJ (I)           (') Ci'            CD
                                                 I0 .,                                                                                        si\J-iJiQQ                                  )                                • Cl) •.                                      -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H'                                                                         N) 4—'                                              • Cl) .                                                           •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  J1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CUL,-)'UN)
                   i--                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 —
                                            C)                  Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I-                  •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U-'-'.00H'N)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4:—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        • ,) ..
                   0'1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IC])
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
            '__J
                                                                                                                                              H' 0"
                           '1                    IIo oC/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                4:()                     —                                 N)                                                                 ji0"
J:4         .—'    H-                      CD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0'. N)
       t-i U,        i     2'      C-1-
                                                                                                                                                   0"                      I       H' \.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -        '-J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        —


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -Cl--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            \/J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -                                                                                                                       4:-
                                   CD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '-0
                                                                                                                                                   0"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -Cl--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     j-
       ti      CD    ci,          Cl)
                                                                                                                                             a"t'-#N)
                                                                                                                                                                                         N)                                                                              LJ                                                         0)                                                                4:-                                                                        -Cl-    0'
                                                                                                                                                                                  \J H'                                                                                                                                        a' '0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4:—
                    :i
                                                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \J,H'H'Q                                        0" -P
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0'
              :0
               Ci)         c-I- H•              C/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              a-. '-J)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      )                                                                                                                            'Ji4:—4:--
                                                                                                                                                   ".11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N)'.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      _7
       C                                                                                                                                                                  I-4:-                                    Ij
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '-
                    H.                    C))
                                                                                                                                                   H'                                                                           0")                                      H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4-Lb.)                                                                                                              •
       C)j._                      ç                                                                                                                                                                                      \J).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               H'
                           (D
                          :i H-
                                                   CD CU
                                                                     0-c (I)
                                                                                                                                             4:-I J1                              -r    0'-—-]                                  Cl'                                      N)                                                    )    H'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      \j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H'   a'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 'j, '.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I—'
                                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                          CD '1(/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0t--.Q--
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i)H'/,j)0'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •
                                 II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CUa'CU'U—J
       (1)                                                     c                                                                 lb
                                                                                                       CD
                                                                                                                                                0"                               0'-0                                                                                    J                                                          .)
 CC -'-                          CD                CU          (,,     CU      OH.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N)N)                                                                       N)N)                                                     o                                                               o
             F-'I—'             H'4:—              (-)   I-0           uj
                                                                                                                                                                                        •
       l—   Q 0 '10                               Ci)
                                                                                                                                                                                 ".1'
                                                                                                                                                                                 )1                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '_) N) •         '0                                              .   4:-—                                                          N) •                                                                       0" •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                                                                                                                                         N)1\)                 tO}—'
)- H'       i—'-
IF'-Ci Ui c'(1)

                    C)    f-
                                     J'
                                         I•—'     CD
                                                  0(D'1
                                                               ()
                                                                      p, Cr
                                                                                                 Cl,        CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -')L..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      'nL)                      —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C,)LA)   0'. -Q'                                       L) N). 'Cl'                                                          0'.   :"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ——--.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4:-
C,)   0             I-I C) CD
                                                                                                                            0
                                            Ci)                             H'       CD   Cl)                         Cl-        C.)                                Cr   0              CD                    p3         CD-            -4:-'                Cl-   0      CD
*                                                                                                       9
                          CD               p3            CD          C H)        p3             Cr                          p3         Cl)      99             CD                C)     0           H                    Cf             CD      H p3 Ct- C?- CD                          0 I-?,          II p3                                                          C) II CD p3 a) H-
                                                                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H' CD- H'                    H-                                                                               4-'          9 0 I-I               Cl-   p3           C)     CD
                                                                                                                                         •
                     Major Field Crops: Output,                 Value AddeiLt Returxii'tàCãpi.tal and                   Maxungement-.      1961
                                                  At Domestic and      International Prices
                                                                                                                                      Return to capital and
                                                 0utut                                           Domestic            Value added by
                                                                                                                                      management, residual
                                  Jnit price ,PT/kg            Value, bE/fedvi'                value added, DVA,     primary factors
                                                                                                                       bE feddan         bE/f eddan
                                           inter —                                               bE If eddan
                                                                                                                                 at               at
                                                 nationa                            at                    at
                                                                                                                                        at      interna—
                                                                 at               interna-       at     interna-       at     inter—
                    Quantity                     at off.
                                                                                               domestic  tional      domesti nationa: domes ti(  tional
                   per feddar lomes tic           exch.        domes tic          tional
  Crops
                       M          x   farm        rate          prices
                                                                 (4)
                                                                                  prices
                                                                                   (5)
                                                                                                prices prices
                                                                                                 (6)     (7)
                                                                                                                      prices
                                                                                                                       (8)
                                                                                                                               prices  prices
                                                                                                                                     (9)
                                                                                                                                                 prices
                                                                                                                                                   (10)     (11)
                      (1)             (2)         (3)
                     0.169'                      24.954                            42 . 172:
Cotton.lipt,                                                   46.804+
       seed          0.335'                        3.520                           11.792
          stalk      1.000-       0.152"                        1.516
                                                               48. 320
                                                                                    1.5  t     41.430"   43.620      31.050         32.640        —1.380   —7.263
          Total*                                                                   51. 730*
                                                                                               67.040)' (72.424)     (56.660)' (62 .044)      (24. 230)"   (22.141)
                                                               (73.930)'          (81.134)
                                            -
                                                                                   49 .623
                                                                          -
                     2.127         1.798          2.333        38. 242
Rice ,grain
      straw          1.125"        0.096                         1.082'             1.082
                                                               39.524
                                                                              -
                                                                                   50.705      33.064"   44.720      26.504"        38. 170        9.744    18.326
      total
                                   2.411          2.207        33.295              30.483
Millet, grain        1.381                                                    -
                                                                                    1.368
          straw      1.501         0.091'                        1.368
                                                                                               26.26 3                23.543        23.485"        9.283    6.376'
          total                                                34.663              31.851                 26..205"
                                                 10.014        39.455              75.909      35.125     70.521k     28.375"       63.771        10.155" 42.184"
Peanuts              0.758'        5.205
                     0.385'        8.600          6.322         33.111k            24.342
Sesame,grain
       straw
       total                                                    33 .   iii'        24.342      29.46P'    21.902"     26.151"       18.59f        15.031    5.032
Corn f,grain          1.009        2.543          2.095'        25.661              21.140'
                      1.375'       0.12 1                        1.658               1.658'                                    I,
       straw                                                                                                                                       3.239" 2.969"
                                                                27.319              22.798     23.349     20.158" 16.179            12.988
       total
                                             -
                                                           -
                      l.038        2.833          2.204         29.411              22.879
Wheat,grain
       straw          1.549
                              -
                                   0.580'                        8.987"-             8.987
                                                                                                                                    22.275"                  0.392
                                                                38.398              31.866"    31.578     27.175"     26.678v
       total
                                                                                                                         "
                                                            Tab]e2      — .,    Continued
_______________  (1)        (2)          (3)       (4')           (5)            (6)          (7)        (8)              (9)          (10)          (11)
Barley,grain    1.099      2.012'       2.017"   22.116          22.824"
       straw    1.132"     0.474"                 5.364"          5.364'
       total                                     27.478"         28.188"       23.778"       25.198"   20.768"          22.188"        8;6)8         6.682"
Beans,beans       0.491"   5.591"       3.135"   27.454:         15.393"
      straw       0.927"   0.405"                 3.753           ".753"                                        V                I,            '4
      total                                      31.207"         19.li+6"      26.977
                                                                                        V
                                                                                             16.606    24.317           13.946         9.827        —4.684'
Lentils,beans     0.540"   5.867"       6.255"   31.683"         33.779"
        straw     1.413"   0.400"                 5.651'          5.651"
        total                                    37.334"         39.430"       32.654"       34.440k   30.364"          32.150"       13.274""'     10.097"
Onions (W.)       4.741    1.814"       2.541"   85.979         120.483"       71.619"      103.345    66.589"          98.315'       43.379"       69.673"
Chick—peas,
   peas           0.671"   9.793"       6.764    65.714          45.384
   straw
                                                                                                                                                             "
   Total                                         65.714"'        45.384        59.484""      41.081"   57.394"          38.991"       40.134"'      16.782
Sugar,eane       37.375    0.234"                87.402"                       64.022'         ,       58.642"                        24.632"
     'Ref.      _______ ______ ______ 133.133                   142.943 118.680              81.260    99.833       J   62.413        44.093        —1.464
 *Ginning and pressing costs E3.750 deducted.
 **Figures in parentheses are calculated on the assumption of "normal" cotton crop in 1961
 +unginned cotton
 Sources: Cols. (l),(2),(4) from Agricultural Economy, Ministry of Agriculture, 1960, 1961, 1962,
                 1963 and 1964
          Cols. (3)  and (5), our estimates, international prices from official Egyptian trade statistics
                  cotton seed (FAO, Production Yearbook, Sudanese), cotton lint (average of offi-
                 cially announced export prices), ref. sugar (see Table 13.C). The international
                 prices, used here, differ in some cases slightly from those presented in Table 12.
                 The latter were taken from international trade publications and dollar prices con-
                 verted to bE at the official exchange rate. Both commodiclassifications and con-
                 version rates may thus differ; the differences are entirely insignificant, however.
                  (6) — (11), our calculations:
              Cols.
                      Col. (6) = Col. (4) —                Col. (7), Table 3.A
                      Col. (7) = Col. (5)          —
                                                           Col. (8) , Table 3.A
                      Col. (8) = Col. (6)          —
                                                           Col. (9), Table 3.A
                      Col. (9) = Col. (7)          —
                                                           Col. (9), Table 3.A
                      Col. (10) = Col. (8)             —
                                                            Cols.(1O) + (11), Table 3.A
                      Col. (11)   Col. (9)
                                    =                  —     Cols. (10) + (12), Table 3.A
                                                                  Table       3
                           Major   Field   Crops: Output, Value Added, And Returns to
                                                                                                     Capital and            Management   —
                                                                                                                                             1963
                                                 At Domestic and International Prices
                                           Output                                                              Value added by
                              Jnit price,PT/kg
                                                                                    Domestically                                         Return to capital
                                                      Value. RE/fed.               value added
                                            inter-                                                             primary       factors      and management
                                                                                    1E/feddan                    E/feddan
                                           national               at                          at                          at
                                                                                                                                             E/feddan
                   Quantity          at off.            at      interna—            at     interna—              at     inter-     at
                                                                                                                                                           at
                  per feddai [omestic exch.           domestic tional             domes tic tional             domes ti
                                                                                                                                                         interna—
  Crops             MTt'      ?X   farm      rate                                                                       national domesti                  tional
                     (1)
                                                       prices  prices              prices   prices              prices         prices
                                                                                                                                  prices                  prices
                                   (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)
 Cotton .,lint                      —                                               (6)           (7)            (8)            (9)
                   0.271'                  31.128'                                                                                           (10)         (11)
                                                      7g.00t     84.496'
          seed     0.527"           —
                                            4.002'               21.079"
          stalk    1.422" 0.l59                        2.255"     2.255"
          total                                       80.323    103.590*          73.139V       92.199"        61. 402        80.462"    25.742         35.222'
Rice,grain         2.326'     1.798"       3.342      41.821'   77. 727
     straw         1.454      0.093"                   1.347'     1.347
     total                                            43.168"   :79.074           37.311"      '71.425         30.974         65 .088    12.238"        42.525
Millet,grain       1.569'     2.122"       2.060'     33.288     32.315'
          straw    2.274      0.100                    2.281      2.281"                                  V
          total                                       35.569'                                                                                       V
                                                                 34.596'          25.604        26. 122       22.905"        23.423"      8.479          5.372
                                                                                                                                                                 I,
Peanuts ,nuts      0.849      5.820k 12.066'         49.415"    102.441'
         straw     1.774'     0.134'                  2.377'      2.377"
         total                                       51.792W                               V                            V                           '
                                                                104.868'       47.537           98.824        39.852         91.139"     21.572         68.568"
Sesame,grain       0.434      7.936        7.129w 34.441"       30.942
       straw       l.254      0.118"               1.475
                                                          -
                                                                 1.475
                                                                          -
       total                                                                               V                            p
                                                  35.916'       32.417" 30.934                 28.130         27 .524        24.720"     14.670"         8.482"
Corn ;grain       0.921"      2.686"       2.584"    24.739'    23.797'
      straw       1.608"      0.118'                  1.900"     1.900
      total                                          26.632"    25.697'       22.042"          22.067         15.452         15.477      2.392'         —1.182"
eat, grain        1.110"     2.874"        3.233" 31.904'       35.882'
     straw        1.624"     0.372'                6.038"        6.038'
     total                                        37.942'                                                 V
                                                                41.920" 31.160"                35 .7 17       26.000"       30.557       8.232           .803
                                                                                                                                                                      '.4
                                                     Table_3   ,   Continued
*Giiining and   pressing costs   E 4.240 deducted.
 Unginned   cotton
Sources: as Table     ZA    --
                                                                   Table.   4
                    Major Field Crops: Output, Value Added, and Returns to Capital and
                                                                                       Maiement — 1964
                                      At Domestic and International Prices
                                     Output   ___________________               Domestically        Value added  y      ecurn Co capltai.
                             mit price,PT/kg Value, E/fed.                      value added,        primary factors      and management
                                      inter—                                      E/feddan            E/feddan            bE/f eddan
                                     nationa:              at                              at                  at                    at
                  Quantity           at off.     at      interna—                 at     interna—     at      inter—    at        interna—
                                                                                domestic tional     domestic national domesti      tional
                 per feddat loméstic exch.     domestic   tional
                    MT       x      farm   rate       prices     prices         prices    prices     prices   prices     prices    prices
1964                (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)            (6)      (7)        (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)
Cotton,linj.       0.313"           —
                                           35.293    100   191   11O.466
        seed       0.566"           —       4.350                 24.625
        stalk      1.528'     0.159'                  2.423'       2.423'
        total                                       102.614"     133.274*" 92.518"        118.602   82.O47'   108.131 41.849      54.873
Rice,grain         2.l23          1.798'   3.747     38.171"     79.549
       straw       1.327'         0.093'              1.229"       1.229'
       total                                         39.400"     80.778         32.637    71.611    25.416    64.390     4.345    37.696
Millet,grain       1.513"'    2.413        2.081    36.509       31.486         25.863    22.350    2l.933    18.420    h.405     —2.006
        straw       n.a.          n.a.
        total
Peanuts ,nuts
         straw
         Total
Sesame ,grain
        straw
         total
Corn,grain         1.166"         2.686"    2.609    32.319w      30.421
       straw       2.041          0.110               2.253'       2.253'
        total                                        30.066"      32.674" 25.311w         29.278'   18.174    22.141'    3.3'49    2.395
Wheat,grain        1.155          2.874;    3.219" 33.197"        37.179'
     straw         1.686"         0.372               6.269'       6.269
        total                                        39.466"      43.448"       32.576"   36.309"   26.946"   30.679"    8.576     4.201
                             'I
                                                            Table     4   ,continued
_________            (1)         (2)      (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)       (7)         (8)        (9)     (10)      (11)
Barley,grain        1.165   '   2.741w   2.741j    31.927           31.933
         straw      l.l50       0.307               3.531              53T
         total                                    35.458        35464         30.818w    31.756     27.278'    28.216   13.3O8     8.139
Beans,bean          0.89Y       5.l58    3.295     46.167W          29.490
      straw         l.262       0.311               3.931            3.931
      total                                        50.098           33.421    44.178     29.181     40.888'   25.891    24.l88     1.686
Lentils,bean        0.661        n.a.     n.a.
           straw     n.a.        n.a.
           total
Onions              6.978       l.461    3.216    101.958       224.41Y       84.938'   192.914v    78.908    186.884 55.428 154.704
Chick—peas,
   pea              n.a.        n.a.
   straw            n.a.        n.a.
   total
Sugar,cane         36.767W      0.239              87.735                     6l.478                53.820              12.650
         ______ ________ ______ _______ 204.318                 321.698      130.815    247.188    106.936    223.309   35.463   137.450
         *Costs of ginning and pressing, E4.240 deducted
         +unginned cotton
         Sources: Cols (1), (2), (3) as in Table 2.A
                        (4) — (11) our calculations
                      Cols.
                                                                                                                                                        ,,   e
                                                            Table 5
                       Major Field Crops: Costs of Traded and Non—Traded Przced Inputs at Domestic and                             International   Prices
                                          With Primary Inputs at Actual and Imputed Market Prices — 1961
                                                                    (iE   per   feddan)
                                                                                                                      Non—traded
                         Traded ,produced inputs                                                                       produced
                                          Fertilizers        Irrigation (fuel)                      Total               inputs:
                             at                    at                   at                                  at         draught—
                at         interna—     at       interna-     at      interna—              at         interna-         power1          Primary factors
              domestic     t I onal    domes tic  tional    domes   tictional             domestic      tional         manures,      Labor    Land rent
               prices       prices      prices    prices    prices     prices              prices       prices         others        costs actual imputed
Crops           (1)          (2)            (3)     (4)       (5)           (6)             (7)             (8)         (9)          (10)     (11)   (12)
Cotton         0.880        4.679          3.900   2.468     2.110         1.563           6 890"       8.710W        10.380         11. 080 21.350 28. 823
Rice           2.900        3.   763       3.000   1.807     0.560         0.415           6.4601       5.985          6.560          7 .950  8.810 11.894
4illet         0.310        0.290          4.600   2.771     3.490         2.585           8.400        5.646"         2.720          6.120 8.140 10. 989
Peanuts        1.830        3.521          1.390   1.045     1.110         0.822           4.330"       5.388"'        6.750          8.600 9.620 12.987
Sesame         0.310        0.228          1.900   1.145     1.440         1.067           3.650        2.440"         3.310          4.150 6.970 9.410
Corn           1.120        0.923          2.850   1.717                                   3.970"       2.640"         7.170          4.320 8.620 11. 637
Wheat          2.870        2.233          3.380   2.036     0.570         0.422           6.820"       4    691k      4.900          3.28€ 13.780 18.603
Barley         1.570        1.622          1.520   0.916     0.610         0.452           3.700        2.990"         3.010          2.60€   9.560 12.906
Beans          3.320        1.862          0.390   0.293     0.5 20        0.385           4 230"       2.540"         2.660          2.660 11.830 15.970'
Lentils        4.680        4.990                                                          4.680"       4.990          2.290          2.910 14. 180     19.143°
Onions (W)    10.500       14. 714         3.150   1.898     0.710         0.526          14.360'      17.138     -
                                                                                                                       5.030          7.690 15. 520     20.952"
Chick—peas     6.230        4.303                                                          6.230"       4.303          2.090          3.120 14.140      19.089°
Sugar ,cane    3.940        3.940      12.220      7.361     7.220         5.348          23.380"      16.649"         5.380          9.73€ 24. 280     32.778k
                                                                                          64.453       61.683         18.848         31 • 884 24. 280   32.778
Sugar, ref.
                                                    (10)
          Source: Col.s (1), (3), (5), (7), (9) ,/(11), Agricultural Economics,               p.cit.
                  Col.s (2), (4), (6), (8), (12), our calculation.
                                                                                                                                                             :1
                                       I                                                                                                                          c
                                                                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                                                             '       0                                                                                                          H            -
                                                                       $1                                                 Ca                      (I)                                                                                    CD                                                                        Q..                             '10c:              CDP.-                                                  C-4- C/)      4))C4-                                               CD        C))                o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            H-                                h        '1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CD    4),   F-'       4)'F-'                         H'C) CD Cl)
                                                                                                                                           HC'4-                     1                                                           c;                                                                                                                                                   Z4),                                      ç                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                c+        P)                       p'   )-CDI                      P.           '—4     c-4-                                                            CD C-4-                                     HO        CD Cl)                              I-' 'C0"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      'L                           4-4)Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '
 ji                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Co    "                                                                                        .-—.   C      '—'                    ,'.    H       '
                  0                                - 00                                             C"    U)'-4                      -                  U'     -                                                      U.)         U' F-'                                              N.'           CO   U)    0                H                     -N U)                    '-4                                      -                                                                "C                                        F-'   4—'     —4     U.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4                   U.)     U)           0         N.) N)        F'.) 0)                              H      CC      0'0
                                                   N.)   '-0C'                                                                       N.)              '.0 C'                                                          N.)         }-    -     Ui                                                                                                                               U'                                       —i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .                                 .1H                                                                     0'.     U) U.) '-I                       '.0     COU.) 0'.                    CO      '.0     0                            N.)    '—1     N.)'4
                                                   0     I'..)   J                                  0     C\ .—                      -N                 C' U.)                                                        U.)         0\Q N.)                                             -N •1. CO          U.)   0                                      C                        '-0                                      U'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -J                                              N)      0\ '.0 '.0                       U'      '-0          0'              CO      -N U)                                N.)    0U' U'
                           CI)                     I-' C\U)                                         U)    .-4 '.0                    )_1                N.) U'                                                        I—'         U) U.) N.)                                          I--'       • -N C0                                              U) U)                    -N                                       U'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '-4     C' CC U'                          CO     U.) 0'.0                             '.0 CO                               -      N-) '-4      I-
                  CDrrrr                             U.)0                                           0     '-4   I—'                  N.)                CO     U)                                                     l-          U'    -     U)                                      N.)        . Ui '.0 1                     N.)I-'4               '-4 U)                   -N                                       N.)                                                              0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N)O-NU)                                              U)      .N                                N             Co -4)-C              '-4¼0   Co '-4                                      N.)     U'-N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              •
                                                   0 0-N                                            H     00                         U.)                U'                                                            N)          C' U.) C                                                                                                                                     -N                                       C                                                                U.)                                             0'      U' '.0 00                         -N     0''0         C               CO              '-4                          I-'            C'
                                                   N.)   '-.1 -N                                    U.)   '-0   —                    U)                 -      CCC                                                    N.)         U'. U' -N                                           0          • U' COO\                                            U'                       C'                                       N.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (                      U'      H0' 0                            U.)     CO-4)-¼0               4-" U)        '.oU)   N,)                                 '.0'0   C   C".0
                                                   H U'U'                                           I—i   C\---i                                        -4
                                                                                                                                           0-U'0N.)COCOU.)
                                                                                                                                                               0                                                      N.'         -N U''.0                                            C             -N COU.)                                          C"                       -N                                       C                                                                0)                                              U)      -1)-   U) C'                      N.)    '.0 '—I                              '-0 0'.                              .N'0   N.)-NU)
                                                                                                                                     0                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U) -
                           rj
                                                   .1-
                                                   U'

                                                         U'"-J
                                                         I— '.0


                                                                                                    U.)
                                                                                                    .-
                                                                                                          C'N.)
                                                                                                          U' U.)                       I                U..)   '.0                                                    C           '.0   F-'   N)                                      C             C' I—'                      000                   CO —                     C"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               U'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N.)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ui
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         N.)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CO'.0 U)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 U,'.0 -N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   U.)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '.0 U'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U)     C     -N'-0-N




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4-' H"O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                —


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -N

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0      N)'.0 N.)   C
                                                   C'    0'.0                                       '.0         C'                   U.)   N C\ Q                                                                     N.)         -N - U'                                             I—'           I—' U.)    0                I-'                   —i    0'                 C                                        C                                        U.)                     C                                               U'      —4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        '-4   0                    '.0    0 0    CO              4--   U'      C Ui                                        U' N) N)
                                                         -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U)U)C'U)C'COH
                                                                 '.0                                      0U'                             I.                                                                                   1.1.                                                          I...                                                                              0'                                                                                                        C                                                       U' -N                                                 U'                      -' -N                                0                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                '-
                                                   C'                                               .N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N.)                                       U.)                                 -N                                                  N.) N.)
                                                                 .-                                                                  -•                                                                               0                 N.) -4                                                                                                              0'                                                                                                                                                                                                                            I-' '.0U'H                                                                               0 -N cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
  P)C)0rPO-CDrt
                      '.          (Da"—'           -N    4-                                         .f-   -N0"                 4—'                      CON.)                                                     —               '-4                                                 C'         • U' U.)—4                     C'                    N.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NC'-U'4-U)C\'-J                      Ui                                       CA-N                                                             '.0    0U'U)U'C'U)Ci-'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U'      0)     ,U'                        U.)                           N) -N                 U)                           U'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U)NH'-'U)     U.)
                                  r                                     _________________                                                                                _______________________________                                                  ___________________
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N..)   HC''.0CO'.ON.F'CO'.0COU'C'L11CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ___________________
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3N.)                    P-.)                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      —--




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               • N-                                          C'                  NJ            '-4 Ui        0000C00000000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             _/.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U'     Cj-  C'     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  —
   ri C)CD                                                       H                                        U' '—'                                                                                                                                                                                    I-'.C)          '-1                               C)                                                                4                                                                                                        N.-C)         H rP           41 Cl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                    ..                         '—'   '.                        "-i                                                    '—'                     N.'                                     rQ                                        I—'                                   N.'      (I)                                                N.- CI) Cr                                                                                41
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ag
                                  cc 00    U)C1)            __
                                                                 N.)                        .NU.)
                                                                                                    '.    C' '—                '—' —                    I-''0PSi                                           ON.'   C1              C)          I-'                                    rr                  Cl)   •
                                 0         a                                                                                   HCDIi                                                                                       -
C? CD                                i—i                 CD                                 Cl)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -
                                                        Table   7
                      Major   Field Crops: Costs of   Traded and Non—Traded Produced Inputs at Domestic and                      International Prices
'
                                          With   Primary inputs         at Actual
                                                                           and Imputed Market Prices — 1964
                                                                        (LE   per feddan)
      fl9f      (1)            (2)       (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)        (7)           (8)           (9)          (10)     (11)     (12)
otton         0.998           6.657     4.241      3.476        4.857             4.539     10.096"    14.672
                                                                                                        p.161
                                                                                                                       10.471        17.680 22.518      35.578
Uce           3.016           b.285     3.747      2.882            —              —
                                                                                             6.763"                     7.221        11.376 9.695       15.318'
4illet        0.309           0.268     4.791      3.685        5.546             5.183     10.646'     9.13E           3.930         7.083 8.445       13.343'
eanuts        1.766                     1.167      1.167        1.324             1.237      4.257'                     7.124         9.162 10.572      16.704
esame         0.329                     1.782      1.371        2.251             2.104      4.362s                     3.750          5.752    7.894   12.473
orn       -
               1.053          0.527     3.571      2.747        0.131             0.122      4.755k'    3.396"'         7.137          6.068    8.657   13.678"
iheat          2.720          3.835     3.590      2.762        0.580             0.54       6.890w     7.139"          5.630          4.390   13.980   22.088"
               2.060          1.634     2.040      1.569        0.540             0.505      4.640"     3.708"'         3.540          3.440   10.530   16.637w'
Barley
Beans          4.560          2.913     0.860      0.860        0.500             0.467      5.920      4               3.290          3.760   12.940   20.445
entf1s         5.570                     —          —               —              —         5.570'"                    3.020          3.570   13.950   22.041"
)nions (W)    12.760      28.085        3.430      2.638        0.830             0.776     17.020"    31.499"          6.030          8.480   15.000   23.700
Thick—peas     6.440                     —          —               —              —         6.440"      —              2.830          3.940   14.080   22.246"
Sugar,cane     4.013          4.013    15.241     11.724        7.003             6.545     26.257v    22.282'"         7.658         16.366   24.804   39.190"
$ugar, ref    ________ _________ __________________ ________ __________
                                                                                            73503      74 510          _23 875       46 669 24 804      3  190
ource:    Agricultural Economics, Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo, 1966, quoted in M. Clawson, H. L. Landsberg,
          L. T. Alexander, The Agricultural Potential of the Middle East, Elsevier, New York, 1971, p. 284.
                                                   ____________________
ote:     Column headings as in Tables 3 A.
                                                                                                                  PP
                                                                                                                                                      p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C)   .)H'C)                                         H'                  rr H' 0                  0                  CD                                        C/'          H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I' '¼
                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    —                                                                                0            C)CO                                   H' C)                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P1 C) CD             _,          rp Cl)                   t1t   t             Hi CD     -                                               .
                      II                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                P.)H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     z0              I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       tll
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0-                                                                         P1          0- CD                                                                                                                                             P1    C/)        H'
                                                                                                                                    I                                                                                  CD Cl'                                                                                                                                                                                                P1              CI) 0)                                                P1                  CD
                                         H-                        CD   P1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                )0-                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C) H'        0..                 H' C) H' 0-
                                                    rP H'          0                   D                                    0                      P1         0-CD 0-                           Hi      0 P1CDH'09                                                                                                                                                                                                           CD rr0P1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P10ZCi)                  P1                              I—'                                                                                                             rPi—   P1                    Co                                 P1                                                                  CD                          09                                      09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r0
                                                                                             H'D3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .)                                                                                                                                                            rr
          C) P1      0           CO                            P1 H-C)CD CI)                                                0       r?                                                                  CI)            H' CD CO                                                                               I-i                          H'                                                       CD       0-                                                '                     H-                                                                                                                                                  og
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r1                                                Q'    rPH'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r                                                                                    r
                                                                                                                                                              CO
                                        jt4jT -'-..                                           •                             tIV                                                                trtTl           '-..)   -nCD 0-                                                                                o                                                                          rtr?                           C) P.)               H- P.)H'                     0              rt                      CI)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r?CI)rtP.)                                                         H'                                                                       rPH-OR'                                                          H'                      P1                             E             P1
                                                                                                                                    "--. ht- CD 0-rrD)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ...—.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -J
                                                               -   H'                                                               I—.)
                                                                                                                                             '—'                                                                             '-'                                                  .NCOC                                                                      Lfl(D'                                                                    ,- C'       '—'                           —se          "—i                                                                                                                                                                                              H'r?                     '—'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N.)—'ag
     rt rP 0
     (
                                                  1'.)           .C -'C)
                                                                 'J            0
                                                                                                                            H'
                                                                                                                            H'
                                                                                                                                    Lii H'C"
                                                                                                                                    0        CC N.)


                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4    C
                                                                                                                                                                                                .0' t...J •• C" Li

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '.c   C                                  H'                                                                         N..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Li.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lii

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             00 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Cjl •           -      "-4 cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U..)                                                              '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ut,r..--.0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    • I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I—'
         H-Ct CD                                    C\         .)                      Lii
                                                                                              <                             H'      Li.) C'. cc                                                  N.)    .- . cc Li.) '-.4                                                                                                                  H'                                                          '.0                       —a          0 00                       H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N.)                                     0'.N..)                   C...)                                                                          cc                                      '.O
     cn   )                                                    • '.0                   N.)                                              • D3 •                                                   N.) H'                '.o   0      N..)                                                                                                                                                               0                         Lii         0 00                         (.4            Li.)   H'0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N.)                                                               N.)                                                                            --                              .\O     .-
                   r1(Drt   CO                      OH'        . Lii    N.)00-                                                          •3•                                                      -4 C . Lii                  N.)     I-                           cc-C'.--JH'..---.0D)           C'H'H'OO'—rr0       00000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              oLiiN.)Liicc                 H'     N..)'.0OH'CC..—P1       '.o-occcc—-'   ccH'CC'ON.)   —4                        cc          000                          C"             "-4 Lii    0                                U.)    Q\)—'Lii0,'0                                               '--.1   .. -0H'-'.0                 --CCN..)                       .-N..)N..)      U.)         QL.iijit-.OP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N.) cc
              C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .- 000                                                                               ',                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (J u
cn
                                                      -4 • H'
                                                      0
                                                                                       ui
                                                                                              '                             H' C' Lii cc
                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 N..)   Lii
                                                                                                                                                                                                 H'co Lii0 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 • LiiLi.) '-4                                                               .                                             H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .                                "-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -4                        .- 000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Lii

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lii H'F-.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Lii — N..)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N..)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N..)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -                                                                          03                            cc—i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cc U.)                   -- cc
         r1        EcD.     P1                                     H' cc
                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                            H'
                                                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                                                    C'.      Lii cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    00                                    .I             C cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        cc .i:-                  .
                                                                                                                                                                                                        '                                                                                                                                  H'                                                                                                                                                                                        N.)                                                               N.)
     CD       rt                                      SZ           H'                  Ln                                   cc               cc-'-j                                              H'cc H" CC CC                                                                                                                                                                                         Li.)                      C'.                                                                   '—4
                                                                                                                                                   .-                                            H'                    cc C...) --                                                                                                         H'                                                                                                0 000                            N..)               Lii   --                            H'                                   H'-4                         N.)                                                                                1—0'.--.)                                                .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \ .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C'.                    C".
                                                                   H' cc                                                    Lii              C"                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C...)
     P1 I-ID) CD
                                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                    C....)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 H' N.) cc Lii Li)                                                                                                                         H'                                                             0                                  000                              H'         0'.0                                         N.)                                                              H'                                                                                                               QUF-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C...)
              Ci)                                                  O'                                                       La.)    '—4      Lii                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0'—
     SC? H'                                                        .N                  0                                    Lii     C'Lii —                                                      N.) cc                 -4 cc -.0              c                                                                                           l-                                                             Li.)                   Lii         0 00                      liii   U.)        Li.) 0'.                                     N.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O0C'C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        U.)                                                                               '-.jLii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        —4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                  N.)'.o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                            CO                        .C>C\J1            O'.0-4LI1'C
     H' 0                                             _4           C....)              .11                                         I•                                                     H'0 Li.)                           .i>Lii
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      --.iN,N..)N.)L.)--4-                                     0000000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .0C'C'N.)U.)Li)'.oC'.occN-.)N..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           N.)       0'.Q'..nN.)CCH-H'




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i--.-J0OL-aL-a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            '.—O¼QC'.C'.C'.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N.)                     cc         0 00                             Lii        0 0     U.)                                          i.—L..)(_...)'.0L.4LflLJ1                            H'F-..)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F-4NLiC'.O•'.Og               Q(au..)N.)H'CC .---.4L-aCCCCH'H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ccCC'.CN)cc.-CO              N.)N.)N.)N.)                 -40O.-CLiiN.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N.)   0                  H' .p-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          '
                                         C'-4H'N.)N..)N.)N.)
     H'C)
                                                                •0                     H'                                               •     ).                                                 .C-     H • 0cc H'                                                                                                                         H'                                                                                    -.     -    000                             N.)    •0 C                             :               Li.)                                                              .-           I_fl U.) cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     b                              • U.)                                        N..)   -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I.
              '1
                             r.rj   0 '1C)

                                                    rH'
                                                        0"

                                                                            _•03                                  —
                                                                                                                                   (I
                                                                                                                                   H C)0

                                                                                                                                                                                                         p• M 0              C'.                                        H'Li •.                   cc.H'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C                     'o.• '-.&'-icccc                                             —       .)- •               —a                   ,- H'cc           •   CC      -0"                                        _..I.—                                   •\0C                                                                                H't._)t,..       H'Cji     • U-4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        l'-..)03                                 '.si
                                                                                                                      H'                                                --.             —                                          CD
                                                                                                       -J'---J-




                                                                                                                      Z\)          H C0
                                                                                                                                   H C)0
                                                                                                                                                                         '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                      I3                                                                                                                       -           CO                                                                0         CO             '1
                                                                                                                      )            II 0                                 i—' O-.—----—
                                                                                                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                                                                                                                             --
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             —s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CD
                                                                                         CC)C)'00000
                                                                                                                      'j           U   0       CC)                           i'.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         00P-H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CD
                                                                                                                                               0                                                                                            0
                                                                                                00

                                                                                                                      Q.
                                                                                                                      -
                                                                                                                                   U
                                                                                                                                   U           C)    0        HHHHI-'


                                                                                                                                                                        c) PH—-'.C)-
                                                                                                                                                                      -. '.o'—'                              Q)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H'f—HHCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        —
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •-a3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CD   >4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0H                                                                       ,.J. CO                      H CD
                                                                                                                                   II          C)                       Cfl
                                                                                                                                                                                        --.-            —'                                  \J                                                                                                               -            —
                                                                                                00                                 II          H' 00                    CD   '1 C)                                               H-CD                0H+          —.              '.i s—0-----:.-                                    '1+        0'C)c+       HCD
                                                                                                                      H'   Q                                          H • CO                          c
                                                                                                                      H' H'                                           0H                                                                    '.j.)                               L)
                                                                                               000
                                                                                         C)C)C)C)                     1-'               'jun
                                                                                                                                                     r'1'1C
                                                                                                                                                              C)C)0   0H      I—'---'
                                                                                                                                                                                        H'     0—CD
                                                                                                                                                                                                      —'---.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO0H+0                   —'       'L._is.      0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1_JO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     • L)'J 'J\)
                                                                                                                                                     ,   I..' r
                                                                          Table
                                                       Calculation        of DRO per US$1,     1963
                                                                 (us$1.      LE 0.435)
                (1)      (2)           (3)       (4)       (5)    -        (6)         (7)            (8)'     (9)     (10)         (11)     (12)
)ttOfl       9Z,.J.99   2.255'-      89.944    13.380   31.860        10.800       9.482"        65.522               7.3.. 97,2.     . 32    .36
I.ce         71.425     1.347'       70.078    9.836    12.7 27        6.000       4.990"        33.553       7.773   41. fl6         .21     • 26
Lilet        26. 122    2.281        2 84 1"   5.996 12.055            8.400       0.418"        26.869       3.231   30,,100'        .49      .55
 same        28.l30     1.475'       26.655"   4.984 11. 254           6.000       1.935'        24. 173      3.094   27.267          .39      .44
anu ts       98.824"    2.377        96.447"   8.300 14.271            9.600       5.308"        37   .479   10.244   47.723'         l7       .21
ori,
summer       29.999'    1.900'       28.099"   4.690 11. 969           4.800       4.690         26.149       3.173   29.322"         .40      .45
3utumn       22.067"    1.900"       20.167"   4.690 11.969            4.800       4.690"        26.149       2.378   28.527'-        .56      .62
eat          35.717"    6.038"       29.679"   3.848 19.906            7   .200   —0.878"        30.076       3.588   33.664'         .44      .49
arley        29.lZ"     3.909"       25.83"     .9 7_4 14.243          7.200      —0.47,3"       23.9j4       2.937   26. 8,81'       .41      .46
sans         22. 684     3.153       19.531    2.959 16.931            7.200      — 0.260        26.830       2.483   29.313          .60       .65
nti1s        36. 170    6.   244"    29.926"   3.304 20. 220           6.000      —3.650"        25.874 3.488         29.362'         .38      .43
  ions       187.034                187.034"   9.080 21.522            9.600       5   .770"     45 .972     22.014   67.986'         .11      .16
Eii ck—
peas         30. 430    3.083"       27.347"    3.255 20.220           8.400      —0.542'        31.333 3.135         34.468'         .50      .55-
a,-.         310.265                310.265    36.667 35.364          60. 500     21.675        154.206        —      154. 206        .22      .22
Dte:      Column headings as in Table 4A
Sources: As in Table 4.A,,          mutatis mutandis with respect to exchange rate
                                                                                                               •4
                                                                    Table 10
                                                      Calculation of JjC per      Us$1, 1964
                                                               (us$1     LIE   0.35)
Crop              (i)        (2)            (3)     (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)    (9)      (10)     (ii)   (12)
Cotton       118.602       2.423       116.179    17.680   35.578   11.880        8.848   73.186     11.047   84.233     .27   .32
Rice          71.611       1.229        70.382    11.376   15.318      6.660      5.992   39.346      7.955   47.301     .24   .29
Millet        22.350                    20.069     7.083   13.343      9.240      1.649   31.315      3.149   34.466     .68   .75
                          (2.281*)
Sesame        n.a.          n.a.         n.a.     n.a.     n.a.        n.a.        n.a.    n.a.        n.a.    n.a.     n.a.   n.a.
Peanuts       n.a.          n.a.         n.a.      n.a.    n.a.        n.a.        n.a.    n.a.        n.a.    n.a.     n.a.   n.a.
Corn,
              29.278       2.253        27.025     6.068   13.678      5.280      4.884   29.910      3.042   32.952     .48   .53
Wheat         38.309       6.269        32.040     4.390   22.088      7.920     —0.639   33.759      3.718   37.477     .46   .51
Barley        31.756       3.531        28.225     3.440   16.637      7.920      0.009   28.006      2.533   30.539     .43   .47
Beans         29.181       3.931        25.250     3.760   20.445      7.920     —0.641   31.484      2.49    34.433     .54   .59
Lentils       n.a.          n.a.         n.a.       n.a. n.a.           n.a.       n.a.    n.a.        n.a.    n.a.     n.a.   n.a.
Onions       192.914         —         192.914     8.480 23.700     10.560        6.030   48.770     22.441   71 .211   .11    .16
Chick—peas        n.a.      n.a.         n.a.       n.a.  n.a.          n.a.       n.a.    n.a.        n.a.    n.a.     n.a.   n.a.
Sugar,ref.247.188            —         247.188 46.669 39.190        61.940       23.879   171.678       —     171.67     .30   .30
Note:    Column    headings as   in Table   4A.                                                                                  ,    0
Sources: As       in Table 4.A.,   mutatis inutandis with respect   to exchange rate.
* 1963
                                                                                                                                          gil
        1927    1516        420   1594   2133     255      362      47     447       41       Cl


                        _ell                Crop areas, 1913—1969

                                            (000 Leddan)


        Year Cotton     Rice Wheat       Corn    Millet Ba.'aey    Cane .3e.ns Onions    Lentils Helba
                                                                                (winter)
        2912    i722        226   1287   1633      200     364       50     518       26      60      50
        1913                             1686                        )6              28               ro
                1723        225   1306            204      369       4.0   .4                 60
        1914    1755         43   1253   1820     285      383      48     428        16      35     37
        1915    1186        320   1534   1777     275      446       52    23        23       I.,    48
        1916    1656        148   1394   1675     245      423                       30       62      57
        1917    1677        263   1076   1623     264      4.79                               92     92
        1918    1316        371   1239   1745     303      324       64    4'76      44       68     103
        1919    1574        144   1275   1727      257     343       57    505       29       62     92
        1920    1828        159   1147   1867      249     328       52    418       33       70     90
        1921    1290        312   1405   2009     259      380      64     494       27       72     79
        1922    1801         48   1462   1960     237      361      63     476                85     75
        1923    1715        179   1481   1797     224      386       56    471       40       20
        1924    1788        246   1364   1807     230      359       51    436       .1
                                                                                              ',.,
                                                                                               I-)    1;t
        1925    1924        137   1329   2000     213      353       51              39       64     103',jS
                 786 ____   229   1475   2086     273      321       52    414                63     •_7•__.__

1927
                 738        255    53 059 232 tJf          353       57    511                84     / I-
        1929    1841        316   1555   2086     255      386       54    502                69     70
        1930    2082        346   1466   1227     260      332      54     424       41       74.    75
        1931    1683         5    1589   2113     330      295      65     424       43       82     I(
        1932    1094        472   1697   1968     346      352      70     592       45       91     122
        1933    1204        422   1374   1578     263      282      71     469       64       85     88
        1934    1732        392   1369   1572     295      271,.    50     432       41       $8     $7
        1935    669         471   1410   1575     335      271      60     416       35       81     81
        1936    1716        471   1410   1520     333      272      61     395       33       78     94
        193?    1978        263   1369   1559     320      261      68     386       42       76     92
        1938    1784        476   1416   1497     390      264      68     385       26       79     86
.       1939    1625        545   1446   1549     412      263      72     385       35       81     63
        1940    1665        509   1506   1540     374      268      76     394       30       62     60
        194.1   1644        446   1502   1527     429      256      76     369       33       82     79
    .   1942    706         673   1576   1983     824      321      88     359       17       7o
                                                                                                /
                                                                                                     1)0
        1943    713         642   1917   1951     729      419      87     381       19       57      57
        1944    53          620   1651   1890     728      331      96     425       21       81      52
 •.     1945    .982        630   1647   1879     684      359      96     392                75     55
        1946    1212        632   1586   1653      551     245      92     381       24       78     65
        1947    1254        776   1630   1608      543     237      94     382       33       73     61
        1948    1441        786   1516   1551     525      220      91     396       .-, -I   73     64
                                                                    t1
        1949    169?        703   1417   1494     499      168      0)     L1..1L+   40       71      -d
        1950    1975        700   1372   1451     393      117      81     356       36       81
        1951
        1952
        1953
                1979
                1967
                1324
                            488
                            374
                            423
                                  1497
                                  1412
                                  1790
                                         1655
                                          1704
                                         2015
                                                  423
                                                  433
                                                  486
                                                           118
                                                           137
                                                           116
                                                                    0'
                                                                    1 •
                                                                    66

                                                                    104
                                                                           320
                                                                           -J

                                                                           299
                                                                                     37
                                                                                     32
                                                                                     35
                                                                                              75
                                                                                              52
                                                                                              69
                                                                                                     53
                                                                                                     54

        1954    1579        610   1795   2904     457      12       115    310       '4.)     87
        1955    1616        600   1523   1833     1437     136      Ui     358       50       81     61
        1956    1653        690   1570   1836     476      132      110    337       46       62     61
        1957    118         731   1514   1769     449      133      107    355       50       83     65
        1956    1905        518   1425   1955     423      136     113     360       49       73
        1959    1760        729   1475   1859     467      141     112     3514.     49       79     59
        1960    1S73        706   1456   •1821     454     142      111     377       /49     25      62
        1961    1966        537   1384    1603    457      121      112    361       5.       0.)    40
                  Table 11, continued Crop Areas, 1913—1969 (cont'd.)
                                         (000 feddan)




                                                                                                   S
    Year       Cotton   Rice    Wheat   Corn   Millet   Barley Cane   Beans Onions Lentils Helba



 1962           1657     830     1455   1832    454      131    121    383   50       79    (60)

 1963           1627     959     1345   1721    484     121     133    382   59       78    (59)

 1964          1611      962     1296   1661    496     126     134   443    62(54)   79     62

 1965          1900      848     1145   1455    501     128     130   445    58(51)   89     52

 1966          1859      844     1303   1583    518     101     133   427    68(58)   75     43

 1967          1626     1078     1262   1494    525     154     137   350    55(42)   66     35

 1968          1464     1208     1432   1561    535     155     156   348    51(39)   52     34

 1969          1622     1196     1265   1491    476     148     170   366    70       46    38




     Source: For Tables A—il through A—13: 1913 through 1957, M. M. El Imant, "A Production
Function for Egyptian Agriculture, 1913-1955." Memo No. 259, Institute of National Planning,
Cairo, December 31, 1962. For 1912 and 1958—61, Annuaire Statistique, several issues,
gicu1tural Economy, Ministry of Agriculture, several issues, and Economic Bulletin, National
Bank of Egypt, several issues. Kantar, dariba, and ardeb are volume measures. The weight
equivalents can be found in icu1tural Economy, op. cit., 1962, p 42. The cotton lint
Kantar used here is the "old" Kantar. 1LE = 100 piasters = 1000 millieme. 1/eddain = 0.42
ha = 1.04 acres.
     For 1962—63, Economic Bulletin, op. cit., 1970, and 1964—1969, Deve1oment of the
Agricultural Sector, 1964-1969, Central Department of Mobilization and Statistics, April
1962, p. cit., 1969. Beans, including humus. For onions, the figures in parentheses from
1964 to 1968 are from Economic Bulletin; the reason for the rather large deviations between
the two sources is not clear. For helba, 1961 figure is from Agricultural Economy, op. cit.,
1962, p. 142, 1962 and 1963, our interpolation.
                                                                                                                       — 2.1—
                                    Table 12            Yields per 100 feddan


Year             -
           Colton,
        lint Grain
        t#..*
                        Fice,  Wheat, Corn, Nillet, Eriey, Cane,
                        dariba ardeb ardb ardeb     ardeb   100
                                                                        Kant.ars
                                                                                   i3eans, CDions
                                                                                   ardeb (win—
                                                                                                ter),
                                                                                                100
                                                                                                              Lentils, He1
                                                                                                              ardeb      arde'

                                                                                                Kantars

1913     44)4    304     162        525    633         746     586       655        553           190          470        380
1914.    367 260         113        475    716         807     524       675        441           144          333        330
11 5     402     306     137        463    741         826     560       668        447           157          352        300
1916     306 233             123    475    696         811     565       675        400           157          396        391
1917 375         287         146    503        715     733     572       655        453           141          362        369
1918     366     281         147    471        681     340     568       635        473           157          398        380
1919 354         271         134    429        672     84.3    533       675        448           150          391        371
1920 330         253         141    502        686     842     572       629        4.46          151          359        36L
1921     337     259         120    478        607     307     571        652       /44b          146          399        33c
1922     373     286          91    455        615     797     568        654       444           141          353        330
1923     381     292         134    498        673     205     564        684.      443           14.1         3Q4        303
1r/4.    407 309             132    455        678     823     544        742       395           140          406        334
   .5414 316                 136    494.       700     845     572        693       445           148          402        335
1926 429 327                 138    457        70      879     571        704       387           141          375        316
1927     401     305         136     505       696     833     600        692       465           151          412        347
1928 464 351                 142    44.2       692     902     555        747       380           148          278        309
1929 463 351                 141    528        701.    917     595        6614.     456           160          3714.      332
1930 397 300                 139    492        694     858     574        44..      431           143          380        321
1931  373 235                118    526        671     895     597        725       417           149          376        325
1932 453 342                 125     560       701     885     621        718       47             149         393        325
1933     475     358         135     523       668     823     595        724       447            14          332        320
1934     4.36    329         140     487       714     921      598       787       409            144         349        310
1935     511     380         160     556       766     987      701       771       455            14.1        412        331
1936     531     399         .157    588       749     875      722       773       489            147         421        360
1937     557     370         151'    601       756     908      735       782       494            156         449        363
1938     467' 316            163     588       749     862      735       751        478           13          404.       371
1939     535  360            174     615   .

                                               703     926      755       759        513           171         44         3e4
1940  544 365                139     602       709     867      750       733        509           166         480        384
''1   509 340                135     499       6oQ     781      636       78         493           169         472        493
 .42 600 399                 148     534       523     836      717       633        4.98          139         460        378
1943      500    343         113     449       404     758      625        557       401              135      468        358
1944      544    373         139     382       589     749      571       604        490              125      397        33.
945       4.31   361         145     479        645    766      608       611        507              162      440        394
19J.4     500    3o6         157     489        615    681      605       611        508              141      400        383
947 503 336                  174     427        623    761      596       644        4.42             139      391        374
140 617 4.02                 176     475        649    760      630        609       466              143      420        3S1
1949
1950
1951
          514
          430
          403 22
                 339
                  295    .
                             176
                             188
                             135
                                     549
                                     495
                                     539
                                                593
                                                643
                                                613
                                                       813
                                                       773
                                                       373
                                                                684
                                                                647
                                                                702
                                                                           583
                                                                           691
                                                                           727
                                                                                     488
                                                                                     359
                                                                                     168
                                                                                                      154
                                                                                                      121
                                                                                                      142
                                                                                                               416
                                                                                                               393
                                                                                                               339
                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                          392

                                                                                                                          333
1952      504    353          146    518        631'   862      719        785       4.53             134      345        4C2
1953      535     381         163    576        657    855      7/0        790       451              132      427        399
                                                                                                      138 '
1954      490     343        194     642        658    358      739        317       490                       433        415
1955      410     294        231     635        667    878      778 '      831       473              129      380        416
1956      438     319        241     657        643    886      813        628       394              129      363        422
1957      496     347         247    646        604    901      818        842       461              132      399        L2
1958      521     368         224    661        637    959      828        830       467              128      361        420
1959      578     398         237    652        563    1010     838        861       379              133      330        418
1960      570
            V
                  390         223    66         663     950
                                                         v
                                                                676
                                                                 V
                                                                           871       517    .
                                                                                                      148      363        4.4.2
                                                                                                                      —2.-
                    Tab1e 13                  F farm prices      of crops, mi11imes per unit


Year            nrGrain
           Cotton,          Rice,    Theat, Corn, r11ct, Earle3,
                            dariba ardeb          ardeb ardeb ardeb
                                                                               (,ane,
                                                                                         .
                                                                                             Beans, Lons, L:
                                                                                             ardeb   (win—   ti s, ardeb
                                                                                                                          Ir L
         Lint                                              .                  (Kantar -.-------      ter),
                                                                                                        —    ardeb
        k-'"
                                                                                                     )Cantar:
1913    3803         895     8750     1406         1093        1006    958       32          1343      105    1428        1148
1914    2402         673     8146     1381          925         828    789       33          1334     316     1577        1329
1915 :3$57                                C-
                    1056     8706
                                      I
                                                   1051        1017   1036       35          1156     200     1791        176!
1916     7562       1184    13676    1880          1603        1435   1110       40          122      168     1271        2417
1917     7703        891    15251    3081          1956        1974   1415       49          2224     307     2068        3728
191$     7440        973    15663    3107          2195        2064   1710       55          2450     165     2520        3CC8
1919    17562       2157    28306    3o49
                                          /        3040        3553   2505       65          4036     391     3814        3280
1920     6900       1252    16293    3275          1294        1216   2072      102          4093     326     3554        3348
1921     6858       1235    14228    1989          1110        1120    951       92          1%9      434     1811        1818
1972 6142           1088    15243    1684          1162        1227   1135       60          2043     293     1565        19144
1923    7959        1236    11585    1469          1245        1216    941       48          2138     142     1514        2947
4 7897 i%5: 13011                    1961          1688        1787   1221       50          2423     204     2102        3914
  5 6093             984.   13571    215$          1282        1331   .1182      43          2305     244     2540        2089
1926    4306         873    10771    1703           873         902   1009       3           2638     243     2141        1505
927     5936        1130     9861                  1113        1177    280       39          1272     208     1701        1402
'923    5176         975    10246                  1279        1220    940       38          1590      166    2108        2020
929     4072         818     9511    1420           950         751    720       37          1510      109    1851        2030
933     2410         540     2313    1291            950        890    700       41          1830     206     1721        1740
931     2016         612     9730    1320            775        740    880       38          1590     234     1429        1227
932     2456         690     6020    1070          ,.590        550    560       35           $50     162      900         800
                                     11—i
933     2272         393     6248                  1043         939    465       34           878      46     1022    .
                                                                                                                           996
934     2650         596     7403    1499          1060         902    901       34          1550     173     1755        2480
935     2726         643     6669    1427           734         629    847       34          1527     151     1704        2234
936     2870         762     7070    1149           838         820    505       34          1277     193     1469        1280
937     2154         532     8129    1265          1073         972    738       34          1332      90     1529         1150
938     2136         604     6799    1445          1051         779    703       34          1497     231     1555        .1217
939     2896         509     6991    II )) E)       942         782    682       36          1262     139     1414         1414
940     2818         640     8409    1364          1253         972    763       44          1154     146    . 1776        2009
1 3320               641    10518    1781          1210        1035   1300       45          2476     120     24.63        2706
 42 4094            1022    15181    2900          2330        2330   2200       71          3290     180     2790         2770
943     5184        1010    17351    2900          2330        2330   2250       91          4020     390     4450         3600
944     61.16       1010    19025    3920          2630        2630   2250       91          4020     660     4450        6171
945     6526        1010    19085    3980          2630        2630   2490       91          4020     380     4450        567Q
946  7470           1007    19295    3594         .2350        2350   1850       95          4C50     690     4450        4780
947 12052       .   1007    20065    3287          2350        2050   1600       95          4380     380     4450        4400
948    11174        1016    20065    3300          2350        2050   1600       95          4450      550    4450        4765'
949    15000        1016    20065    3300          2300        2100   1220       95          3510      960    4600        4130
950    25110        1016    18485    3300          2450        2450   2620     115           5240     1030    6110        62CC
951    18650         800    134.85   3300          2450        2200   3070     115           6230     755     64o         7410
952 12420           800     14500    3300          2700        2360   2060     115           576C)    754     9080        4560
953 12097           800     15250    4900          2700        2430   2750     115           5370     766     9150        5670
954 12538           800     15750    4400          2641        2648   1949     110           4847     324     9150        643
955    1414         $00     16500    3900         3776         3547   2869     105           5659     355     6294        8292
956    17020        800     16500    a900         4j88         3622   2492     100           6613     548     9150        6'737
957 14790           200     16500    4070         3500         3520   2280     115           6520     41      9110        4960
958 13630            800    16500    3700          3300        3554   3320     105           5670     682     9210        4'700
959 14970           791     16500    3700         3300         3210   2930     105           6530     361     9150        6670
960    (iioo)       791     17000    4290         3680         3060   2570     105           5820     350     9140        6210
961                                       ./                            ,        ,             '/       I,      V
                                                                                               —2 i   —
                                                                                               'I
           Table 14            Labour and water input, 1912—196


            Labour,    Uater, billion ri3                Labour,      Waters bi]Jion
 Year       index,     May —    Scot ember        Year                       —
                                                         index,       May         Septercber
            1950—54    June,                             1950—55      June            .

       .      1000                                       =1000
1912          (575)   3.01        18.20      /    194)   1,014       6e25           14.20
1913           580    3.83        12.20          1942    1,013
               585    3.18                                           7.38          20.10
1914                              20.00           1943   1,017       6.48          24.40
1915           593    4.05        14.90          1944    1,019       7.21          17.90
1916           602    4.14        26.60          1945    1,016       6.75          18.80
1917           612    5.40        27.80          1946    1,0i/.      7.14          26.90
1918           627    8.62        17.70          1947    1,009       8.57          22.30
1919           644    4.52        20,80          1948    1,002       L72           19.10
1920           661    4.90        17.80          1949
1921
                                                           999       7.68          20.10
               692    4.00        19.60
1922           726
                                                 1950      999       8.08          22.30
                      3.35       23.60           1951    1,001       6.58          17.50
1923           753    5.38       21.40           1952      998
1924           784    4.63                                           6.56          20.90
                                 22.30           1953      999       &ói           20.60
1925           810    4.67       16.50
1926                                                     1,003       6.80          27.00
               840    5.49       20.50                   1,010       8.09
1927          862     4.89                                                         22.50
                                 18.30           1956    1,010       8.30          20.50
1928          888     5.33       19.90           1957
1929          908
                                                         1,010       9.12          21.10
                      6.17       24.40                   1,010       6.6           24.90
1930          926     5.33       17.50           1959    1,010       7.63          27.90
1931          942     3.80       21.20           1960    1,010       7.65          20.20
1932
l933<,,.
1935
1936
              97 7..3
              958
              978
                      4.99
                 5.61<.
                                 22.80
                                 22.
                                 23.90
                                                 1961    1,010
                                                 196, 1,025
                                                      1,041 ' .
                                                                     7.30
                                                                    8.94
                                                                             qg
                                                                                   26.io
                                                                                   25.30
              986     6.75       23.80           1965    1,070
1937          990     5.60       22.10
                                                                    11.93          1260
                                                 1966    1,086     (14.00)        (ii,oo)
1938        1,007     6.16       28.10           1967
1939        1,014     7.37       18.20
                                                         1,084     (is.oo)        (io0o)
                                                 1968    1,081     (16.00)        (10.00)
1940        1,019     6.37       17.90           169                   ,
   Sources: Labour: 1912—1955, El Iman (1962); 1959—1969,
                                                             George Abed,
             tion, Employment Growth, and ECOTIOUIIC
                                                     Development, unpublished thesis,
             Unjvergj of California, Berkeley,
                                                   1972; our interpolation for 1955—1959.
            Water: Discharge of Nile River at Aswan; M. Clawson, H.H.
             and L.T. Alexander, The Agrjcu1atura Potential of the Middle Landsberg
                                                                              East,
            E].sevier, New York, 1971
                                                                                              —




                                Table 15_    Yields, MT/fedd&i


Year      ('rttrn      Rice Corn Millet Wheat Parley Beans Onions Lentils Helba Cane
        Lint    Seed

1961   0.169   0.332   2.13   1,C    1.38   1.04   1.10   0.45   4.C5   0.54   0.54 37.38
1962   0.276   0,525   2.46   1.09   1,45   1,C9   1.12   0,86   7.20   0.71   (0.73)39.74 .

1963   0,2     0,533   2.31   1.08   1.51   1.11   1.11   0.69   6.70   0.60   (0.71) 38.74

1964   0.312   0.567   2.12   1.17   1.50   1.16   1.17   0.86   7.52   0.66   0.76 36.49
1965   0.250   0.5C4   2.11   1.48   1.61   1.11   1.04   0.79   7.74   0.69   0.76 36.74
  6    0,245   0.441   1.99   1.51   1.66   1.13   1.04   0.91   7.47   0.59   0.76 39.02
1967   0.269   0,466   2.12   1.46   1.69   1.04   0.93   0,56   7.65   0.52   0.74 38.37
1968   0.298   C.538   2.15   1.48   1.70   1.07   1.03   0.92   6,84   0.69   0.69 38.82
1969                   2.15   1.58   1.72   1.01   1,01   0.88   6.84   0.52   0.64 40,33
                          ,     '1            '      1#      "     -
                                                                          V            ,


Source: Economic Eulletin, . cit. 1970, and Development of the Acriculturl Secto, .2' £.Ji'
         1972.
                                                                                                      —'o-

                        Table 16
                 j                          .Ponestic _____prices, ex fari, pistersjr
            Cotton
 Year     Lint Seed          Rice   Corn Millet Wheat Barley Beans Crxicns Lentils Helba Cane
'1960 29,300' 652 1,799' 2,629W 2,186' 2,827' 2,142 3,755"                       (778)"   5,713" 4,OO6 234'
.1961   26,400k 652 1,798' 2,543"            2,411"   2,833w   2,012w 5,591" 1,814"       5,867" (4,196) 23
 1962 26,300 652W 1,792" 2,304"              1,960' 2,856"     2,157' 4,867' 1,763"       6,675" (4,366) 234'

 1963 27,800w         652   1,798' 2,686"    2,122' 2,874"     2,637   5,079'   1,680"    6,064" (4,576) 239'

 1964 30,800' 652' 1,796' 2,686 2,413 2,874" 2,741" 5,156' 1,461"                         4,101   4,767   239"

 .65 34,000           652   2,013 2,802      2,506 3,199       2,416 5,207 2,071          4,840   5,109   261

1966 30,3C0 652 2,531 3,38 2,760 3,455                         2,707 5,316°'    1,778     4,680   5,293   281

1967 31,6CC           652 2,840 3,790 3,112 3,937              2,993 5,864 2,007          5,095   5,580   293

1966 32,500 652 2,980 3,016                  2,656 3,392       2,183 4,697 1,856          5,860   5,213   295

1969    30,600        652 2,909 3,436        2,742 3,459       2,053 4,064 1,481          4,939   5,058   292

Source,     1960 to 1964 —      griu1tural cowmY,0PC].t
            1%4 to 1969— Develoent
           The       to serie
                                                                           Opit , se'eial issues
                                              of the grict.ltural Sector 161—,969,
                                            inn 1964tievej of the data for 1960—64.
            For      millet and lentils overlapping data for 1964 were not available and the 'figures
           for 1964—67 were used without corrections (which for the other crops renialned within
           5 per cent). For helba,,data were available for 1960 and 1964—69; the years 196 1—63
           were obtained by lineaø interpolation.
           The price for cottcn lint is the implicit price for unginried lint, calculated through
           deducting from the total value of unnned cotton1th value of cotton seed
           (quantity tin's official prcducer price) and dividing by the voiuie of ginned lint.
                          Table 17              International prices, piasters per rnet'c ton


                                               Millet Wheat Earley Beans Onions Lentils Helba Cane
         antCotton
             Seed lUce                  Corn


/
                                                                                      2,325                              166
1       24,900    3,520 2,333          2,119 2,207      2,028     2,077 3,135                          6,255     4,196

2       30,300    3,467 2,971          2,058    2,225   2,569     2,640    3,397      3,460            5,240     4,386   172


                                                        2,926     2,654    3,499      3,098            5,784     4,576   487
3       31,1W     4,002 3,346          2,580    2,060
t
    .   35,300    4,350 3,748          2,888    2,081   3,286     .2,741   3,295      3,O60 (5,417)              4,767   335

                                                                                      3,516            (6,233)   5,103   122
5       34,500    4,568 3,898 3,067             2,122   2,970      2,958   3,771

                                                2,12    2,876     3,089    4,144      3,500            (6,850)   5,2?3   107
6       36,500    L..,524 3,977        2,C23
                                                                   2,871   3,533      6,662            (5,840)   5,580   114
7       41,600 (4300) 4,456            2,819    2,260   2,911

8       45,630 (4100) 5,128            2,658    2,390   2,596      2,436 4,518         5,333           (7,468)   5,213   114


                  3,959 4,653          2,788            2,547      2,262               4,812                     5,058
9
           V         V    f   .,         t'                V           ,      •,              ..                 .




r ce s:
      Cotton —       lint:
                                   (   Li'j)
                               average,price of crop at officially announced export prices for individual
                               varieties and grades. Ashxouni and Other at price of comparable medium stapi

                   —seed:
                               variety. Rounded to nearfest hundred.
                                   an, .i.f., European port. FAQ seures.
                                                                                /
                                                                                                   '--'
                                                                                                   .




         Rice:       average export price £.o.b. for milled rice, converted to paddy, 100 MT paddy =
                     65 MT milled rice.
         Corn:       average import price, c.i.f.
         Millet: average import price, c.i.f., 1961—1963. From 1964 U.K. import price c.i.f.,
                  Argentina "granifero", adjusted to Erptian level of 1963. FAQ sources.
         Wheat:      average import price, c.i.f.
         Barley: U.K. import price, c .i.f.,              Canadian No 2. FAO seurces. u(.'
         Beans:      average import price, c.i.f., 1961—1962. From 1963 U.K. import price, c.i.f.,
                     adjusted to Egyptian level of 1962. FAQ sources
         Onions: average export price, f.o.b.
         Lentils: average import price, c.i.f., 1961—1964; from 1965 proportional to beans.
         Helba:      domestic price; no international price available.
          Cane:      imputed price; raw sugar export price, Carribean port, raw 900, bagged, Cuba,
                     £.o.b. minus "normal" costs at international prices in Egyptian sugar factories.


          f tt
                     FAOoureeThnd Chapter—.
                  U S 7                 c-     ''               /Vt.
                                                                 c'S               4c..'e c            i t.
                                                                                                         é ct
                                                              Table 18. The Cotton Textile Industry, 1956—70:
                                                       Coats and Revenues at Current Domestic and International Prices
                                                                                   (In thousands of bE)
                        .                                       1956                                      1960                                   1965/66                               1969/70
                                                 Domestic         Internatioii        Domestic              International            Domestic        International.       Domestic               International
                                                  Prices             Prices            Prices                  Prices                 Prices               Prices         Prices                    Prices
                                                                                                             it          Ii                                                                      '!I       I'Y
Produted outputs
Cotton yarn                                      16,567.7           15,396.1          29,884.0           214,777.2     214,777.14          ...                    ...    107,211.8         79,595.!.     79,594•I.
Gray cotton cloth                                      ...                ...               ...                ...           ...      6,230.2               14,353.8
Bleached cloth                                         ...                ...               ...      .         ...           ...     12,1495.9              8,327.3
Dyed and printed cloth                           28,0514.1          214,996.0         35,767.0           31,651.3      31,651.3      51,1141.9             314,14149.0
                                                                                         827.2                                                                    ...      5,0140.5
                                                                                                                                                                  ...j
Rayon yarn                                          768.9              650.7                                690.7                          •..                                              1,7014.5      l,70!..5
Cotton waste
                                                                                                                           69°•7a/
                                                                                                                                           ...                                   ...               ...    2,717.I!.'
Other products
                                                       •..14/
                                                    290.7—'
                                                                          •..141
                                                                       290.7—'
                                                                                            •..14/
                                                                                         226.2—'
                                                                                                               ••.14/ I4,l4l0.2,
                                                                                                            226.2—' 7,569.5—'        23,372.'              l6,3314.3'            ...               ...   12,l477.2/
    Total value1 all outputs                     I45681.I4          141,333.5         66,7014.14         57,3145.6 69,099.1          93,2140.8             3,14614.4     110,252.3         81,298.9 96,1493.5
Produced current inputs (traded)
Cotton lint                                      23,915.1           23,915.1          35,530.1           35,530.1             ...          ...                    ...     58,703.1         58,703.1
Cotton yarn                                           ...                 ...               ...                               ...    53,8142.6             58,687.14,
Rayon yarn                                            ...                 ...               ...                ...            ...     1,055.1                 385.3
Rayon fiberi                                        1467.1             1436.5            1418.5              591.3         391.3           ...                    ...      1,788.3          1,088.2       1,088.2
ChemIcals                                           676.7              632.14            923.2               858.6         858.6           ...                    ...          714.0           66.1          66.1
Starch                                                 ...                ...               ...                ...           ...        636.3                  636.3
Packing material                   .                231.0              215.9             8149.14            789.9          789.9        333.3                  297.5       1,866.7          1,666.7       1,666.7
Fuel                                                372.8              372.8             950.7              779.6          779.6        7214.3                 603.6         798.3            665.2          665.2
Electricity                                         14145.5            14145.5           766.7              628.7          628.7        353.7                  2914.7      2,117.6          1,7614.1      1,7614.1
Spare parts                                         870.2              813.3           1,882.6            1,750.8                     1,107.3                  988.6       1,3114.7         1,173.8
Other                                                  ...                ...               ...                ...      l,75D.8(,
                                                                                                                        14,o21.6—'      14143.3                398.3             ...               ...    1,l73.8,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          6,0142.1+.—
    Total                                        26,978.14          26,831.5          141,321.14         140,729.0      9,220.5      58,1495.9             42,1491.7      66,662.7         65,127.2      12,1466.5
    Depreciation                                  1,567.8            1,1465.2          2,529.14           2,1479.8      2,1Ii9.U,       8314.1                 71414.7     3,900.8          3,1482.8      3,U
    Total value, traded inputs                   28,5146.2          28,296.7          143,850.8          143,208.8     10,778.5-'    59,330.0              143,236.14     70,563.5         68,610.0 15,9149.3
Nontraded inputs
Net aervicee                                      2,035.7            2,035.7           2,516.3            2,516.3       2,516.3       l,771.Oio,            1,771.010/     1,573.5          1,573.5   1,573.5
Other                                                  ...                ...               ...                ...      8,803.8'     15,802.9              15,802.9-'-     1,5314.3         1,5314.3 13,719.52
    Depreciation                                  1,0145.2           1,0145.2          1,931.7            1,931.7       1,931.7         923.6                  923.          938.1               908.1  938.1
    Total                                         3,080.14           3.o80.9           14,14148.0         14,1.148.0   13,251.3      18,1497.5             18,1497.5       I+,15.9          14,015.9 14,201.1
All produced inputs                              31,627.1           31,377.6          148,298.8          147,656.8     214,029.6     77,827.5              61,733.9       714,579.14       72,625.9 32,150.14
Domestic value added                             17,135.2           13,036.8          22,853.6           114,136.8     58,320.8      33,910.8              20.228.0       39,688.8         12,688.9      80,5141..2
Domestic resources, of which:                    10,3814.2          10,384.2          16,018.1           16,018.1                    27,5148.7             27,5148.7      21,703.9         21,703.9 91,371.
                                                                                                                  !47,b01.th
wages and salaries (including fringe benefits)    7,264.3            7,264.3          11,1457.6          11,457.6 22,579.43—          8,992.0               41,992.0      17,662.7         17,662.7 ,S,9J47.
Rent                                                 39.0               39.0             112.5              112.5      ...               59.2                   59.2          25.5             25.3
Profits                                           6,751.0            2,652.6           6,835.5           —1,881.3             ...     6,362.1              —7,320.7       17,9814.9        —9,015.8
Rate of return                                       12.6                                   9.0               -0.2           ...                               -15.0                             -10.2
Investments                                      53)457.6           53,1457.6         76,002.7           76,002.7             ...    148,867.0             I48,867.o'     88,371.3         88,371.3J
Footnotes on following page.
                             (a,.
                                                                    Table 18. The Cotton Textile Industry, 1956—70:
                                                           Costs   and Revenues at Current Domestic and International Prices
                                                                                  (In thousands of   L)
Footnotes:
   if Textiles considered ass separate manufacturing activity.
   2/ Textiles considered as an integrated activity with cotton cultivation. the cotton used in 1956, 16 per cent in 1960 and   114.6   per cent in 1969;   of   these, about half ii
   3/ Waste factor of cotton in the production of yarn was 17.1 per cent of
                                                                          as a joint product.
recovered as "scarto" which has been assigned a scarto price and included
   14/ Medical cotton.                                                                                    from FAQ
   /  Cotton Seed from Tables    and    , and Bachir, op cit, for 1966; yield and export prices for 1969          yearbook.
   /  Blankets, towels and other ready—made products.                                          these eots were extrapolated for 1969.
   7/ Tradedinputs in cotton production: ferti1izr, seed and irrigation     costh see Table    ;
   B/ A premium of 100.0 on imported inputs subtracted from total traded inputs.
                                                         and ginning costs;  value of cotton wood subtracted.
   2' Includes drought, manure, trade, transport margins
  10/ Payments to subcontractors dyeing the fabric.
                                                                       million in 1970.
  11/ Includes imputed rent of LE U.570 million in 1960 and LE 19.222
                                                                   no change in wage level between 1966 and 1969/70.
  I/  Wages from Bachir, op cit, for 1960 and for 1969/70 assuming
  rj/ Adjusted for a normal level of inventories equal to 10 per cent of value of production.
                                                                                                                                                       I
                                                       Table 19. Domestic and International Unit Values of
                                                               Cotton Yarn, Fabrics and Lint, 1956-70
                                                                                        (In LE)
                            1956                                        1960                                 1965/66                        1969/70
                 Domestic    International                Domestic       International            Domestic      International     Domestic     International
Cotton yarn      14146.3              14l14.71                515.3                1427.6"         657.7            1472.O"        6714.3             500.6
Gray cotton
  cloth             ••.                 ...                       ...                ...           735.1            513.7            ...                ...
Bleached cloth      ...                 ...                       ...                ...           897.9            598.14           ...                ...
Dyed and printed
                                              1/                                            i/
  cloth          777.5                692.7—                  805.6                712.9—        1 ,278.9           861.5            ...                ...
Rayon yarn       531.7                14500                   538.9                1450.0          901.2            500.0         891.9               320.0
Cotton 1int'       ...                283.0                       ...              309.3             ...                ...          ...              329.8
  1/  Export  prices of fabrics and yarn derived from the subsidy received by the industry on
                                                                                              exports (exports at domestic
prices — subsidy = f.o.b.  export price).
  2/ F.o.b. unit value adjusted for differences in counts.
  3/ Since the domestic average count in 1965/66 was equal to the export average count in 1960, the same value was
                                                                                                                     used,
assuming that international prices did not change  significantly during that period.
  14/ Unit value from CAGMS industry studies. Until 1960 the Minet el Bassal price
                                                                                     applied to both export-and mill
purchases. Between 1961 and 1965 the domestic sale price exceeded the export price while the reverse occurred between
1961 and 19614. In 1969-70 the ex—farm price converted with the domestic sale
                                                                               price (see Economic Review, 1971, No. 14).
Other international unit values from Monthly Bulletin of Foreign Trade for all multilateral
                                                                                             trading partners.
                              p
                                  -
                                                   -
                                                          -   -                -
                                                                                                                   I,     ,-  a
                                                                             I..


                                            Table 20



                                            The Sugar Industry
                 Costs and   Revenues   at Current     Domestic   and International        Prices
                                            (Values in LE 000)
                                                      1960                                      1970
                                                                At                                      At
                                                       International     -                      _Jnternatjonal
                                            At         lang_term average             At         long term average
                                         mestic              c.i.f.            Domestic                c.i.f.
Outputs:                                  -—
                                          Prices        Import    Prices,
                                                                             ——
                                                                                   Prices         Import Prices
                                                                                                         (4)

  Sugar,    refined                       1)4.993.0          1)4.553.1             33699.0             28652.0
  Molasses                                  870.0             1573.0                1346.0              2267.0
Al]. outputs, total value                 15863 .0           16126.1               35045   .0          30919 .0


Produced, current inputs:

  Thaded: a) in sugar production
           Chemicals                         87.8              790.2                360.7                324.6
           Fuel                             413.6              343.2                683.6                526.4
           Packing                          662.3              596.1               1094.7                985.2
           Spare parts                      878.0              790.2               1040.7                936.6
             Depreciation                  1517.0             1380.5               3581.0               3222.9
             Total                         3558.7             3900.2               6760.7               5995.7


             b) in cane production
             Seeds                          341.4              341.4                468.7                468.7
             Fertilizer                    1057.2              637.8               1524.8               1524.8
             Irrigation                     625.6              463.6               1249.9                962.4
             Total                         2024.2            1442.8                3243.4               2955.9
             Tota) traded:                 5582.9            5343.0               10004.1               8951.6


  Non-
  traded:    Services                       593.0             593.0                1926.0              1926.0
             Depreciation                   628.0             628.0                1482.0              1432.0
             Draft and Manure               411.6             411.6                 986.7               986.7
             Total    non-traed            1632.6            1632.6                4394.7              4394.7
Al]. rcduced iriuts, total value           72iS5             6975.6            14398.8                 13346.3

                                                                                           (cont.)
                                    Table 20,   continued



                                                  (1)           (2)        (3)           (4)
Net domestic value added                        10,280.1    10,783.1     25,040.9    21,957.4
Net value added                                  8,647.5     9,150.5     20,646.2    17,572.7
  Of which: Rant of land                         2,065.8     2,771.2      3,000.8        6,385.2
              Labor, agricultural                  830.2       830.2      2,476.9        2,476.9
              Labor, industrial                  1,931.6     1,931.6      6,274.3        6,274.3
              Management and capital             3,819.8     3,617.5      8,894.2        2,436.3
                   (residual)
Capita], in industry (processing)
  at historical costs                            8,500.0     8,500.0     31,800.0    31,800.0
  at replacement costs                          22,300.0    22,300.0     52,600.0    52,600.0
"Normal" return to management
  and capital:
  Cultivation                                                1,039.2                  2,253.6
               pcb                                           1,115.0                  2,630.0
  Processing 0 pcb                                           2,230.0                  5,260.0
              '5
               pcb                                           3,345.0                  7,890.0
               pcb                                           2,154.2                  4,883.6
  Total at     pcb                                           3,269.2                  7,513.6
               pcb                                           4,384.2                 10,143.6
Resource   Costs

              rspcb                                         9 , 319 .8               24,414.7

             cb
 at          -(10 pcb                                       10,434.8                 27,044.7
                                                            11,549.8                 29,674. 7


 Sources: For 1960: The Sugar Industry, CAGMS,Cairo, May 1963; for 1970: Federation of
 Industries, Yearbook, 1971. Data for packing and fuel, extrapolation from 1960. Data
 on agricultural inputs for 1970 extrapolated from Table 6.with the priced indices.
 Data on irrigation costs from Federation of Industries, Yearbook, 1969. Agricultural
 rents correspond to official, legal maximum average rents for sugar cane land. See
 Table 6 and Bahia, op. cit. Depreciation and rates of return were based on the 1960
 data on investment and the cost of fixed capacity carried out and completed between
 1960 and 1970 (LE 23.3 million). The fixed asset figure for 1960 of LE 8.5 million
 at historical cost was judged far too low. Some of the equipment dates back to the
 pre—Worid War I period and the investment in the industry during the 1950's was very
 small. Assuming the average life of the equipment to be fifteen years and a price
 increase of capita], equipment between 1938 and 1960 to be of 103 per cent (IMF
 export price index from Western Europe) replacement costs of the fixed assets were
 estimated at LE 17.2 million in 1960. Total capital for the two years was estimated
 at LE 22.3 and LE 52.6 million. A depreciation rate of 12.5 per cent used in 1960
 was also used for 1970; interest charged in 1960 was carried to 1970.
                                                             I.


                                                                                108

                                   Table 21


                          The Cement Industry
             Revenues and Costs at Current Domestic Prices
                              (Values ZE 000)


                                               l954        1957
 Outputs:

   Portland Cement                            14530.2     5215.9     6116.8       7233.14
                                                ——          ——         ——             580.2
   White Cement
   Joint products                              196.2       2145.1     957.3       14830•9
   Other revenues                              1114.5      229.7      1410.14         871.0

 All outputs, total value                     148140.9"   5690.7     714814.5    13515.5'


 Produced, current inDuts:

   Traded: Fuel oil
                     .P1—
                                              11432.0     18314.5
                                                             I—_I7
                                                                     2382.1
                                                                        Id.')
                                                                       7')
                                                                                  3055.2
                                                                                      1fl
                                                                                      J'•II
            .3paxe                             330.i       +2i.7      512.+       1C2.1
             Packing material                  561.3       6145.8     879.2       1680.0
                                                  3.14        14.3      5.3         13.7
             Pyrites
             Gypsum                             27.1        39.2        514.0          93.5
             Electricity                        148.1       146.5                     598.14

             Total                            214514.2    30614.7    14176.9      6701.6

   Non-
   traded: Limestone                           183.9       219.8      377.1           615.7
           Clay                                 37.6        58.7       71.5
           Other minerals                        0.2         0.2       32.1           293.14
            Services                           312.14      383.0      212.0       1090.1
                       -
             Total                             5314.0      661.7      752.0       2136.0


______   ___Tota1 value of produced
                  current inputs              2988.2v     3726.14    14928.9      8837.6



 prec iatjon ,ali___                           197.6       366.0
                                                           I92675_-
                                                                       535.0          926.7,

            ofhich,     trdd-                   94.9

  Al]. produced
  ii1
                  inputs, total value

        dnTncti ir1ii ddcL__———               -94
                                              3185.8      14O92.     51463.9      97614.3

                                                                             U406 1
                                                                                    j.

                                                                         109
                            Table2l,     continued




                                            l951      1957      1960      1965/66


Net value added, total                               1598.3'   2019.9"    3751.2v
  of which: Wages and     salaries
               (including fringe beflts)5&5.7        791.0      975.0     1285.2
               Interest                      —-
                                             -
                                                                 37.0      288.1
               Rent                                               3.0       17.5
               Net profits to industry                807.3'   100I.9     2160.1i



Total   capital (historical costs
                minus depreciation)         6136.0   7910.9    13289.6 19786.6


Rate of return, Der cent (net profits        18.0      10.2       7.6       10.9
  on capital)

ateorcanacir utiiizacion,        per cent
                                             89.2      75.0      91.2      106.5




Source: Industrial Studies, The Ceirient Industry, Central Organisation for
         Mobilisation and Statistics, Cairo, June 1968 (in Arabic).

    *cludes capital goods in process of installation, LE 10.8 million.
                              Table 22



                           The Cenent Industry
                Revenues and Costs at International Prices
                           (Values in LE Q0O)


                                           1954     1957       1960    1965/66


1. At current    international   prices:

      Outputs,   total   value             5638.8   7372.6    8521.1   14823.3
 Produced    a
       Inputs, traded                      2323.2   2918,14   3873.4    59714,7
                 non—traded                 636.8    830.0    1020.2    2654.4

      Net domestic value added             3315.6   4454.2    4647.7    8848.6
        of which: net profits              2133.1   2833.2    2612.5    4455.2

      Rate of return,
                         rirpercent
                             'r41o1          IL,7

2.   At constant 1954 international
     prices:

       Outputs, total values               5638.8   6601.2    9657.0   12744.8
Pröduced
                 traded                    2323.2   2858.l    4063.0    5570.8
                 non_tradedC                636.8    789.0     788.4    1518.4

       Net domestic value addedb           3315.6   3743.1    5594.0    7174.0
         of which: net profits             2133.1   2163.1    3790.6    4064.8

       Rate of return,   percent
         (net profits over capital)          34.7     27.2      28.5      20.5




Source: See Table 7.A.lind trade statistics.

      aDepreciation has been distributed between traded and non—traded
       input in proportion to the share of machinery and eui.prnent in total
       capital.

      bTotal   value of outputs minus value o± traded inputs. Domestic value
       added   thus includes value of non—traded inputs at domestic prices.

      cA constant domestic prices; services deflated by domestic wholesale
       price index.
                                   Table 23                                  111



                           Phosphate Fertilizers
         Value and Cost of Production at Current Domestic Prices
                             (Values in LE 000)

                                              1954       1957      1964/65
Outputs:

  Super phosphates                        1192.8        1972.4      3050.5
  Sulphuric acid                            61.2         165.8       415.2
  Other revenues                            49.6          58.7        73.1

All outputs,         total value          1303.7        2196.9      3538.9


Produced,   current inputs:
  Traded: Rock phosphate                      133.5      334.0       601.1
          Pyrites                             208.9      522.3       388.8
          Packing (jute bags)                 143.2      175.7       286.0
             Sulphur                           ———        ———        324.7
             L U.I
             •T:'.
                                               3'.3
             Electricity                       ———        ———          2.7
             Spare parts                       64.4      118.7        71.0
             Other inputs                       3.8        1.3        29.0

             Total                            586.1     1213       1737.8


  Non-
  traded:    Services                          83.0      260.8       336.2

Depreciation, value                       ]!379 _f9__115.i__
              which,tradd_
A11 produced inputs, total value
                          806.2  i637Q______
            of_whjcht±ádjd682.7
                            62iTh1252.7___l798.4
Net domestic valueadded, total               174CL5     944.2
Net value added, total              497.5                559.9      l289.3;
  of which: Wages and salaries                           172.5       312,a.
             (including fringe ben.)L35.7i
             Interest
                     nt               9.7 -
                                              0.4
                     Net profits to indutiy 352.4
                                                           6.2
                                                           0.4
                                                                      18.7
                                                                       4.5
                                                                     953 .__4_
                                                      __________
                                                                     112

                          Tabie   23    ,   continued


                                       1954             1957     1964/65

Total capital (historical costs
              minus depreciation) 1996.1                2299.6    4449.7



Rate of return, percent (net            17.6              16.5      2l
       prof its over capital)                                         /




—- Does not include pension and insurance contributions.
Source: The Phosphat.ic Fertilizer Industry, Central Organization for
        Mobilization and Statistics, September 1967 in Arabic).
                                                                                            113
                                  Table    24



                        Nitrogenous Fertilizers
             Revenues and Costs at Current Domestic Prices
                           (Values in LE 000)

                                           1954                  1957                   1964/65
Outputs:

  Calcium nitrate 15.5%                   4099.4                5919.3                   6124.9
  Calcium ammoniuni nitrate 20.5%           ——                    ——                     2433.4
  Aminonium sulphate 20.6%                  —                     ——                     2199.8
  Calcium ammonium nitrate 26.0%            ——                    ——                     8326.4
  Joint products                                                                           55.1
  Other revenues                                                                         1516.3

All outputs, total value                  4099.4                5919.3                  20655.9


Produced, current inputs:

  Trar!d   ('.ti1ysts                       30.5                  94.6                    217.0
                                           "73.7                 7Q9.3                   2145.2
           FueL                   -.      .492.3                 687.6                   1498.8
                                                                                                  -
           Spare   parts                   176.4                 217.7                    511.8
           Sulphur                          ——                                            402.3

           Total                          1172.9'               1799.2                   4775.1


  Non-
  traded: Limestone           -
                                            46.2                  50.5                    122.4
                                                    -
      Gases                                1306                  2496                     4166        ____
    ___E1ectricy_                           ——
                                                            -     ——                     1698J1111.11111

           Services                        805.2                 804.6                   1402.0
           Other inputs                     —                     ——                      538.7

           Total                           982.0                1104.7                   4178.4


Depreciation, value                        771.2                1160.2_38225
                                                                       1829                  .1
                                                                         -   - --

AU produced .nputs,     total value       2926.1                4064.1                  12776.0
  ôThithaded                              1653.9        —       2272.9   -              6604.2    -   -
Ndèitic value added, total                2445.5                3646.4              -   14S77
                                                                                      'H
                                                                              llli.




                              Table 24,     continued



                                          1954           1957           1964/65

Net value added, total              _Il7.3              1855.2           7879.9
  of which: Wages and sa1aries__
(inc1udinring_ebenefitsi    283.6                        414.1           18728
                 Interest                  79.6           ——              155.9
                 Rent                                      1.2              7.3
                 Net profits to industry 810.1          1439.9           5843.9



Total capital (historical costs
              minus depreciation)         8611.1        9817.3          43235.1


Rate   of   return, percent (net
            profits over capita1)2
                                     nt                   14;
                                                                7             13.5



Rate of capacity utilization, percent 63.6                83.2                80.0




                                                  —---              -     -




        Unspecified.

                                                                                       4
Source: The Nitrogen Fertilizer Industry, CitZalOaP
      Mobilization and Statistics, April 1967 (In Arabic).
                                                                                    115
                                                 Table 25



                                       The Fertilizer Ind
                   Costs and Tevenues at Current Interflatjora1-


                                                                   Prices
H                                         (values in 000)


                                                   1954       1957          19   6,/65
     iii)     Nitrogen    Industry


     Outputs, total value                         3339.0    4160.0          16293.1
     Inputs, traded                               1586.0
             nontraded
                                                            2164.0              5868.9
                                                  1257.3    1776.5              5990.9

    Net domestic value added, total -1753.0
         of which: net profIE
                                                            1996.Q..        10424.2
                                                   132.5.                    2397.3
                 return                             1.5
    (per cent)              -
                                                              —2.0                 cc

    2)      Phosphate Indus try


    Outputs,      total   value              -
                                                 1100.1     1939.9          3349.1
    Inputs, traded                                588.9     1206.2          1674.0        —____
            nontraded                              185.2     384.3
                                                                                451.3

    Net     doriestic value     added,   total    511.2     733.7           1675.1
      of wich: net profits                        177.9     169.7               860 .0
    Rate     of return                              8.9
    (per     cent)                                            7.4                19.3



             Source: Tables       -   l3Fejidl3G                            A
                                                                                                                -IL




                                        Table 26                                        118


                                    The TIre Industry
                        Revenues and Costs at Current Domestic Prices
                                [Va1ues in.000ZE)
                                                      Current    Prices               Constant Prices
                                                    1967E1            1963/614.           1963j64

Outputs:
  Tires and. tubes                                  4668.0             5685.8              5685.8
  Other    products                                   21.0                66.7                667
Al].   Outputs,   total value                        4689.0            5752.5              5752.5



Produced, current inputs:
  Traded: Natural rubber                              709.0             592.2                 610.5
              Synthetic rubber                        275.5             509.1                 398.11.

              Rayon                                   645.1             841.5                 711.5.9
                                                      109.4             177.0                 148.1
              Bead wire
              $teel wire                               31.5              50.4                  36.3
                                                      136.1              199.2                196.2
                                                       30.2               LlL1..
              Tire cord (cotton)
              Tire valves                              25.6               33.0                 29.6
                                                       67.14.             85.5                 73.0
              Spare parts                .

                                                                                               88.4
                                                       63.6               88.11.
              Fue1/e1ectrcity
                                                       27.5               38.3                 38.3
              Packing
                                                      117.5              160.9                160.9
              Depreciation
                                                                •

              Total                                  2238.4             2820.3             2560.5


   Non—
                                                       36.0               50.0                 50.0
   traded: Services
                                                      117.5              160.9                160.9
           Depreciation
                                                      153.5              210.9                210.9
              Total


All produced inDuts total value                      2391.9             3031.2             27.4
                                                     211.50.6           2930.2                3192.0
Net domestic y].ue added:
                                                     2297.1             2721.3                2981.1
Net value added, total
  'of which: wages and sa1ares
                  jç_uding fringe benefits)           346.5         ____ 507.7 -               396.6
                  Drofits                            1950.6              2213.6               2584.5




 Capital                                                                                                —   -
 Rate of. return on caoit.al. Dct-
 _________________________                             71. 5               59 .   8
                                                                    auoed by
 Source:   Transport and. Engineering Company Annual Report / - Samir Abd. National
                                                                            el Samih
            Attiyah, "Thc Rubber Tire Industry in the UAP.",  Institute of
                 •         -.          1Q
                                           Table 26,            continued                    82



                                     The Tire Industry
                        Revenues and Costs at International Prices


I
                                   At Act,ualAt                          At 1960/61           At
                                                                                                           -

                                   Effective Uniforrn              i.Prices     and          Uniform
                                   NultiDle    Official            Effective liul    title   Official
                                     Rates       Rates                  Rates                  Rates
                                                C:(.1...4iU..



    Outputs:
      Tires                          2742.8       2346.2                   3280.2              3408.0
      Other rubber products

      Total                   I1i3:2 - 21.0           21.0
                                                                    --
                                                                             66.8                66.8
                                                                                               34_74__
    puts,:
      Traded:                        2092.9      1902.6                    2396.6              2665.0
     • !'!cntrdcd:                    153..5       ,cz
                                                   —— - •
                                                                            .),r
                                                                            ——.',o                ._,,r   r
                                                                                                          .1
                              —-
    Netdomestic value added,        7O.9                   .6               950.4                 809.7
     total of which: aet profits 170.9             —35.4                    231.8                  91.1




Source: Table _jjnd trade statistics




                                                                     .




                                                                                                               '
                                          Table 27



                        Costs   and Reveriuesof the Paper Industry
                        at Domestic  and International Prices 1962—63
                                              (LE 000)
                                             At Domestic Prices   At International Prices


Outputs:
                                                     2334.1                1478.1
  Writing paper
                                                      473.0                 299.2
  Printing paper
                                                      126.7                 126.7
  Straw pulp

Outputs, total value                                 2933.8                1904.6

Produced Inputs:

                                                      417.2                 375.4
  Traded: Wood pulp
             Chemicals                                497.2                 447.5
             Fuel and energy                          168.3                 134.6
             Packing and finishing material           108.5                  97.6
                                                       73.1                  65.8
             Spare parts
                                                      Zi.82. 5              1.34 .2
             Depreciation•

             Total. traded inDuts                    1746.8                1555.1

  Non-
                                                                            167 .5
  traded:    Rice straw                               167.5
                                                                             28.3
             Weed straw                                28.3
             Services                                    88.2                88.2
                                                      165.1                 165.1
             Depreciation
                                                                            449.1
             Total, nontraded inputs                  449.1

Domestic value added:                                1187.0

Net value added,                                         737.9
                                                         266.9               266.9      ----
-1chL wages and fringe benefits
                                                      471.0                                    --
 eurn                                                9500.0
                                                        4.9                   —3.8
 hate   of return percent



              Source:           AM.   1   Moneim Au Soliman: The Rakta PaDer Industr,
 Institute   of NanrTianning, October 19611..,
                                                Table 28


                                            The Steel Industry
                       Revenues and Costs of the Helwan Steel Plant                       119
                       at Domestic and international trices 1961/65
                                    (Values in LE 0OO


Outputs:                                              At Domestic Prices    At International Prices
   fl1Lfjjshed               products                          2,692.5               2,111.0.5
   Heavy sections                                              5,610.6               2,700 .0
   Light sections                                              1,325.6               1,060.8
   Plates                                                     2,789.14               1,335.8
   Sheets                                                        91l.7. 2               553.9
   Joint products                                                604.7                  604.7
AU outputs, total value                                      13,970 .0               8,39S.7
                 -
Produced                      inputs:
  Thaded: Coke                                                4,590.5                3,700.6
                     Iron ore                                   339.3                  305.4
                     Ferro.-Llicone                              46.1;.                 41.5
                     Ferro—marigane se                          111.2.8                 128.5
                     Schpiegel    iron                           78.7                    70.8
                     Phosphates                                    11.2.3                42.3
                     Pyrites                                     39.6
                          —.-
                          G.&L         •                        ),-i •0
                                                                                         39.6
                                                                                        -'-' r.
                     spare   parts                            2,263.(                ,Oj( .j
                     Depreciation                                909.1                 8i8 .2
                     Total                                    8.866 .2               7,5144.2
  Non—
  traded:            Asswan ore
                     Dolomite
                                                              1,413.9
                                                                 35:3
                                                                                  ,4l3.9
                                                                                     35.3
                     Limestone                                   204.2.                204   2
                     Clay                                         18.1                  ].8.1
                 Services                                        632.5                 632.5
                 Depreciation                                    3140.8

                 Total                                        2,644.8                2,644.8
Al].   produced inputs, total value                          11,511.0              10.189. 0
                                        a
Net domestic value added:                                     5,103.8                  851.5
Net value added:               total                          2,459.0              —1,793.3
       -
  ofihich: vases arid salaries
           (including fringe benefits)C                       2,757.0               2,757.0

ateofReturji_Capitaljpercent)
             -
                                                                 298.Q             4,550.3
                                                             —                       —11.4
                                                           40 . 000 .0              40, 000--0------
       Total value of outut minus traded inputs
        Total value of output minus total troduced inuts
       CNot includi,n social security contributions                           SteeL Industiy 1966,
                                                                            Insitute of--National
Source: Iron and Steel Ccmany Annual Ret'ort and Budget auoted by                          Plaiming,
                                                 Talle 29

                                 Costs and Reienues ef the Authmob±le Industry
                                at Domst.c and International Prices 1963/19614.
                                                           000)
                                                                        1alue of                  Approx.      Value
                                           Unit    Value                Production Unit Value  Inttl. Product4
                                                  of                        at      Paid for Prices of    at
                                             Finished Output Domestic Unassembled Finished Intl.
                                                                         Prices      Vehicles     Vehicles      Pri'e
                                            Vehicles Quantity
                                                      )(Noj (ooo)                     TT (LE)
uputs:
 Commercial transport
   Buses (Deutz 6 cyl 14.500)                    6953a          52)1.     3585.7       )4599C       553         9ç)Q3
   Trucks 3.6 tons                               5120            99        506.9       314.211.     2513         2)1.8.8

   Trucks (Dump) 5.0 tons                        11.O014      87           314.8.3     2210         3000         261.0
   Trucks 6.0 tons (Dcutz 6 cyl 14.850)          360L       1029          3708.5       2357         3000        3087.0
   Trucks 6.0 tons (Deu.tz 6 cyl 5000)           14.697      150           70)1-.5     28914-       3958         593.7

 Passenger cars                                  ,0b        14.591        4802.2                                1512.0
   Nasr 1100 cc (Fiat)                                      2016                                     750        13825
   Nasr 1300   cc (Fiat)                     .              111.18                                   975        ll4.1.0
   Nar 2300 cc (Fiat)                                           739                                 15)1.14-     209.C
   Rases (NSU angina)                                           i8                                   500
 Trailers
  7.5 tons                                       2097           125        262 .1      1114-5       1200         150 . C
   8.5 tons                                      2897            14.0      1.15.9      114.03       11100         56.0
  12.5 tons                                      3625             15        54.        1923         2000          30.0
 Tractors                                        1388           650       i.179 .8     1289         10711.       912.
   Engines: air—cooled                            913           596        5)1-4.1       819          760        453,0
               ater—coo1ed                         6'5          529        357.0         515          562        297.3
   Brake lining (quantity in tons)                                77        70.3                          .       70.3
   Clutches    (quantity in   tons)                               10        23.7                                  23.

)utputs, total ra1ue                                                     16263.                                13328.5
                                                                                                                         -
                                                                                                                    S

'dInuts:
 Traded: Vehicles in parts                                               11516.5                               1026.5
         Tires                                                             562.8                                 325.5
         Batteries                                                          89.8                                  80.2
          Paint                                                            115.9                                 103    .5
          Welding material                                                   0.8                                   O.
           Side glass                                                        5.6                                   5.0
           Tin plates                                 .                       2.2                                  2.C
                                                                             18 .5                                16.5
          Upholstery
           iel                                                               66.5                                 59.
          Electricity                                       .
                                                                             .7.0
                                                                           126.2                                 ll2
           Depreciation
           Other                                                            160.0                                .142.8

                    tra                                                  12671 8                               111314
          Total,              .npUt5
                                          Table 29,    continued



                                                                   (Value of Production at Domestic ar.
 Non—                                                                        Internatjonei Prices)
 traded: Services
          —                                                        8L.6.i.
              Depreciation                                         29L. .5                            29i
ta11TaIue, all produced 1.flouts:                              13812.T                     —         12272.3
tdomestjc value cdded:                                          3591.6                               2191.5
                of Which:                                      2450.7
 wages and sal.ries                                            13!-2 .5
                                                                                                     1056 . 2
  net profits                                                                                        1342.
                                                               1108.2
_return: (per cent)                                                  3J.
                                                                                                  —   286.7
                                                                                                      -.0 .5
:apital    __________________                                 32162.0                            32162.0
          Notes:

                body. Price of bus chassis with engine only LE 3975.
          bavere2e unit value; breakdown by make obtained. froni Federation of
                                                                                 Industries, 1961. p.72.
          Cprice paid. 'for cornpiet as$ernbled bu LE 699
               (CAGMS)
          Source The                 of Automobi1e end_Their_Com,ponents, Cairo, June 19654
                  (in Arabic).
