NBER Working Paper Series
No. 54, 1974

BILATERAL TRADE AS A L.EVELOP1ET I:;S:RUMENT
UNDER CLO3AL TRADE RESTRICTIO:S

by

Karim

A. Nashashibi

In their striving toward development a number of less developed countries
have espoused bilateral trade as yet another policy instrument allowing them

to increase their acquisition of foreign resources. indeed, bilateral trade
agreements
recent

became a salient feature of

trade flows throu;hout the l96Cs and

developments point to an increase in bilateral

trade's share of

world

trade.

This has been particularly true of the trade of India, Pakistan,

and

Ept, on which scm useful empirical studies have been conducted (6,7,10).
On the whole, however, the economic literature seems to have allocated '-ery

little theoretical
was widespread

attention to the problem even

though this type of trade

in the 1930s. (1). Holzman and Wiles (5,11) view

biiateraii

in the context of centrally planned econcmies and attribute its raison

to

d'etre

the rigidities inherent in them (e.g., inconvertibility, carry—over from

internal

balance methods,

and so forth). No attempt, however, is made to

bilateral trae systematically in the context of specific targets
rigidities which characterize all trading alternat.ves.
The target we are interested in is not trade eficiericy as an end in
analyze

and

itself, but growth. And for a number of countries the ability to grow depends
very

much on the ability to ipDrt. Hence, it is in

we propose
and

terms of this target that

to evaluate the efficiency of bilateral trade as a policy instrument

to exaine a number of related issues, such as the terms of trade, trade

diversion, and its

:';Z

n

resource allocation.

—2-.
A

brief description of bilateral trade areemerits starts our discussion,

followed by a three—country model as a theoretical formulation of the problem.

Finally, several imulictions will be derived in relation to the issues
mentioned above.
What distinihes

bilateral trade from multilateral trade or state

the built—in mechanism which promotes exports in payment fcr imports.

trading

is

Imports

and exports need not balance in any

given

year but the agreement moves

the two countries toward balance over a period of time (usually, three to five
years).

In case one of the partners shows a deficit, a "swing credit" is

provided by the

surplus country to finance it. If the

deficit country exceeds

its credit ceiling a settlement of the balance is provided within a certain

period of time (usually six months). Such settlements usually consist of an
additional flow of

exports,

although the deficit could be settled with

:cnvertible

foreignexchange. Since the two modes of settlement are not cualitatiely different

as

will be shown

below -

we start by assuming that the trade is to be commodity—

balanced.

The model
It is pointless to discuss bilateral trade in comparison to multilateral
trade without pcsing

ecific restrictior,s since in a standard theory of trade

approach bilateral trade would
to say that

under

would, sell its

appear

both primitive and inefficient. Sufficient

multilateral trade and perfect market conditions a country

commodities to the highest bidder and buy from the cheapest source

cver the largest set of buyers and sellers. Hence it would reap the highest terms

of trade. Multilateral trade is also compatible with all kinds of restrictive
practices such as price discrimination, state trading and export taxes which

tend to maxim!se a country's benefits from trade whenever it ceases to be a
price talcer (2).

In this sense a unilateral' moncpoly is superior to bilateral

—3—
monopoly. In:case a chronic deficit in the balance of payments develops,
an adjustment in its exchange

rate

together with the manipulation of its

monetary anifcal instrurents should restore equilibrium.
In order to pose the problem it is necessary to specify a set of
conditions which, when they arise, reduce the effectiveness of multilateral

trade and invaliaate some of its advantages. : the 1930s these conditions
were the acu;e shortage of international liquidity which resulted from the
collapse
in

of the gold

the wake of the

standard and the need to push employment through exDorts

depression and reparation payments (3).

Today, while

under—develcied countries do not face the problem of a depressed aggregate

demand they nevertheless want to stimulate theirrow-th: on the one hand they
have high import requirements necessary to realize investments which would help
them break away from the low—growth traditional structure of troduction; On

the

other hand

this

traditional structure is incapable of suDlying the kind

and amount of exports necessary to pay for the required imports (with the

exception of oi. producers). if sufficient means of payment were vailable by
international oranizatjons such development could be financed, prcvi-ed credit
is extended over a period long enough to lead to the emergence of a new vintage
of exports which would be sufficient to pay for the present and future imports.

fulfilling

However, such eans of payment fall far short of/sound investment possibilities

and most underdeveloped countries are forced to finance their irts thrcugh
their

exports.

This usually means to restrict their imports to the level of

exports the country can sell ccsetitive1v abroad at

goingexchane rate.

Such export basket is mostly composed of primary ccmmodities (raw

materials

and

tood) and simple manufactures in which these countries developed a comparative

advantage. The first group of cc.modities has frequently encountered sluggish

1/

Wiles,

(8)

p.271.

growth and downward sloping demand curves while th second has been strongly

resisted by buyer countries

(textiles,

in protection of their own

inefficient industries

leather goods).

Eence, le:.s developed countries engaged in bilateral agreer-ents view

this trade as an oçDortunity of accuiring additional imports necessary to

their developnentai process without agravatin their balance

thanks to an increase in their exports,

of payent probls,

particularly the "nontraditional"

coodities.
To derive the properties of bilateral trade under policy target, which
attempts to satisfy a certain import bill and the trading restrictions which
prevail in world markets, we shall set up the following model:
Let us call our less developed country, country III and let us assume

it has only two trading partners: country II with which it trades on a bilateral
basis — we shall refer to it as a "tied market" or "II" — and
country I

with

which it trades only for convertible currency (free market). II and I have
many trade partners other than III and any amount of a commodity exported by
them to III only forms a small proportion of their total exports of that

commodity. Hence, we consider III as a price taker on the import side.

The

prices quoted by the free market serve as "world prices" for country III. Clearly,
there is no a priori reason why prices quoted from II should be higher or lower

than those quoted by I. These would vary for each commodity according to its
export availabilities and cost conditions as well as its assessment of III's
relative need of the commodity, its ability to purchase from the free market

and so forth. Hence, while the free market quotes a single world price for
each commodity, the tied market can practice price discrimination vis—.—vis
its trading partners.

However, even if export prices under bilateral agreements do not exceed
the cheapest alternative source of supply the purchasing power of the proceeds

—5—
from

to

the exports is limited by the choice set of exports offered by country

III. This choice rait differ substantially from

the

II

commodities which

rank high among III's import priorities. Hence, the "real" price received

for III's exports is lower than its ncina1 value. In this case a simple
comparison of prices quoted from the free market, and from tied narkets is not
sufficient, since the means of payment

to bring

differ.

''e

shall attempt in this

model

out with some degree of precision the real returns that our less de-:elcped

country reaps when it trades its exports against a set of specific imports

rather than for convertible exchange. We would want to comtare a hyotheticai
situation where all the exports are paid for in convertible currency to the
real situation where only part of the export's proceeds are in convertible
currency while the rest are to be chosen from a set of potential imports.

Suppose III's totcal export availabilities can be denoted by a SUiY

vector s 3(sii .. .s .. .s.
3j

) where each variety or zrade of a product is treated

as a distinct corr.modity (j =

i. .. .n).

From it country

I

will draw a set of

exports denoted by vector E1 and II will draw a set of exports E2.
will be attached price vectors
proceeds from
(1)

exports

and

To

and R2 respectively. Hence the total

will be:

+

V3=R1E1

Vectors R1and R2 are denominated in a cor.vertible currency, say dolars.
However, while the amount R1E1 wcu.ld be actually transferred to III and can be
disposed of at wi11,

represents simply a credit to the account of

III,

which can cniy be used for an equivalent purchase of exports from II. It
should be stressed at this point that a less developed country cannot sell as

much as it would want to country I out of its export basket. Indeed,
market will distribute its

purchases among the nuerous sources

the

free

of supply which

can quote roughly the sameworid price on a c.i.f. basis and among

thcse

with

—6—
whom

it entered into

soe preferential agreement. Hence, unlike the perfect

is translated into horizntal
sellers, differences in c.i.f. import costs,

market

model where a large demand

demand

curves fr a multitude

in

product varieties and

result

in a ezan curve

the

of

for a product

prevailance of auantitative restrictions viii

which will rapidly

slope downward past a certain .uantity

sold. Thus, country III will ta:e 1E1 as given arid attempt to expand its
exports towards country II.
Furthermore, II

vililiave a vector

denoting its import requirements

for the forthcoming planning period. These could be derived from various

investment appropriaticns and various disaggregated import functions. To this
vector

is associated a weight vector W which will indicate III's preference

for each of its inport requirements.

These weights could be akin tc dual

variables derived from a global programming

the

of

net increase in

a unit

of

model a la Frisch and

reflecting

the value of a welfare function resulting from an addition

expenditure on a particular import. Or more simply, they can

roughly indicate a ranking

of

import priorities among various investment g.ods,

raw material and consumer goods.'
Country

III will choose its imports from two supply vectors (or export

availabilities) S and S2, offered by countries I and II. To theoe are attached
From these supply vectors, country III will have to

price vectors P1 and
pick two import vectors

and

in such a way as to get as close as possible

to its import requirements M under the constraint of its foreigh exchar.ge

resources V3. In addition, any quantity imported of a particular commodity from
a given source cannot exceed the availability of that commodity for export by
the same source (e.g.

m.

).

1/ Je do not assign weights to exports. In general their prices would reflect
their opportunity ccsts as investment or cor.umption goods. To be sure s:e of
the export prices would be in line with "world" prices. ?ence prcitabiiity m:n
export goods (in terms of do—estic resources used rer unit of rei:n exchanTe
rc:rate.
qf wei 't on exncrts would hen be
\-arv. r.u'e
:erin
•snl.tri at tr.e prbiem mor rrai without,

coid tie

;'st€

re

ernea

— 7-.
Sumnarisin we have:

III's import
requl rements

I's export

availabilities
to III

Ii's export
availabilities
to III

S1

=

m21

S2 =

s

n

III's possible
imports from II

S21

S11

=

III's possible
Lports from I

M1

=

m.

=

m

S

2n

2n

in

weights on III's import requirements:

w =

prices

P1 1:"j"

attached to S1:

prices attached to S2;

P2 =(p21.. p2 "2n

We shall now define a function on the set of possible import vectors. This

will be a subset of RXR1
dimension n) and

will

(cartesian

product of two real vector spaces of

be bound by countrj III's iiport requirements, its

export possibilities (resources available for ir-ports) and by I and II's export

availabilities to country III (s,2)

The function defined on this set will

rank couples of import vectors according to III's preferences W.

(2)

f(,M2) =

where i =

1,2

>!_
and j = 1

wm.j
In.

The restriction on the set of possible import vectcrs will be:

—8—

(2a)

Supply restrictions:

(2b)

Import recuirerent restriction:

(2c)

Rescurce restrictiOn:

Sjj

2

n

i=1

j=l

p1 4m.

Given the restriction posed, the set of irprt
closed, and bounded set (call it H) in -t:e space

coipact.'

vectors

psibilitieS

will

be

a

x i. Therefore it is

This assures the existence of a possible ccbinatiOfl of inport

from the two sources which axi'izes the function f over H and thereby

offers country III a best coice of irnports. enote one such combination by
(M1,M2)* for which f(M1,M2)* =

ax.

!ow suppose we restrict the import vector from the free market to our

availability of convertible currency naeiy to R1E1.

Then our

set

will be

further restricted to a new set H1 by the condition:
(2d)

P1M1 R1E1

In the case, where the value of our

optirnu

import vector from the free

market exceeds our availability of foreini exchange (P1M,*._R1E)
then f(M1M2) will reach over H1 a maximum f(?.i1M2) where

This result hinges, however, on the uniticity of the maximum reached over each
of the two sets. To start with, it is easy to show that each of the 'two sets

1/ Hykakane Nihaido: (8),

p.9.

—9is

This mears that if we have a maximum, we could have either one

convex)1

or infinitely many. The oecond outcome (which is a case of degeneracy) can

be avoided; for, there exists a vector of weihts W which, when appropriately
chosen, would

yield

a uniaue solution.'

Let us now measure the difference between the two

under the two sets of restrictions by A .

We

rraximums attained

will refer to it as the

bilateral trade factor (BTF).

(3)

A = f(MM*
will

-

f(M1,M2).

measure the degree to which country III is diverted from its

optimal import combination by the stipulation that it should receive a share

1/ By definiticn our

set

of possible import vectors is convex if for any two

points of the set (M1,M2)1, (M1,M2)2, a linear combination of these two

points will fall within the set. That is (Q (M ,M2),=(l — Q)
where O QL..l. will be an import

(M,M))

combination within the new set. Clearly

for any value of Q the restrictions which jefine the set are satisfied.
2/ In this diagri A3 is a line of all points for which the function

a
R

value .

2n
.

in

the space

and a maximum over our

subset

assunes
H1 I'

Suppose this line coincides with a.sement FG of the set.
There is an infinite number of points on the segment FG,
for which the function assumes a maximum. In order to assure
uniticity we can find a W as close to W as we want such that

____________

the

angle

of the line AB rotates by

a

— 10 -

of

its import 2j m24 form a particular source nely the tied market.

J=l
Therefore the real

return

which country III receives for its exports from
deflated by a factor

the tied market is the nczinal revenue
(normalized).

To normalize

=

we set the following equation.

f(TAM*
—

The numerator reflects the difference between max and the s:uticn.

obtained under constraint 2d. If the bilateral partner offers a choice

of export which is both appropriate to hIts requirements (as deterined
by W and competitive (as determined by P2) to the point where the vector
in the initial solution exhausts III's proceeds from country II for its

expor.s the constraint 2d is not binding and

The
situation

not

A

o.

denominator reflects the difference between max* and the unlikely

where there is nothing the bilateral partner can sell to country III,

even for transhipment to country II or stockpiling, and where the real

value of IIIs proceeds from exports to II is zero. In this case
weighted by W is a zero vector and f(M1M2) acquires a value of
If that situation were to occur \

will

acquire an upper bound of 1.

A

more likely outcome would arise when, while 2 may be zero, the proceeds

from exports to country II (RE) are used to obtain M20 as a substitute
for what could have been obtained from I under sufficient foreign exchange

will bear lower weights and/or higher prices

availability. Of course

than the equivalent imports which would have been obtained from I amd therefore:

M20W

Z

-

In this case(as in cases where I42

*

0,)we will have lNL..O.

— 11 —

Since

X is

a i':s factor with respect to the tied narket, the actual

returns on III's total exports viii be:

(5)

V

=

+ (1

—)

R22

Now, the srnaller the value of

where oL>Li
th re efficient would the bilater

trade be with ccuntrj III, and hence the cre desirable the division of total

trade between bilateral and multilateral flows. ut even where

is

relatively large to the ectent that it increases III's level of exports

above what it would have been under purely multilateral flows, it ay still

be beneficial. In what follows we shall draw the irplications steruing from
the model and discuss the various factors which determine the value of
Bilateral markets as preferential zarkets
A small illustration reveals here the preferential market nature of

bilateral trade. Since the two trading partners may offer competing sets of
exports, a possible import combination for country III can be represented by
two intersecting sets B1 and B2.

Imports
from country I

Imports
from country II

competing imports

— 12

—

The intersection of the two sets (E1fl B2) encom;asses those cotic
which are competitive from the two countries (on a c.i.f. import

basis)

and

bear the same weight. Hence, a Driori, the function would be indifferent
as

to whether they are i::ported from countr- I or

process

country II. However, in the

of finding a maximum and as restrictions (2d) become binding, the

shift co:4eting impcrts to the imDort vector from the biaterai
trade partner. :ence, country II is a preferred market of country I by virtue
functions will

of

the

from

fact that any increment of Imports from II can be matched by exports

III,

Notice

while the level of imports

from

I does not bear such a relation.

that this can occur over a certain range without efficiency lOSS as

the shift of all competing imports to II does not affect max.*
However, as other imports begin to move to II under the convertible exchange

constraint,

+

max.* starts to fail along the path of max .

It simply means that

the cost of transforming domestic resources into foreign resources has riser..

Nevertheless, this cost might still be lower than the alternative offered by

multilateral markets. The relatively higher terms of trade which can be
fetched in the bilateral market would result from a higher demand elasticity
facing the products

marketed. And this

for two reasons:

i) on account of the preferential treatment the demand curve

facing

country IIIs

product in the protected bilateral market will be more elastic than in the free

market where all competitors have equal access. This can be demonstrated within
the framework of Sweezy's diagram (9):

A

— 13

We

—

have two dcmand curves: A is drawn on the assumption that only country

III can reduce the price of a given ccmmodity, while its competitors hold

their own; B is drawn on th assumption that all competing countries to III
reduce their price of that commodity.

Clearly a preferential treatment

allows country III to move along curve A while multilateral trade would move
it along

the

far less advantageous curve B.

ii) It is presumed that the elasticities of substitution among consumption
goods for the countries engaged in bilateral trade would be higher than for
developed countries engaged in multilateral trade.

This results from the

foreign exchange constraint under which tied markets oterate and hence the
lower order of preferences they would have for quality refinements, model

changes and pure consumer choice.'
Comlenent an ty

The advantages which III can reap from bilateral trade depends very much

on the export basket II has to offer. One would want vector

(the optimum

import vector to be drawn from the tied market) to have as many positive

elements in it as possible and be weighted as heavily as possible. This would
occur when II is both able to offer the commodities which meet III's itort
requirements and to do it at competitive prices (world prices or better).
In a sense, a high degree of complementarity of II's export basket to III's

import requirements would reduce the possibility of R1E1 being binding and

would tend to make A small in case

does hold as a constraint. When one

of the bilateral partners is industrially advanced and large, implying varied

export and import baskets, such a comleentarity might naturally occur.
1/ Tourism is a case in point. Whereas residents of Western Europe can choose
any country where to spend their vacations, tourists of Eastern European countries
often have their choices restricted to those countries with whom they have bilateral

agreemnts.

— 114 —

On the other hani,

resulting

za11

countries may experience larger values of X

from the disparity between their demands and their partner's supply

availabilities. This ci be rnedied if the ex-Dort availabilities to each
partner are increased and if the new export availabilities are competitive.
Whereas
time,

it

this is difficult
can be easily

to do for any single country within a short period of

done within a group of

countries

which opt for the

convertibility of their currency (within the group). Thus each ccuntry
will now face the export availabilities of all the other mbers of the
group which will both increase cozplenentarity and the competitiveness of

the bill of imports offered. This "multilaterally balanced trade" is now
being applied .thin Fastern Europe through ruble convertibility within the
Comecon and would approach Frisch's ideal (14).
Trade Diversion and Long-Term Ecuilfbriurn

Since, as we have seen above, export returns are in general icuer under
bilateral than under multilateral trade, it would be in the interest of
country III to sell everything it can in free markets at the going price and

then allocate the remainder of its export availabilities to tied arkets.
This would maxiizze the terra

in equation (1) hence re:Iucing the size

of the constraint (2d) and help minimize

.

It

is likewise in the interest

of the partner country (country II) to have a set of imports facing it which

would be as close to its import priorities as possible. For instance,
country II would want to buy on a bilateral basis certain primary comodities
or food items such as rice, rubber or tea to which it attaches a high pricr'y
and which it would otherwise buy for convertible exchange. Hence the r.agni—

—15 —

tude of the variable

for each of the trading partners becomes a matter of

bargaining arid subject to economic and political influence. Under this
bargaining s:me trade could be diverted from free markets into tied markets
so as to reducethe divergence between import needs and export availabilities
which

might arise more acutely for one of the partners. For instance,

Erpt is a

be

price taker in rab markets for rice. evertheless, it might

forced to divert part cf these potential sales for convertible exchange

to Eastern European countries in order to diversify its limited list of

exports. Starting from (1) our new export equation will be:
(6)

V't =

where (1

e1 which

+

(i—)

R1

(14) E1

is

a diagonal matrix denoting for each.. the proportion of

has been diverted into

a lower R1E1 will restrict

R2E2'

e2. (where E2 +

E").

Clearly

even further and hence would increase X

to A

Hence, trade diversion in this case reduces the ai'ount of convertible exchange
available for imports from free markets which in turn worsens the term of

exchange with tied markets. Conversely, it imporves the relative terms of
trade of the bilateral partner. Therefore, it is equivalent to the settlement
of a deficit sustained by

one of the parties to a trade in convertible foreign

exchange.

Aside from this deliberate trade diversion arising out of the bargaining
process between the two partners some trade diversions may occur as a result
of a general slackening of efforts in preserving market shares obtained in
convertible currency areas, let alone gaining additional markets.

.1

—16—
This process might

be further encouraged by the price illusion fostered by

the nominal export price vector

Hence the total revenue from trade when

the country only trades on a multilateral basis might substantially exceed

what is actually sold on free nrkets

when it

also engaged in bilateral trade.

If the country fetches a hypothetical g in foreign exchange when it trades
solely on a multilateral basis its net gains in export returns from bilateral
trade will be:
(7)

b

V" —

g

Both trade diversion and the value of

X can

be reduced by

simply

lowering the overall volume of export and import which enter under the bilateral
agreement. This can stem from a lower level of optimum (!&1M2)*

or

conversely

by restricting import requirements M or adapting them to the availabilities

of the bilateral partner through a different W. In any case, it becomes a
question of trading off a higher fulfillment of on&s import requirements
against a higher domestic resource cost of one's exports, implied by a higher

equilibrium would be reached at a point j\* where the marginal efficiency of
an

additional

unit

of

foreign resources acquired through trade equals the

marginal domestic resource cost of paying for it.
Over some time horizon a process of adjustment will take place both to

trade diversion and to maximize profits from experts. For trade
diversion need only occur in an initial period when the country is not adjusted

eliminate

to

the bilateral/multilateral allocation. ill

the longer run, provided the supply

of exports is elastic, such trade diversion can be eliminated.
Likewise with respect to A. if trade is to be fair between the two
partners, we
system of

would

weights.

\*, provided they are derived frorn the same
=
Hcwever, it would be purely coincidental if

have*

=

1,,

2

— 17 —

Hence, the movement towards such an equality can only be achieved through
time

as the appropriate adjustments are made in

the

of

the export

and

import vectors

two trading partners.

Allocative

effects of bilateral trade

Some of the literature ccncerr.ed with trade among East European contries
often brinout the possibility of trading in the

"wrong" cczzcdity, i.e.,

where a commodity which should have been imported is exported at a loss.' How-

misleading

ever, it would be

to associate this possibility to the practice of

trading on a bilateral basis. For it would always be to the country's interest
to offer those commodities in which it has a comparative advantage.'

Those

commodities which are priced above the world price will either be rejected by
the trading partner of if
bilateral

accepted would tend to increase his

making this

trade less attractive to him and forcing eventually a reallocation

of imports and exports. However, if a country will not produce a "wrong"
commodity as a result of bilateral trade it might increase the production of
those commodities which are highly desired by the bilateral trading partners or
thea to his specifications.

On

the

import side, the reallocation of

resource

might still he rore pro-

nounced. Investment allocations among industries as well as the choice of
techniques involved rright be decided by the

by

the

bill

of goods offered as imports

trading partner. This investment reallocation would increase the weights

In favor of the bilateral partner and hence reduce the value of

1/ (5),
2/
to

p.

cuever,

245.

We can define a state of comparative advantage for any commodity j destined
Cr. + t. )
i when

market

:

:i.j

l+v'

where

-

ii

is the export price, t the transport ccst, v

of currency
market i.

cvervaluation and z. the

the rate of exchange,

"world"

price of cozmodity j

v'

in

the

—:8—
a part from the cornplex questicn pertaining to the overall cost of such a
reallocation (from an efficiency point of view) it brings out the problem

of economic dependence which may become severe for a small country adapting
its import and export bills to a large bilateral partner.

throuh trade

Aid

It

is cconly agreed that aid through trade consists in granting credit

an underdeveloped country

to

later

date

for the purchase of imports to be repaid at a

with exports. This is a form of bilateral trade where one party

fulfills the agreement at a later date against the payment of interest. In
this framework, however, the element of time (deferred payment) need not be a

necessary characteristic of aid. Let us define, at any point in time, a purely

—

1/
commercial transaction as one where the two partners have equivalent \ 's.—
Then,

X

country II would be providing aid through trade to country III

2\

tied

This

is

if

a form of aid which is frequently overlocked for it is not

to specific projects but applies to regular yearly flcvs

of imports and

exports.

respect to aid which is project

With
case

tied there is some confusion in each

as to the exact amount of aid provided. A full easure of such aid should

take into account the following three factors.

1. Difference in interest rate between that which is charged by the
donor country and the equivalent going market rate.

2. Difference in prices charged by the donor country on the ecuipment
specified in the aid agreement

and the

going world prices for equi-

valent equipment.
3.

Difference in the weighted value of the goods sent as repayment to

the donor country and the goods which the donor country would have

bought had it received convertible exchange.
1/ We assume the weichting systems used for the two sets of import requirements
to be the same.

—19Factors 1 and 2 can be measured in isolation of the annual bilateral trade

flows with the donor country. For instance, the difference in prices in factor
2 can be expressed as a percentage of the total value of equipment arid added to

the nominal interest rate. Factor 3, however, is a function of the absolute
level of bilateral trade flows between the two countries. Indeed, bilateral
trade flows would have already encompassed for the donor country its preferred

imports from the aid receiving country. Hence, any additional imports would
have relatively lower weights attached to them. The proper method fcr the donor

country to easure
deterioration

in

would be first to cc.pute

would reflect the relative

the weighted value of the goods used as repayr.ents by the aid

receiving country. This deterioration in the terms of trade plus the interest
foregone on the financing of the imports will represent to the dc.nor country

the

cost of providing the aid. The same procedure could be applied to the aid
receiving countries, and as it often happens in aid programming the value of
the aid to the receiving country may diverge substantially from the cost of aid
to the donor country.

We can now surarize the conclusions shown from our model:
1.

Bialteral trade is essentially a preferential trade agreement, where ccmmoditie

of the two trading partners receive a preferential treatment, in their respective

markets. From a two—country point of view and under market restrictions governing
multilateral flows it is trade creating and need not involve any loss factors
as long as it is limited to the exchange of competitive comiodities.
world point of view it

has

the limitations

of any

1/

tariff club.—

From a

when pushed

beyond the exchange of competitive commodities, bilateral trade involves a
loss factor since rettirns from exports to the trading partners become restricted

1/ The limitations are brought out by the Theory of Common arkets, see (3).

— 20

to

—

a set of imports which gradually exceed world prices, (the acceptance of

produdts which depart from certain sDecification requirements is another

dimension of price). This in effect reduces the real value of export returns

received from the bilateral partner. owever, since world prices are cften
exogenously given and may include excess profits to the exporter, the loss
factor can Simply be viewed as a discount factor which takes advantage of

elastic demand curves for the cocodity traded in their privileged markets.
Hence, on one hand the terms of trade under bilateral agreement tend to improve
on account of the preferential factor but on the other hand they tend to worsen
under the restriction which bilateralism imposes on the import set of each partner.
2.

The more complementary the two partners in their import—export bundles

the

greater the efficiency of bilateral trade. Hence, the inclusion of additional
partners will broaden the variety cf goods to be traded and

a

common currency

area

with an overall balance between imports and exports for each trade partner

will

be more efficient than bilateral trade ficus.

3.

Trade

diversion

from multilateral markets to bilateral markets is not an

inherent feature of bilateral trade by a temporary measure intended to provide

adequate payment to a high level of the bilateral partner. Basically, it a:onts
to the settlement of a deficit in the trade flows with convertible foreign exchange.

However, as the country adjusts in its allocation of resources to an optimum level
of the bilateral trade, such diversion need not occur.
i.e.

Aid through trade is viewed in this framework as a sequential balancing of

bilateral trade where the aid component of tho donor country consists of net
interest foregone on the transaction and

the

loss factor involved in a repayment

which consists in commodities rather than convertible exchange.

— 21 —

1.

Andersen,Nyboe: "Exchange Controls and Clearing Agreernents". tJppsala, 1936.

2.

Bhagwati)Jagdish: "ine Theory

and Practice

of Commercial Policy, Departure

from Unified Exe tes". Princeton, 1968.

of

3.

BelassaEea:

l4

Frisch,Raaar: "jiti1atera1ly alanoed Trade". Economics of Planning, 1969.

5.

HolzmanFranklyn

"e Theory

Economic Integration". Irwin, 1961.

Foreign Trade Eehavior of Centrally PlarAned

D.:

Economics in "In'iustrialization in Two
6.

Systeris".

Henry Rosovsky,

1966.

Kardouch George: United Arab epub1ic: "A Case Study of Aid through

Trade". UCTAD, TD/B/C.3/63.
T.

NaraianD.: "Aid throun Trade: a Ca e Study of India". tJ1CTAD, TD/B/C.3/57.

8.

Nihaido, H.: " Couvex

9.

Sweezy, Paul: Demand under

Structures and Economic Theory". Academic Press, 96g.

Conditions

or O1igpOly

Journal of Political

Economy, Aug, 1969.

10. Watts, N." and Datar,A." "The Development of :ndia's Trade with the Soviet
Union and

Eastern

Economics and

Europe". Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of

Statistics,

February, 1968.

11. Wiles, P.J.D.: "Communist International Eccnoiics". Fraeer 1969.

