NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE SOCIAL COSTS

OF MONOPOLY AND REGULATION

Richard A. Posner*

Working Paper No.

55

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Blvd., Stanford, CA 94305

September 1974
Preliminary; Not for Quotation
NBER working pagers are distributed informally and in limited
number for conents only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
nublications; in oarticular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.
*The University of Chicago and NBER
Research on this paper was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation to the NBER for its research in law and economics.

Revised
August 19, 1974

THE SOCIAL COSTS OF MONOPOLY AND REGULATION
Richard A. Posner*
I

When an industry is monopolized, price rises above and output

falls below the competitive level. Those who continue to buy the
product at the higher price suffer a loss, L in Figure 1, but this

loss is exactly offset by the additional revenue that the monopolist

obtains by charging the higher price. Other consumers, who are
deflected by the higher price to substitute goods, suffer a loss,

D, that is not offset by gains to the monopolist. This is the
"deadweight lossH from monopoly, and in conventional analysis the

only social cost of monopoly——L being regarded merely as a transfer

from consumers to owners of the monopoly seller. D, however,

Figure

1

::

*professor of Law, University of Chicago; Senior Research Associate,
National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Gary S. Becker
and George J. Stigler for helpful coments. Research on this paper
was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation to the
National Bureau of Economic Research for research in law and economics.
The paper is not an official National Bureau publication since it has not

undergone the full critical review accorded Bureau publications,
including approval by the Bureau's Board of Directors.

yet

2.

underestimates the social costs of monopoly. The existence
of an opportunity to obtain monopoly profits will attract resources
into efforts to obtain monopolies, and the opportunity costs of those
resources are social costs of monopoly too.

Theft provides an

instructive analogy. The transfer of wealth from victim to thief does
not involve an artificial limitation of output,

but it does not

follow that the social cost of theft is zero. The existence of the
opportunity to make such transfers draws resources into thieving and
in turn into protection against theft, and the opportunity costs of
the resources consumed are social costs of theft.

This type of analysis has long been familiar in a few special contexts. For
example, Plant's criticism of the patent system, made a generation
ago, was based on the effect of the patent monopoly in drawing greater
resources into invention than into activities that yield only corn—
petitive returns.

was in the same vein.

And Telser's theory of resale price maintenance
However, although the tendency of monopoly

1.

Gordon Tullock, The Welfare Costs of Tariffs, Monopolies and Theft,
5 W. Econ. J. 224 (1967).
2.

If, however, a thief took three radios from a hcfne and on the way
out dropped one, which broke, this loss would correspond to the deadweight loss of monopoly.
3.

Gary S. Becker, Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach, 76
J. Pol. Econ. 169, 171 n.3 (1968); Gordon Tullock, supra note 1.
There is another possible source of social cost from theft--the
value of the stolen goods may be less to the thief than to the victim.
4.

The Economic Theory concerning Patents, 1 Economica (n.s.) 30 (1934).

5.

Why Should Manufacturers Want Fair Trade?, 3 J. Law & Econ. 86
(1960). Cf. George J. Stigler, Price and Nonprice Competition, in his
The Organization of Industry 23 (1968).

.

3.

rents to be transformed into costs is clearly no longer a novel
insight, its implications both for the measurement of the aggregate
social

costs of monopoly and for a variety of other important issues

relating to monopoly and public regulation (including tax policy)

continue to be ignored. Studies of the costs of monopoly still focus
exclusively on the deadweight loss (plus alleged consequences of
monopoly that have no firm theoretical basis, such as "X-inefficiency");
analyses of public policy toward monopolies (both private and govern-

mentally induced) continue to ignore the social costs involved in
obtaining monopoly power.

The present paper is an effort to rectify this neglect. Part II
presents a simple model of the social costs of monopoly, conceived as

the sum of the deadweight loss and the additional loss resulting from

the competition to become a monopolist. Part III uses the model to
estimate the social costs of monopoly in the United States, and the
social

benefits of antitrust enforcement. Part IV explores

tions of the

the implica-

analysis for a variety of issues relating to monopoly

and public regulation, such as public policy toward price discrimination
and the choice between income and excise taxation.

II.

I make (and later will defend) two simplifying assumptions. The
first is that becoming a monopolist is a competitive activity and hence

that the expected profit from obtaining a monopoly is zero. Firms
seeking monopoly expend resources until the last dollar spent increases

the expected value of having a monopoly by one dollar. The second

4.

assumption is that the costs of becoming a monopolist are constant, so
that the sum of the opportunity costs of becoming a monopolist is equal
to the expected value of the monopoly.

With these assumptions,

the total social costs of the monopoly depicted in Figure 1 are D +
Since D =

-APAQ

and L =

-

AP(QC

L.

AQ), the relative sizes of D and

L are given by

r

2(Qc_AQ)

This ratio can also be expressed in terms of the elasticity of demand
for the product in question at the competitive price (e), and the
percentage increase in price brought about by monopolization (p):

D_

P

2

E2(i)
E

It may

be objected that the assumption that the monopolist's

price increase is determined independently of the elasticity of demand
is inconsistent with the assumption that he is a rational profit—

maximizer. Profit maximization does assume that the monopolist's
price is a function of the elasticity of the demand curve facing him,

but a firm's demand curve may be different from the industry's demand
curve, to which E

in

equation (2) refers. For example, the demand

Another assumption, which does not affect the ana1ysis is that
the monopoly is enjoyed for one period only; otherwise the optimum
.'penditures on obtaining a monopoly could not be compared directly
with L in Figure 1.
6.

This is strictly accurate only for a linear demand curve; it is
only an approximation for nonlinear demand curves. The significance
of this qualification is consider later.
7.

8.

p E

LW/PC The

sign of E

is

positive in equations (2) and (3).

.

5.

curve facing the individual seller in a cartelized industry will
almost certainly be more elastic than the demand curve for the
industry,because the cartel will not be able to eliminate all competition among

its members. As a result, the actual prices charged

by the cartel will be lower than the profit-maximizing level as
determined with reference to the elasticity of the industry demand

curve. It seems quite likely that, due to the imperfections of
cartelization (especially in industries subject to the Sherman Act)
and of cartel-like forms of public regulation, the prices actually

charged in many monopolized industries will be lower than the optimum
monopoly price for the industry.
From equation (2), it is plain that the ratio of the deadweight
loss of monopoly to the loss that results from the competition to
become a monopolist (what we may call the "additional loss" of monopoly)

is smaller, the less elastic the demand for the product in question

at the competitive price. For example, at c =

1,

a one per cent increase

in price over the competitive level will result in a deadweight loss
equal to about .5 per cent of the additional loss; at c =

figure is about orper cent; at E

= --, it

2,

this

is only about .025 per cent.

C, the total social costs of monopoly, is equal to

D+L=pR_PAQ=R(p_.cp2),!!
9•

Rc is total sales revenues at the competitive price.

(3)

6.

and is higher, the larger the scale of the industry as measured by its

S

sales revenues at the competitive output, and the less elastic the demand

for the product at that output. At c = 1, a one per cent increase in
price above the competitive level will yield a total social cost of
monopoly equal to .995 per cent of the industry's revenues at the

competitive price and level. At c = 2, the total social cost falls to
.99 per cent of the industry's revenues atthe competitive price and
level, while at c =

the percentage rises to .9975. The costs Qf

monopoly are maximized when demand is totally inelastic at the competitive price.

These formulas are accurate only for small changes in the price
levels for larger changes, e, which measures elasticity at a point,

can no longer be used. And monopolization might result in large price
the middle term of
increases. Hence the general formulas, (1) and/(3), remain important.

5

For purposes of empirical estimation, it will be helpful to derive

two additional formulas: one for the case where the deadweight loss,
the elasticity of demand, and the monopoly price increase are known

and the elasticity of demand is assumed to be constant, and the other
for the case where the monopoly price increase, the monopoly output,

and the elasticity of demand at the monopoly price are known and the
demand curve is assumed to the linear.

(1) For constant elasticity, since

and therefore AQ =

10.

=

and Q

= a)mE,

]i2L

-

In these formulas, E has its usual negative sign.

.

70

-

(kP

-

2P
simplified to

where k P/P. Equation (4) can be

= (kE

(5)

fl

From (5), we can readily deduce that C is equal to
1C
U

+ L =

D

(1 +

kc_l

)= Rm (l-k)(

2

(6)

where Rm is total sales revenue at the monopoly price and output.

A question aries whether, since a demand curve of constant
elasticity is nonlinear, the linear approximation of the deadweight
loss used in equations (5) and (6) introduces a source of serious

inaccuracy. It appears not to, at least in the simple case where
c =

1, and therefore

PdQ_PQ
D_
— m

1

—

m cm
-

1n_l+k
1

(7)

k

The following table compares D/L calculated from equation (5) (with
c =

-1)

and equation (7), and shows that the linear approximation

overestimates the deadweight loss, but not seriously.

11. For the special case where the firm is able to charge the optimuii
monopoly price for the iidustry, so that P = MC = m (1 + 1), equation
c
c
(5) becomes

L

= :i2

+ E1)1 - 1,

(5')

and equation (6) becomes

-R (1 +]—)
c=_--!T1(
E

2

+1

).

(6')

8
Table 1

P

(MonoDolyjce increase)

D/L (ratio of deadweight to additional loss)
Equation (5)
Equation (7)

5%

.025

.025

10

.050

.049

15

.075

.072

20

.100

.094

50

The partial derivatives of D/L in equation (4) with respect to k
and 6

are

(D/L) —— 6k6-1
2

'c

(D/L)

—2 ikEl k

8

a(D/L)/k is negative since c is negative, meaning that the ratio of the

—

deadweight loss of monopoly to the additional loss is smaller, the
smaller the monopoly price increase

(k, the ratio of the competitive

to the monopoly price, is larger the smaller the relative price increase).

3(D/L)/e is also negative (since the natural logarithm of a fraction
is negative), meaning that the ratio of the deadweight to the additional
loss of monopoly is greater, the more elastic the demand is.
the
(2) For the case where/elasticity of demand at the monopoly price
(as well as the monopoly price increase and the quantity sold at the

monopoly price) is known or can be computed, and it is believed that
the demand curve can be approximated by a straight line, we first

express the slope of the demand curve at the monopoly price in terms of c:

S

9.

P

tiP

(9)

m

Since the slope of a linear demand curve is constant, we can use
equation (9) to find tiQ; it is CQmPk• Equation (9) can now be transformed into
C =

R(l••k)(l

+

c(l—k)),

(10)

and D/L is given by
0 —

E(l—k)

L

2

We now have two formulas for the ratio of the deadweight to the
additional loss from monopoly-—equations (5) and (ll)——and we ask:
how different are the estimates that they produce, under various assumptions as to the monopoly price increase and the elasticity of demand?
The answer is, not very, for price increases of less than 25 per cent,

and even for much larger price increases if the elasticity of demand is

no greater than one. These results are shown in Figure 2.

III

A
The formulas developed in the preceding part could be used to derive,
from

the estimates used by Arnold Harberger and others of the deadweight

12. The sign of c is positive in equations (10) and (11).
13. For the special case where the firm is able to charge the optimum
monopoly price, equation (10) becomes simply
-R
(10')

and equation (11) becomes
2.
E

has its usual negative sign in equation (10').

(11')

10.

ri-i-

.

.

cigure 2

.

11.

loss of monopoly, an estimate of the total social cost of monopoly.
Harberger, estimating an average monopoly price increase of about

six per cent and assuming that the elasticity of demand was constant
and equal to -1, found the deadweight loss from monopoly in the manufacturing sector to be equal to (at most) .1 per cent of GNP.

Harberger's (implicit) k is thus 1/1.06 or .9434, and from this and
his estimate of c, we calculate from equation (5) that the ratio of

0 to L in Harberger's analysis is .03. Hence if D is .1 per cent of
GNP, L is about 3.3 per cent and C about 3.4 per cent—-about $40

billion today. David Schwartzman used similar methods and found D
equal to about .1 per cent of GNP too.

increase of 8.3 per cent and an c =
equation (5) yields D/L =

.06.

-1.5.

But he assumed a price
Plugging these values into

Hence if D = .1 per cent of GNP, L =

1.7 per cent and C about 1.8 per cent.
However, neither estimate can be taken seriously because both
Harberger and Schwartzman, in determining the monopoly price increase,

relied on rate-of-return statistics. Above-average rates of return
were used not only to identify the monopolized industries but also to

calculate the monopoly price increase. If the analysis in this paper
is correct, such a procedure is improper. The monopolist is not
expected to enjoy a supernormal rate of return, but only the normal

14. Arnold C. Harberger, Monopoly and Resource Allocation, 44 Am.
Econ. Rev. Papers and Proceedings 77 (1954), reprinted in his Taxation
and Welfare 91 (1974).
15. The Burden of Monopoly, 68 J. Pol. Ecón. 627 (1960).

12.

return

(assuming, realistically, that the investment which he

makes in obtaining the monopoly is written off over the life of the

This point is distinct from the objections to Harberger's

monopoly). '11'

procedure raised by Goerge Stigler: that monopoly profits are often
capitalized into the valuation of a firm's assets and that some of
the profits may be received as rents by suppliers of the firm's
inputs.

The proper method of calculating the social costs of monopoly
(deadweight plus additional loss) is to obtain estimates of the mono-

poly price increase, and of the elasticity of demand at the relevant

points along the demand curve, from industry studies. An independent
estimate of the elasticity of demand would of course be unnecessary
if we could assume that, after the price increase, the price
charged was the optimum monopoly price; and where an independent
estimate of E

is

available, it can serve as a check on that assumption.

To illustrate, there have been a number of estimates of the percentage

by which CAB regulation has increased the price of airline travel. The
is .66.19,

simple average of these estimates / —

If

a 66 per cent price increase

16. Subject to an important qualification, discussed later, when there
is uncertainty in the market for becoming a monopolist.
17. Thus, if it costs $10 million to obtain a monopoly that will yield
a profit (net of the cost of production and sale) of $1 million a year
for 10 years, we can expect the annual expenses of the company to be
adjusted upward, by depreciation or other accounting techniques, by
$1 million a year throughout the 10-year period.
18. George J. Stigler, The Statistics of Monopoly and Mergers, 64
J. Pol. Econ. 33 (1956).
19. Computed from Richard E. Caves, Air Transport and Its Regulators
372 (1962); William A. Jordan, Airline Regulation in America 110—li,
124-25 (1970); Note, Is Regulation Necessary?, California Air Transportation and National Regulatory Policy, 74 Yale L. 3. 1416, 1435—36
(1965).

13.

over competitive levels is assumed to raise the price of air travel

to the optimum monopoly level, then the elasticity of demand at
the monopoly price can be calculated from the formula which equates

marginal cost to marginal revenue,

and

=

6m'

c =

-2.5

MC =

+ ). Since

MC =

at the monopoly price. An independent

estimate of the long-run elasticity of demand for air travel made by
Houthakker and Taylor is -2.36,

which is virtually identical t.c

our calculation.

We havE two choices now. We can assume constant elasticity and
solve for OIL using equation (5'), or we can assume a linear demand
curve and solve for Oil., using equation (10'). With the assumption of

constant elasticity, D

2.04 L, and (from equation (6')) it is readily

calculable that the total social cost of the airline monopoly is

approximately equal to 2.48 times the total revenue at the monopoly
price.

However, the assumption of a linear demand curve seems more plaus-

ible than the assumption of constant elasticity, especially for large
relative price increases, which one expects to find associated with a
rising elasticity of demand as substitutes become increasingly attractive.

20. This was essentially the procedure used by David Kamerschen, in An
Estimation of the Welfare Losses from Monopoly in the American Econciy,
4 W. Econ. J. 221 (1966), to estimate the deadweight loss from monopoly
in manufacturing. He has been criticized, and rightly so, for assuming
that firms in concentrated industries subject to the Sherman Act's
prohibition of collusive pricing are typically able to charge the
profit-maximizing monopoly price.
21. H. S. Houthakker & Lester D. Taylor, Consumer Demand in the United
States, 1929-1970, at 124 (1966). This must be the elasticity of demand
at the regulated price, since only a small part of the airline industry is not subject to CAB regulation.

14.

And if equations (10') and (11') are used, D is one half as great
as

L, and C is equal to 20 per cent of the total revenues of the indus-

try at the monopoly price. Still, this
loss from the regulation_induced

indicates a very large social

airline monopoly.

The foregoing exercise brings out an important general point that
has been completely ignored in previous studies of the cost of monopoly

to the economy: much of this cost

probably originates in the regulated

sector of the economy. The ability of firms to maintain supracompetjtjve
prices must be greater in industries in

which a regulatory agency limits

entry and price competition than in the manufacturing sector where
express collusion is forbidden by the Sherman Act.
previous studies of the cost of

Yet all of the

monopoly to the economy have been based

on supposed monopoly pricing in manufacturing alone.
Table 2 collects estimates of the

regulation—induc price increase,

and the elasticity of demand at the current price, for several industries
for which these data are available.

Two estimates of elasticity are

given; one (ci) is derived from the price-Increase data, on the
assumption that the industry is
charging the optimum monopoly price,and the
other (c2) is an independent estimate of elasticity. The estimates
of the total social costs of the

regulation in question, which appear

in the last two columnsof the table,

are based on the assumption

that the industry's demand curve is linear in the relevant region, and
are expressed as a percentage of the total revenues of the industry.
Our airline example appears in the last row of the table.

22.

C1 is computed from c1 C2 from

c2.

15.

Table 2

The Social Costs of Regulation

Industry

Regulatory
Price Increases
C1

C2

Physicians' services

•67a

—1.43

.29

.35

Eyeglasses

•34c

—

.13

.24

Milk

•11e

.05

.10

Motor carriers

•62g

-2.63

.19

.30

Oil

.65'
.66

-2.5
-2.5

.20
.20

.32
.19

Airlines
a

—.9'

—2.36

Unpublished study by Reuben A. Kessel.

b.

H. S. Houthakker & Lester D. Taylor, Consumer Demand in the United
States, 1929—1970, at 99 (l966)(short—run).
c
Lee Benham, Price Structure and Professional Control of Information,
p. 19 (March 1973).

d

Id, at 30 (simple average).

e
Reuben Kessel, Economic Effects of Federal Regulation of Milk
Markets, 10 J. Law & Econ. 51, 73 (1967).
f
H. S. Houthakker, New Evidence on Demand Elasticities, 33 Econometrica
277, 286 (1965). This estimate is for all food; an estimate limited to
dairy products in the Netherlands was not significantly different. Robert
Ayaynian, A Comparison of Barten's Estimated Demand Elasticities With
Those Obtained Using Forsch's Method, 37 Econometrica 79 (1969).
g
Average of estimates in Department of Agriculture studies cited in
Thomas Gale Moore, Freight Transportation Regulation 72 (American Enterprise Institute 1972); Richard N. Farmer, The Case for Unregulated
Truck Transportation, 46 J. Farm [con. 398 (1964).

Simple averages of various estimates for transportation in Scandinavia.
See Regnar Forsch, A Complete Scheme for Computing All Direct Costs and
Cross Demand Elasticities in a Model With Many Sectors, 27 Econometrica
177 (1959); Richard W, Parks, Systems of Demand Equations: An Empirical
Comparison of Alternative Functional Forms, 37 Econometrica 629, 649 (1969).
h

i

Cabinet Task Force on Oil Import Control, The Oil Import Question (1970).

16.

These estimates are crude, although they have the virtue of being

improvable. They do suggest, however, that the social costs of regulation are probably extremely high, given that about 17 per cent of GNP
comes from industries such as agriculture, transportation, communica-

tions, power, banking, insurance, and medical services that contain
the sorts of controls over competition that might be expected to lead
to supracompetitive prices.

True, a much higher percentage of GNP--

30 per cent——originates in manufacturing and mining, a highly concen-

trated sector of the economy, and the conventional wisdom associates

high concentration with supracompetitive pricing. But only about a
fifth of the output of this sector comes from industries in which four
firms account for 60 per cent or more of sales, and there is little
theoretical basis for believing that the sellers in less concentrated
industries could collude effectively without engaging in behavior pro-

hibited by the Sherman Act. ?_1 Not all violations of the Sherman Act
are detected and punished, of course, but the secret conspiracies

that escape detection are probably not very effective-—even the great
electrical conspiracy, a highly elaborate and long-continued conspiracy

23. This figure may seem an overstatement, since not all of the markets
in the regulated industries are in fact subject to the relevant regulatory controls (almost half of the trucking industry, for example, is
exempt from regulation by the ICC). On the other hand, tariffs and
similar restrictions (g,, the oil import quotas) are excluded from
the estimate of the percentage of GNP affected by regulation.
24. Thus, Kessel's study of underwriting costs shows that an increase
beyond eight in the number of bids does not reduce those costs; and
an industry where the four largest firms have less than 60 per cent of
the market is apt to contain at least eight significant competitors.
Reuben Kessel, A Study of the Effects of Competition in the Tax-Exempt
Bond Market, 79 J. Pol. Econ. 706, 723 (1971).

.

17.

among a very small group of firms, apparently succeeded in
the price level by only 8.8 per cent on average.

raising

It seems highly

unlikely that the price level of the manufacturing and mining sector
as a whole is more than about two per cent above the

competitive level'

Assume that it is two, and that the average elasticity of demand for the
products of this sector, at current prices, is -1.1607.

Then, from

equation (10), the total social costs of monopoly in this sector are 1.9
per cent of the total revenues generated in the sector,
substantial, it amounts to a total dollar loss

and while this is

substantially smaller

than that generated in the regulated sector.

25, U.S. Cong.., Jt. Comm. on Internal Revenue Taxation, Staff Study of
Income Tax Treatment of Treble Damage Payments Under the Antitrust
Laws 39 (Nov. 1, 1965).

is assumed that only in industries where the four-firm concentration ratio exceeds .6 is effective undetectable collusion likely,
and that it allows these industries to
maintain, on average, prices five
per cent above the competitive level, while in the rest of the manufacturing and mining sector the average price level is only one per cent
above the competitive level, then average prices for the entire sector
would only be 1.83 per cent above the competitive price level. (Statistics
on the distribution of output among industries in different four-firm
concentration ratio groups are from the 1963 Census of Manufacturers.)
26. If it

27. This figure is a simple average of the long-run price elasticities
for nine product groups within the manufacturing and mining sector
estimated by Houthakker & Taylor, supra note 21, at 72, 74, 83, 112-14,
116, 128—31.

28. The simple average of the social—cost estimates presented in Table
2 is 20.4 per cent of the total revenues of the
regulated industry.
Assuming that 50 per cent of the output of that sector is produced in
markets that are regulated in a manner similar to the industries in
Table 2 and that the average social cost of regulation in each such
market is 20.4 per cent of total revenue, then it would follow that the
social costs of regulation were equal to 1.7 per cent of GNP, while the
social costs of monopoly in manufacturing and mining would be equal to
only .6 per cent of GNP. These estimates exclude, of course, the administrative costs of regulation and antitrust enforcement in the two sectors
respectively, and the benefits of monopoly. The benefits are likely to
be greater in the manufacturing and
mining sector, where much concentration
and the resulting monopoly pricing may be due to efficiencies of various

18.

Another use

to

which the analysis developed here can be put is

estimating the social benefits of the antitrust laws. Table 3, which
is constructed on the same basis as Table 2, presents estimates of the
social

costs of several cartels not subject to the prohibitions of

the American antitrust laws.
Table 3
Social Costs of Cartelization

Cartel

Industry
Nitrogen

Price Increase
75a

C

c1

-2.3256

14493b

2
.21

.30
.22

Sugar

-4.3276

339d

.12

Aluminum

-2

n.a.

25

Aluminum

—3.6311

n.a.

.14

-2

n.a.

.25

37h

—3.7023

n.a.

.14

3l'

-4.2499

n.a.

.12

Rubber
Electric bulbs
Copper

100g

a

George W. Stocking & Myron W. Watkins, Cartels in Action 163 (1946).

b

Id. at 166.

c

Id. at 46.

d

H.S. Houthakker, New Evidence on Demand Elasticities, 33 Econometrica
277, 286 (1965) (food --obviously a much too low estimate for one food
product sold at a cartel price:).
e
f

Stocking & Watkins, supra note a, at 228.
Id. at 251.

g

Id. at 64—65.

h

Id. at 343.

i.

George W. Stocking & Myron W. Watkins, Cartels or Competition? 127

(1948).

28. continued
sorts. See Harold Demsetz, Industry Structure, Market Rivalry, and
Public Policy, 16 J. Law & Econ. 1 (1973). There is no accepted theory
which attributes socj1 benefits torequlation limiting entry and
price competition; OUt See note 29 inf?'a.

19.

Presumably, collusive price increases of this magnitude, and the
attendant very substantial social costs, are deterred by the American

antitrust laws. However, a complete cost-benefit analysis of antitrust
law would also require estimation of (1) the costs of administering
the antitrust laws and (2) the large social

costs imposed by the many

perverse applications of those laws, which may be an inevitable byproduct of having antitrust laws.
The conclusions that emerge from our estimation exercises are
necessarily tentative; they are that:

1. the social costs of public regulation, in
increasing prices
in the regulated industries above competitive levels, are
probably very great--perhaps two per cent of our entire GNP;

2. the social costs of monopoly in
manufacturing and mining
are, in contrast, probably much smaller even though a larger
sector of the economy is affected;
3. the enforcement of the antitrust laws against cartels has
probably generated large social-cost savings, but at what
cost we do not know.

B
The validity of the approach of this paper, and of the estimates
presented in the preceding subpart, depend, of course, on the soundness

of our basic assumptions that the market for becoming a monopolist is a

20.

competitive one and that marginal costs in that market are constant;
and it is time we examined those

assumptions critically. The first

is a standard assumption of economics, and, pending better evidence
than we have, seems reasonable in the present context. Anyone can
try to obtain a patent, a certificate of public convenience and
necessity, a television license, a minimum—wage law, and anyone can
try to enter a cartelized industry, or if he is a member of such an

industry try to engross a greater share of the monopoly profits of

the industry. To be sure, where there are no barriers to entry the
expenditure of resources on becoming a monopolist will lead to an
increase in the output of the market and a consequent reduction in

price. But these situations are properly analyzed as ones where the
expected monopoly profits are small and hence where the social costs
of monopoly are small too.
As one example of the mechanisms by which the potential transfer

of wealth from

consumers to the owners of a monopolistic firm is

transformed into a social cost, consider

nonprice competition in the

airline industry. Assume that the CAB places a floor under airline
prices that exceeds the marginal cost of

providing air transportation

under competitive conditions. If the regulation is not anticipated, the
situation initially is as depicted in Figure 3, and is unstable. Since
there are several airlines, and nonprice competition is not constrained,
the airlines will expend resources

on such competition (better service,

etc.) until the marginal costs of air transportation rise to the level
(p in Figure 3) where the industry is earning only a normal return.

S

21.

p
MCaA1Figure 3

(Judging from the profit statements and stock prices of the regulated
airlines, their return is indeed no higher than normal.)

By this

process, the monopoly profit initially generated by the regulatory
price floor--the shaded rectangle-—is transformed into higher costs
for the industry, and these costs are a social cost of regulation.
The demand curve shifts to the right because the increased

expendi-

tures on service presumably improve the product from the standpoint

of the consumer. The shift produces some additional consumer surplus

not enough to offset the higher costs—-otherwise the higher level
of service would have been provided without the spur of monopoly
but

pricing.
This discussion suggests an

important (and familiar) point about

expenditures on monopolizing. If for some reason the free market is
not expected to produce the optimum output of a particular good or
service, the creation of a monopoly in that market may, by attracting

29. This does suggest, however, that not all of the social costs of
airline regulation estimated in Part III A, supra, represent pure waste.

22.

additional resources into the market, result in the correct output

of the good. This is the economic justification of the patent system
and the (nonmonopolistic) explanation for resale price maintenance;
it is not a justification for the regulation of the airline industry.
Observe that if the regulatory price floor had been anticipated,

the initial cost curve in Figure 3 would be incorrectly drawn. The
airlines would have bid away the anticipated monopoly profits in
jockeying for admission to the regulatory cartel.
Figure 3 also illustrates the second critical assumption underlying
our analysis, the constancy of the marginal costs of becoming a monopolist.

The assumption seems appropriate in most contexts——there

seems little reason to believe that obtaining monopolies involves the

use of resources the long—run supply of which is inelastic. Some
exceptions are discussed in the next part of the paper.
How is the analysis affected if there is uncertainty in the activity
of becoming a monopolist or if bribery is the method used to obtain the

monopoly? Given uncertainty, the expected monopoly profits of any
firm seeking a monopoly will be smaller than the actual monopoly profits,
and therefore the expenditures of each firm will also be smaller than

the actual monopoly profits. Suppose ten firms are vying for a monopoly
having a present value of $1 million and each of them has an equal
chance of obtaining it.

If risk neutral, each will spend $100,000

(assuming constant costs) on trying to obtain the monopoly. Only one

30. With rising marginal costs, the total social costs of becoming a
monopolist would be less than the private social costs = expected
monopoly profits; the difference would be rents received by suppliers
of resources specialized to the activity of obtaining monopolies.

23.

will succeed, and his costs will be much smaller than the monopoly

profits. But the total costs of obtaining the

monopoly--counting

losers' expenditures as well as winners'--wil] be the same as under
certainty——$l million.

If we assume that the market for monopoly is characterized by a
high degree of uncertainty--a plausible assumption--we can explain

why the costs of obtaining a monopoly have largely eluded observation.
Most of the costs are incurred in unsuccessful efforts to obtain a
monopoly--the lobbying campaign that fails, the unsuccessful attempt

to obtain a bank charter or form a cartel. This point also suggests
that the use of above-average accounting rates of return to identify
(though not measure) monopoly power may not be entirely unsound after

all. The firm (or industry) that obtains monopoly under conditions
of uncertainty will, like the winner of a lottery, enjoy windfall
profits ex post.

It might seem that where monopoly is obtained by bribery of
government officials, the additional loss of monopoly with which this

paper is concerned would be eliminated--a bribe is a pure transfer.

But this conclusion would be incorrect.

Bribery merely shifts the

monopoly profits from the monopolist to the officials receiving the
bribe, and draws real resources into the activity of becoming an
offical who is in a position to receive these bribes.
Iv

The analysis of the costs of monopoly presented in this paper has
implications for a number of issues of public policy.

24.

1.

In a recent paper Comanor and Smiley attempt to show that a

large part of the inequality in the distribution of wealth in contemporary America is attributable to monopoly.

They use the Harberger

and other studies discussed in Part III of this paper to determine the
aggregate wealth transfer from consumers to the owners of monopoly firms,
and by a series of additional assumptions

concerning the incomes of

consumers and shareholders, family size, the savings rate, etc., derive

an estimate of the distributive impact of

monopoly. Many of the assump-

tions are questionable but even if their correctness were conceded the

conclusion would be wrong. There is no reason for thinking that monopoly has a significant distributive effect. Consumers' wealth is not
transferred to the shareholders of monopoly firms; it is dissipated in
the purchase of inputs into the activity of becoming a monopolist.

2, Oliver Williamson has argued that the refusal of the courts to
recognize a defense of economies of scale in merger cases under the
Clayton Act is questionable because, under plausible assumptions concerning the elasticity of demand, only a small reduction in the merging

firms' costs is necessary to offset any deadweight loss created by the
price increase that the merger enables the firms to make.

The

nature of the comparison is shown in Figure 4.

31. William S. Comanor & obert H. Smiley, Monopoly and the Distribution
of Wealth, forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics.
32. Economics as an Antitrust Defense: The Welfare Tradeoffs, 58
Am. Econ. ev. 18 (1968).

.

25.

B
C

P

Figure 4

This analysis is incomplete, however. The expected profits of
the merger—-ABEF-—will generate an equivalent amount of costs as
firms

vie, through service competition or whatever, to engross these

profits (alternatively, the merging firms might expend resources equal
to the rectangle in attempting to negotiate the merger, convince the
government to permit them to make it, or contest an antitrust case

brought to prevent or undo the merger). The total social cost of the
merger, at least as a first approximation, is ABEF + BCD and exceeds
the cost savings (GDEF) made possible by the merger. Of course, the
curves could be drawn in such a way that the merger would generate net

cost savings. My point is only that there is no presumption that anticompetitive mergers generate net savings and this, combined with the
high cost of litigating issues of cost savings, provides some justification

in

for the refusal of the courts to admit a defense of efficiencies

a Clayton Act merger case.
3.

concern

It

is

frequently

argued that the antitrust laws should not

themselves with practices that are merely methods of price

discrimination, since there is no basis for thinking that discrimination

26.

increase. the deadweight loss of monopoly, and it
may reduce it (to
zero, if discrimination is perfect).

justifiable by reference to the costs of

The conclusion may be
administering antidiscrjmjna—

tion rules, but the basis on which it has been defended by its pro-

ponents is incorrect. Even when price discrimination is perfect, so
that the deadweight loss of monopoly is zero, the total social costs
of a discriminating monopoly are greater than those of a single—price
monopoly.

This is because, under perfect. price

discrimination,

C is the entire area between the demand curve and the marginal (=

average)

cost curve, and must exceed the sum of L and D at any single price
(see Figure 1).

4. It is widely believed that the case for antitrust enforcement
has been gravely weakened by the theory of the second best. The theory
teaches that the elimination of one monopoly in an economy containing

other

monopolies (or other sources of divergence between price and

marginal cost , such as taxation) may reduce the efficiency of resource

allocation;

hence antitrust enforcement may increase rather than reduce

D. The true economic basis for antitrust
D but D +

enforcement, however, is not

L, and we have seen that under plausible assumptions as to

the elasticity of demand D is only a small fraction of D +

L,

at least

for moderate increases in price above the competitive level. The social
costs measured by L, like the social costs of theft, are largely unaffected
by the existence of second—best problems.

33. This is a major theme in Ward S. Bowman, Jr., Patent and Antitrust
Law (1973).
34.

I abstract from the costs of
administering the price-discrimination
scheme; these increase the costs of discriminating
monopoly relative to
those of a nondiscriminating monopoly.

27.

This discussion implies that monopolizing would be a socially

undesirable activity even if D were zero, and this is correct. Criminal
or socially undesirable activity may in fact be defined as activity
that does not add to the social wealth, but
untarily. --"

merely transfers it invol-

Monopoly, like theft, is unproductive of anything other

than involuntary wealth transfers, and hence any resources devoted to
obtaining monopoly are socially wasted.

5. The analysis in this paper suggests a possible explanation
for the positive correlation that has been found between concentration
and advertising (I assume, without much conviction, that the studies
finding such a correlation will withstand the assaults of their critics).
It may be easier to collude on price than on the amount of advertising.
Although there is no great trick to establishing an agreed-upon level

of advertising and detecting departures from it, the incentives to violate
any such agreement are strong because the gains from a successful advertising campaign may be difficult to offset imediately and hence offer
promise of a more durable advantage than a price cut would.

If so, the

situation is similar to nonprice competition in the airline industry.

Price is fixed by the cartel but the level of advertising is not, or

at least not effectively. As a result, the monopoly profits generated
by

the cartel price are

transformed into additional expenditures on

35. Some pure wealth transfers may, of course, be socially desirable.
But presumably public redistribution is both more efficient and more
equitable than the redistribution brought about by criminal activity.
36. Subject to the qualification stated earlier in the discussion of
patent monopolies.

37. See g., obert B. Ekelund, Jr. & William P. Gramm, Advertising

and Concentration: Some New Evidence, 15 Antitrust Bull. 243 (1970).

28.

advertising. Therefore we can expect, other things being equal, to
find more advertising in cartelized than in competitive industries.

6. In discussions of the "social

responsibility" of large corpora-

tions, it is generally assumed that a firm (or a group of firms) having
some monopoly power could decide to incur somewhat higher costs in
order to discharge its social responsibilities, without courting bank-

ruptcy. Thus, glancing back at Figure 1, even if MC rose to P, the
firm would still be covering its costs.

However, if the analysis in

this paper is correct, and the expected profits of monopolizing are
zero, it follows that the entire area L in Figure 1 will represent
fixed costs to the firm, unless the monopoly was obtained under con-

ditions of uncertainty. In the latter case the fixed costs will be
somewhat lower, but in the former case any increase in MC will place
the firm in danger of bankruptcy.

7. If one views the activity of obtaining monopolies as a competitive industry, the amount and social costs of monopoly are as shown in
Figure 5.

Figure 5

-

.

29.

The number of potential monopolies in the economy is plotted on
the horizontal axis and the value of each monopoly on the vertical.
The demand curve has a negative slope,

on the theory that there is

not an unlimited supply of lucrative monopolies. Our earlier assumption of constant costs is abandoned, and the

supply (marginal cost)

curve is shown as having a positive slope.

The intersection of the demand and supply curves determines the

output of monopolies (Q). The total revenues of monopoly, VQ (equivalent
to L in Figure 1), are equal to the total private (although now not the

total social) costs of the activity of

obtaining monopolies.

It is

plain from Figure 5 that the social costs of monopoly can be reduced in

any of three ways: by reducing the average value of a monopoly (as
by eliminating regulatory barriers to entry); by increasing the marginal

costs of obtaining a monopoly; and by reducing the elasticity of the
supply of inputs into that activity.
This analysis provides a framework for analyzing a variety of public
policy issues, such as the recurrent proposal to

replace the present

method of assigning television licenses (awarded to the applicant who
convinces the FCC in a formal hearing of his

superior ability to serve

the "public interest") by an auction system. This proposal is frequently
supported on distributive grounds--why should the licensee rather than

the public receive the rents due to the limited amount of

spectrum that has been allocated for television? This

paper suggests

38. The social costs are the area under the supply curve to the left

of Q.

30.

a nondistributive justification for the auction proposaL The auction
would substitute a transfer payment for a real
cost--the expenditures
on the hearing process by competing applicants. To be sure, there
is a danger that the auction mechanism might be subverted by expendi-

tures designed to rig the bidding. An applicant would be willing to
expend in real resources up

to the amount of the transfer

that would be necessary to obtain the license, in order to obtain the
license without having to make the transfer. However, such expenditures could be discouraged by

appropriate legal penalties. ---''

The

objective of punishment would be to increase the expected costs of
obtaining the license (other than by an honest bid), which includes any
expected punishment costs, to the point where the applicants are induced
to make the costless transfer rather than

to expend real resources on

trying to obtain the license outside of the auction

The patent laws embody a somewhat similar
Were there no such laws, inventors would

process.

economizing technique.

expend substantial resources

on preserving the secrecy of their inventions; their efforts would
generate indirect as well as direct social costs by retarding the

spread of knowledge. The patent laws, by providing a legal remedy for

39. To be sure, the enforcement of legal penalties is not a costless
activity. However, at least in principle, the private marginal cost
of criminal activity can be raised to arbitrarily high levels far
exceeding the expected value of that activity to the criminal, at
negligible cost, by establishing a schedule of penalties that are so
severe that even though only slight resources are devoted to detection
and punishment of criminals the
expected punishment cost faced by the
criminal is so large as to deter him. See Gary S. Becker, Crime and
Punishment: An Economic Approach, 76 J. Pol. Econ. 169 (1968).

.

31.

infringement, reduce the level of such expenditures, in much the same

way as the existence of legal penalties for theft
of resources that people devote to

reduces the level

protecting their property from

thieves.

An interesting method of reducing the social costs of monopoly is
used, perhaps unwittingly, by labor unions.

The existence of a monopoly

wage might be expected to induce the expenditure of more and more
resources by workers seeking entry to the union, until the expected

benefits of union membership were reduced to zero. However, unions
traditionally have rationed membership in a way that greatly reduces
the marginal benefits of expenditures
the resources expended in that

on obtaining membership, and hence

pursuit, by conditioning membership on

a status that is difficult or impossible for

the job seeker to buy at

any price--such as being white, or the son of a union member, or an
apprentice for seven years. --"

In the limit, this method of
rationing

would reduce the elasticity of the supply of inputs into obtaining
union membership, and hence the social costs of labor monopolies excluding

deadweight loss, to zero. Thus, the costs of labor
be

monopolies may

lower than the costs of other types of monopoly, even for the

equivalent price increases and scale of activity, because other markets
in monopoly have not used such efficient () methods
of rationing
monopoly power.

40. The use of these methods by unions
is being increasingly limited
by government regulations designed to eliminate racial discrimination.

32.

8. One reason why most students of tax policy prefer Income

.

to excise taxes is that the misallocatlve effect of an Income tax
is

assumed to be less than that of an excise tax: the cross—

elasticity of demand between work and leisure Is assumed to be lower
than that between a coninodity and its substitutes. Even if this Is
correct, it does not follow that the total social costs of collecting
a given amount of

those of

an excise tax. The amount of the tax transfer-—I in Figure

6--represents

P

revenue by means of an income tax are lower than

potential gain to the taxpayer, and he will expend real

-N

Figure 6

MC.

JN

resources on trying to avoid the tax until, at the margin, cost and

gain are equated. The critical question in comparing the costs of
income and excise taxation, therefore, is the shape and location of
the marginal cost curves for avoiding income tax liability and excise

tax liability, respectively. In the case of a highly progressive
income tax system in which expenses for the production of income are

S

33.

ductible, the comparison is likely to be distinctly unfavorable to
income taxation. Imagine that the marginal income tax rate in the
highest bracket is 90 per cent (as it once was in this country).

Then the taxpayer will continue expending resources on tax avoidance
until the expected value of a dollar so expended falls below ten

cents; conceivably, he might spend as much as ten times his tax

liability in order to reduce that liability to zero. How much he
would actually spend would depend on the location and shape of the
supply surve for avoidance, but, as shown in Figure 7, his expenditures could easily exceed his tax liability (the I of Figure 6).

T IQL
MC. Lp&*)

Figure

7

dF

.QA Q1

Qu4ib C0cO01(LJ of 0b1 O j$CO,I)

This analys4not conclusive against the income tax. It might
be possible to increase the private marginal costs of avoidance by

punishment or by disallowing expenses on tax avoidance. The main

34.

problem would be to distinguish legitimate from illegitimate avoidance

efforts.

S

The point remains that no general presumption that

excise taxation is less costly than income taxation can be derived
from an analysis limited to the allocative costs of taxation, corresponding to the deadweight losses of monopoly.

.

41.

One would hardly want to punish everyone who believed that some
provision of the Internal Revenue Code was not intended to apply
to his activity.

.

