                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     VARYING-PARAMETER SUPPLY FUNCTIONS AND THE SOURCES OF
     ECONOMIC DISTRESS IN AMERICAN AGRICULTURE, 1866-1914


                     Thomas F. Cooley*
                    Stephen J. DeCanio**




                  Working Paper No.      57




  COMPUTER RESEARCH CENTER FOR ECONOMICS AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
            National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                      575 Technology Square
                  Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

                      September 1974



                Preliminary: not for quotation


 NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
 numbers for comments only. They should not be quoted without
 written permission.

 This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
 publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for
 approval by the Board of Directors.

 *NBER Computer Research Center and Tufts University. Research
  supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant GJ-ll54X3
  to the National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
**yale University. Research supported in part by National Science
  Foundation Grant GJ-ll54X3 to the National Bureai of Economic
  Research, Inc.
                                                                             .
                                Abstract

The agrarian unrest in the United States at the end of the nineteenth
century is examined. This unrest is often viewed as stemming from the
inability of farmers to adapt to changing conditions in world agriculture.
This hypothesis is tested in the context of a distributed lag supply
function. Varying parameter estimation methods are used to trace the
history   of the parameters in the supply function and to   decompose
observed prices into permanent and transitory components over time.
The patterns of variation are tested for conformity with a model of
rational price-expectation formation. The conclusion is that farmers
behaved as economic theory would predict, but that neither theory nor
practice gave them relief from the troubles which plagued them,


                                                                             .
                          Acknowledgments


We wish to acknowledge the helpful criticisms and comments which have been
offered by William Parker, Merton J. Peck, Peter Temin, Stanley Engerinan,
Joel Mokyr, Matthew Berman, and others with whom we have discussed these
findings. Responsibility for errors remains ours.




                                                                             .
                                 Contents


].    Iitroduction                                                 1

II.   The Model

III. Estimation Method                                            11

IV.   Results                                                     15

V.    Concluding Speculations                                     33


Not                                                             •3
References .    .   .   .   ,.                                  . 63



                                  Tables


Table 1.   Varying—Parameter Estimates                            41

Table 2.   Estimates of y and                                     46

Table 3.   Comparison of Estimates of                             48

Table 4.   Correlations Between Varying-Parameter Estimates
           and Trend                                              50

Table 5.   Correlations of Differences of Estimates and Price
           Standard Deviations                                    52

Table 6.   Estimates of the Relative Variance of the Components
           of Price

Table 7.   Correlations Between Parameter Estimates and the
           Relative Variance of the Components of Price           56

Table 8.   Probability Values of the Sign Frequencies of
           CorrelaUons                                            58

Table 9.   Durbin—Watson Statistics of Observed Relative Price . 59

Table 10. Shares of Regions in World Production of Wheat
           and Cotton                                             60
"IWihen we speak of 'rational behaviour' or of 'irrational behaviour' then we mean
behaviour which is, or which is not, in accordance with the logic of the situation.
In fact, the psychological. analysis of an action in terms of Its (atioza1 or ir—
ratIoaj.)motives presupposes.. .that we have previously developed some standard of
what is to be considered as rational in the situation in questior."
                                                                ———Karl R. Popper [1966]

    I. Introduction


           Few questions of American economic history are as int'iguing as those

    surroundIig the transformation of American agriculture between the Civil War

    and World War I. The reversal of the relative weights of agriculture and

     industry is well known, with agriculture employing 52.5% of th labor force

     and producing 57% of commodity—production value added in 1870 but employing

     o.y 3l.% of the labor force and producing 38% of the commodity—production

     value   added in 1910 [Lebergott 1966,   p. 119; Galiman and Howle 1971, p. 26.

     The   value added figures are for 1869   and 1909.]. But   in addition, this period
     seems to have marked a once—and—for—all shift in the consciousness of the
     farn4ng population. The years prior to World War I marked the emergence of

     the "farm bloc" attitudes which have persisted to the present day. The

     Granges, W1eels, Alliances, and cooperatives were proving grounds for the

     tactics of special interest politics. Unlike the antebellum prosiavery

     minority, the farming minority managed to avoid being swamped in the political

     triumph of its rivals. The reason for the farmers' survival as a political

     force may originate, paradoxically, in the decisive defeat they suffered in the

     Bryan debacle of 1896 and their simultaneous loss of organizational autonomy.

     The Repulican victory coupled with the dismantling of the Populist political

     machinery guaranteed that the farming interests could never again seriously contend

     for national hegemony. Secure in its victory, the business establishment could

     afford to grant the farmers special privileges almost as a consolation.
                                            2




      Whatever    conclusions might be drawn about the politics of the era of

protest and unrest that began in the 1870's, the sources of that unrest

remain obscure. Because of the deep current of special pleading that flows

through   all the farmers' manifestoes, the modern historian is unwilling     to
accept them at face value. And because of the Populist intellectuals'

ignorance of economics (any doubts concerning this can be laid to rest by

brief attendance at Coin's Financial School [Harvey 1895]), the articulated

grievances of the farmers are similarly suspect. When the viewpoints and

prejudices of the contemporary observers are put aside, most of the alleged

economic foundations of the farmers' uihappiness fail to pass modern tests of

necessary or sufficient cause. Railroad rates, exploitation in the Southern

labor market, high interest rates, and adverse movements in the agricultural

terms of trade      are   all inadequate as explanations of either the pattern or

timing   of   the upheavals [Higgs 1970, DeCanio l974a, Bowman 1965, North 1974].

Even so, it would be foolishly premature to assert that the farmers were not

somehow oppressed in their economic role. To claim otherwise risks being

forced to argue that the entire era of protest and organization, wh1cl left

a permanent imprint on the political style of the agricultural minority, was

nothing   but the   product of the fevered imaginations of misfit reformers, or

of   the systematic   misperceptions of the farmers themselves.

       Economic   historians have recently inclined towards the view that
while the farmers were not victimized by trusts and markets in the ways they
thought they were (monopoly exploitation, falling terms of trade, speculation
in futures, etc.), they were nevertheless suffering the burden of adjustments
to   changes in the economic environment. For example, Mayhew has hypothesized

that the unrest of the Grangers and Afliancemen was not so much a response
                                      3




to a worsening of their overa.LL economic position as instead a reaction

to the commercialization of agriculture. This commercialiZat.on probably

increased farm incomes, but it also made the farmers subject to impersoiaJ.

and myterious market forces. Farmers' discçmfort with the demands of

the   market environment was thus the true source of their discontent (Mayhew 1972].

A somewhat different but related view was expressed by Nort!1:

       What was fundamentaLLy at stake in the farmer's discontent was,
       first of all, that he found himself competing in a world market
       in which the fluctuations in prices made no apparent sense to him.
       The bottom might drop out of his income because of a bumper crop
       at the other side of the world, in Argentina or Australia. When
       he suffered a period of drought and, poor crops, the higher prices
       he had learned to expect in such a case might still not be forth-
       coming (if other areas had a good crop year).... [North .I9t].

Implicit in the motivations for Populism proposed by both North and Mayhew

is the idea that farmers' perceptions of the econpmic reality were awry;

that in some fundainentaj. sense the operation of the markets for agricultural

products presented farmers in the ,Late nineteenth century with a puzzle

beyond their ability to solve.

      Against this approach may be counterposed the results of recent studies

on the responses of cotton and wheat farmers to changes in the relative

prices of alternative crops in the late n1neteentI century. Although these

supply studies are based on a relatively simple specificatipn of the farmers'

response functions, they do indicate a reasonable degree of flexibility in

the behaviorof' agriculturalists in those regions of the United States where

the great cash crops were grown. price movements elicited output changes in

the proper direction, and the speed of farmers' responses was rapid enough

to guarantee substantial adjustment to perrnanenl price changes In a fairly

short length of time     [Fisher and Temin 1970, DeCanto 1973].
                                                4




       Nevertheless,      doubts linger that conventional estimation of distributed

 lag   supply   functions viii reveal those aspects of the farmers'              underlying
 behavior required to unravel the origins of their distress. Even if producers'

 price responsiveness is a key indicator of their adaptability, the fifty—year

 span from the end of the Civil War        to   the outbreak of World War         I can not
 reasonably     be characterized as a period during which agriculture In the
United States was untouched by structura. change. Yet all the econometric
models employed until now to estimate the parameters of farmers'                   response
functions assume     an   unchanging structure. If      changes     in   the   behavior, psychology,
organization or     outlook of the farmers were responsible for the boiling up

of   the protests, then the estimates of constant parameters of distributed lag
supply functions may be incapable of        revealing those causes. The

commercialization     of wheat farming and the bitter experience of the sharp
cycles of the 1870's and 1890's may have altered the manner in which farmers
formulated      their expectations. In    the South, a general flexibility            in

switching between cotton and alternative crops may have gradually succumbed

to the demands for cotton by monopolistic furnishing merchants. In either

region, specialization may have required increasing investment in crop—

specific capital, thus reducing opportunities for choice of crop. Changes

in   the relative proportions     of   farmers exhibiting different types of behavior
could change the weights appropriate for aggregation. In any of these cases,
the 1866—1914 average estimates of the price elasticities and speeds of
adjustment could easily reveal normal           responses   by   the farmers for the
period as a whole, while remaining mute on the magnitude and direction of
the all—important changes in       these parameters-


                                                                                                       .
                                         S




       Recent developments in the theory of models with varying parameters allow

these issues to be attacked directly [Cooley 1971; Cooley and Prescott 1973a, 1973t',

1973c, 19714; Rosenberg   1973].   These new techniques not only enable identification

of   changes in the parameters over time, but   also permit fresh speculation   concern-
ing the origins of the changes. This paper explores the outcome of applying one
such technique to the data analyzed in the previous wheat and cotton supply
studies.    The results   reveal a surprising combination of influences operating
on Merican agriculture at the turn of the century. The farmers seem to
have behaved according to standards of optimal decision-making, but despite
their best efforts their freedom of action was curtailed by the development
of world commodity markets. The farmers' difficuLty was      not so much that

they   failed to understand their condition, but that they were unable to

do anything to alleviate it. In such a situation, the pursuit qf chimeras

may have offered the only hope. Populism and its related organized uprisings

may be seen in this light not as unsuccessflui. attempts to right economic

wrongs, but as doomed efforts by the farmers to deny what could not be

changed. In the dollars and cents matters involving farm management and

crop choice, the farmers behaved as economic theory would have led them to

behave, but neither theory nor practice offered any realistic relief from

the problems which plagued them. They were more successful in adapting to

an inherently unpleasant situation than in proposing or implementing reforms

to change that situation in any fundamental way?
                                                   6




II. The Model.


     The model employed by Fisher and Temin [1970] and DeCanio       [1973     ]


in   their studies of wheat and cotton is a version of   the   dynamic adjustment

model of Neriove [1958) The basic model assumes the form


     St       8 + 82 Pti +         83   St1 + f3   S2                        (I)


where St denotes the share of acres planted in wheat or cotton in year t,

Pt denotes the relativeprice of cotton or wheat compared to an an index of

the prices of the alternative crops in year t, and the 8's are coefficients

to be estimated.3 The theoretical motivation for this model has implications

about the interpretation of the coefficients 8.. The suppliers are

assumed to base their desired share of acreage (St*) onthe expected

relative price (pta):


          =
               j+a2pte                                                    (2)



In the studies referred to above, actual acreage is assumed to respond to

desired acreage with some speed of adjustment .*,. and    price   expectations

are assumed to adjust to experience with some speed of adjustment 8.


          =
              s1 +      (ste
                               —
                                   s1)                                    (3)

                                        e
• t t—J.                t—i             t—1


      With some manipulation equations (2)-() lead to empirical relations

of the form     (1)   where the B's depend on the speeds of adjustment             and

o and the      elasticity of desired supply with respect to expected price

(a2). Both the studies of nineteenth—century agricultural supply referred
                                             7




to above found that either u or e was equal to unity, which implies
   =    O.   For this reason, and because we          are interested   primarily in

testing hypotheses about the mechanism           of   price expectation formation, we

will follow the previous studies in estimating

    Sta 8+ B2Pt_j+ 835t—l

        Neriove argues that these coefficients are likely to be relatively

constant in the short run, but that the condit4.ons which lead to the

formation   of expectations are not likely to be constant in the long run.5
As we    have argued in the introduction the time period spanned in this 8tudy
is not only quite long but was probably characterized by a wide variety of
structural changes. Such changes are likely to have influenced the
expectatior of     farmers •   Thus,   even within the context of       received   doctrine
there are strong reasons to believe that the supply functions we are concerned
with are subject to change, over time.
        One objective of the present study is to determine empirica.U.y the
extent to which such structural change actually did take place over the
period l866_l9l1. In addition, however, we wish to probe beneath the surface of the
distributed lag supply response model to determine whether or not any changes
which did take place conformed .to        the types of     parameter variation which might be

predicted by economic theory. Theoretical attempts have been made to relate the

parameters   of   distributed lag specifications to optimal decision processes at the

micro   level, both   respect to the formulation of price expectations and the
                      with

rapidity with which actual levels of the dependent variable are brought into
                                             8




conformity with "desired" levels [Griliches 1967]. While             it would be best
to test both types of structural change hypotheses, the data required to investi—

gtefu1iy the        origins of changes in the speed of adjustment of actual to
desired acreage shares are not available.6 On the other hand, the data
required to compare farmers' behavior against standards of optimality in
price   expectation formation is immediately accessible, since the requisite

historical price information is already contained in the price series used

to   estimate the lagged adjustment supply functions.
      For   this reason, we wiLl concentrate on testing the theory of optisia.L.

expectation     formation proposed by Muth [1960]. Thus we     will    assume that

farmers were not prevented from achieving their desired crop mix. (This

amounts to assuming that St = S         or    j = i.)   Instead of   simply   positing

a lagged adjustment of the expected price to        past values of the     price, Muth

derives the optimal adjustment parameters as functions of certain characteristics

of the price history itself. To test this economic theory of expectation

formation,     changes in   the structuraJ. parameters that actually occurred will be

compared    with the changes predicted by the theory, given the changes taking
pLace in the price series over time.
      To    make this approach a. bit more transparent, let us consider in more
detail the     decision problem facing   the farmer. Since i = I,        the relationship

between actual supply and the expected price is given by


                                                                                 (6)
              St= Ui + a2Pt

Following    Muth, Let us also make     the reasonable assumption that the price

the   farmer observes is the sum of a permanent component (Pt) and a
                                                9




transitory component




We    shall assume that the transitory components are independently and

identically distributed with mean zero and              variance a2. The      permanent

components can     be   assumed to follow a moving average process


                             +                                                       (8)

where the C's are independent.Lydistribüted with mean zero and variance

a2 The essence of the farmer's decision problem is to forecast the

price for time period t given the information available up through t-l.

Muth shows that the price prediction Pe which minimizes the error variance

E(Pt —   Pe)2   given the information up to time t is


                   —               k-I
                        k1               t—k

where A depends in a known way on the variances of'               the   permanent and

transitory components of the price:7


             A =    j + (i/2)(a2/a2)        -       (a/o)[I + (i/)(a 2/a 2)]1/2            (10)


A Koyck transformation after the substitution of equation (9)                 into   equation

(6)   leads to an empirical relationship of the form


                         (i—A)   + a2    (i—x)      _1 + x s1                         (ii)
which gives the interpretation of the                    of equation (5)   which will be

followed throughout.
                                       10




     If the price itself is subject to exogenous influences because of               .
changing conditions in the marke for agricultural, products, then A will

change, provided the farmers perceive the changes in the characteristics of the

observed prices and modify their decision rule accordingly. In section IV

we test this hypothesis about farmers' behavior in some detail and find that

the pattern of variation in the coefficients of (5) is quite consistent with

this view of rational behavior.

     Equation (5) is identical to the form of the supply functions estimated

by Fisher and Ternin [1970] and   DeCanio [1973], except that (5) does not include

a time trend as an additional variable. The main justification for inclusion

of the trend in the original studies was that it picked up effects of omitted

variables. We feel that a significant time tread may actually be indicative

of the type of structural change which the varying.-parameter estimation

technique is explicitly designed to capture.8 Also, since there are good

reasons for expecting the parameters to vary over time it may be that the

empirical form (as distinct from the structural parameters) of the model

changes over time as well [David 1971]. Tentative results obtained when

we extended the data series through World War   I to   1925 suggest that the

basic form of the relationship may indeed have changed. We found several

instances of negative or statistically insignificant price elasticity

coefficients when the samples were extended to 1925. It was decided to

end the sample in l911 to maintain comparability with the previous studies

and to avoid having to change the basic specification of the estixated

equation.9



                                                                                     .
                                                          11




III. Estimation Method.

       The estimation method used in this study has been developed in

[Cooley 1971; Cooley and Prescott 1973c and 1974]. While theoretical and other

reasons      suggest that the parameters in our relationship are likely to
change over time,               they do not suggest the precise            pattern of the   variation.

For this reason we assume that the parameters are subject to a rather

generaj. process that is capable of detecting parameter variation from

a variety of sources. The coefficients are assumed to be subject to

both permanent and transitory changes over time:


                    =
              8t         spt + Ut
                                                                                               (12)
              8p=8p
               t t—J.             +
                                      LL)t




The vector                     represents the permanent component of the parameters              at

time    t.    The u. and                         are   independent and   identically distributed

random variables with zero mean vectors and covariance matrices which

are specified as


              Coy (ut) = (.L—y) a2 E

                                                                                               (13)
                                        2
                                             Z
              Cov(wt)=yc

The   matrices                 and Z             specify the relative magnitude of the parameter
changes and        are   assumed known up to a scale factor. In the current analysis
we assume

                                   100
              E
               U
                        Z =        010                                                        (lu)
                         (A)
                                   001
                                        12




The implication or this assumption is that the 6 coefficients will vary

at    the same rate. The choice of this particular specification of the

covariance structure was essentiaU.y arbitrary, except that all        parameters
were allowed    to   vary and no a priori assumption was made about the relative

magnitudes of the variations. Extensive experiments were carried out

with alternative specifications of           and   E,   including matrices with

unequal diagonal elements and ones with both positive and negative off—

diagnoai. elements. Comparisons of the Bayesian posterior odds [Zeilner 1971,

pp. 291—302] did not indicate that any particular       specification of the
Z     matrices was superior to the others. In addition, the parameter

histories traced out with the alternative specifications were all very

similar, with extremely high correlations between both the values of the

parameters at different base periods (see below) and changes in the parameter

values from one base period to the next, for all the alternative covariance

structures tested. Thus, the analysis presented below is quite robust

with respect to alternative E specifications.

       The parameter y (which     is constrained to lie between   zero and   one)
specifiesthe relative variance of the permanent and transitory components of
the changes in the 8's. If y is significantly different from zero, then
the    8's are subject to permanent changes over time.

       Since we are interested in the permanent component of the parameter

process and, in particular, specific realizations of the process, we

normalize the equation around a specific time period.'°If we let r

represent such a period, then



                                                                                    .
                                                  13



                    =         +w

                                  T                                                   (15)
                              +   E   w
                                          j



From equation (12) we can write


                    =-    T                    +u
Letting   X.
                    represent the row vector of independent variables

(', —1'                 we can rewrite the supply equation as



               St        xt 8 +                                                       (17)

The error vector 1r is distributed normally with mean zero and

covariance matrix


            Coy (,r) = 021CL—y)R              + yQ]    a2c(y)                         (18)


The matrix R is a diagonal matrix which depends on Z11 and X, while

Q is a matrix which depends on X, Z                     and the period on which the

parameter process is normalized.

     If y were known, estimation would be a trivial application of

Generalized Least Squares. The object of the estimation procedure is to

obtain a consistent estimate of y which wILL yield the asymptotically

efficient estimates of the B'S. The forxnaLL details of the estimation

technique and the asymptotic properties of the estimates are developed fully

in [Cooley 1971 and Cooley and Prescott l971]. In this study we present the

Bayesian estimates of the parameters. We have assumed priors which are

sufficiently diffuse so that the sample Information dominates. Our prior

knowledge (or ignorance) about the parameters is represented by the

independent distributions:
                                     14




                                                                           .
           p('y)dydy              O<y<1
           p(8) dB k d                                             (19)


           p(a) da   (1/a) da


The margina.l. posterior density for a can be shown to be


                                                 —(T+ic)/2
           p(a;s)                                                  (20)


where a is the generalized sum of squared residuals, k is the number

of independent variab,Les, and T is the number of observations. The

parameters 8 have the posterior density (conditional on y)


          p(8;s,y,a) ".   N(B(y),a2(X'c(y)XY1}                     (21)


where B(y) is simply the Aitken estimator of 8. The first moment of

the posterior density for 8 is obtained by numerical integration


          E(8;s) =           p(y;s) dy                             (22)
                      JB()
    In the subsequent discussion we report as estimates of 8 the

first moment of the posterior density. The parameter y is only estimated

once for each state and the estimates of B at five year intervals are

obtained conditional on y.
                                           15




IV.   Results.

      Estimation or (5)     and tracing the parameter histories over the entire
period at 5—year intervals reveals the existence of substantial parameter

variation as measured by , as well as several interesting patterns in

the variatton of the different parameters. Table I gives the values of

the Bayesian estimates of the parameters at a year close to the beginning

of the sample period (i87) and at the end of the period (l9l1).


                                 {Insert Table .L}




Table 2 gives the estimates of y for each state with the associated

standard errors       •    The small sample distribution of      is not known,

but   the   asptotic distribution of             is derived in [Cooley and

Prescott 1971L].




                                {Insert   Table 2)


      Examination   of    the parameter histories (of which the estimates given

in Table .1. are the endpoints) reveals several interesting findings. Allowing

variation in the constant term is a general way to provide for shifts in the

supply functions. The Fisher and Temin and DeCanio specifications parazneterized

such potential shifts by inclusion of a trend term. Table I reveals that for

the cotton states, the constant increased over the period for all states but
                                         16




Florida   and Louisiana. These two states and Mississippi were the only

states whose trend coefficient was negative in [DeCaniol9T3J. For the wheat
                                                                                           .
states, the constant drifted downward for all states but Kansas, Maryland,

and Missouri. In the Fisher and Temin regressions, the trend was negative for

all states but Kansas, Maryland, Virginia and Nebraska, and in the cases

of both Virginia and Nebraska, they found a negative trend when relative

iield was included as an explanatory variable. It appears that both

specifications indicate similar movements in the intercepts of the supply

functions over the period.

     This similarity is reassuring, but there are important differences

between the fixed parameter and varying parameter models' results. In

both the cotton and wheat states, the varying—parameter estimates of             ,   the
coefficient of the lagged share,   are   generally lower than the estimates of

this coefficient in the fixed—parameter models. Now it is weLl. known     that
misspecification of either the disturbance process or the explanatory

variables can lead to biased estimates of the coefficient of a lagged

dependent variable Tohnston 19T2].This bias is likely to be positive if the

omitted variables exert an influence on the dependent variable which persists

over several periods. In agricultural supply it seems likely that factors

tending to stimulate wheat or cotton production might exert a persistent

influence over a period longer than one year. Such omitted variables might

include relative prices of crop—specific inputs, forces leading to a revision

of the price—expectation behavior of the farmers, or other factors too erratic

to be adequately parameterized by the trend coefficient in the fixed—parameter

functions. The varying—parameter technique is specifically designed to

capture permanent changes in the structural coefficients which might be
                                       17




associated with movements in omitted variables, and it is also a more general

alternative to the specification of a first—order autocorrelated disturbance

[Cooley and Prescott 1973c, p. 681.    On both grounds then, the varying—parameter

technique is less susceptible to the possibility of a upward bias in the coefficent

of the lagged share. This is consistent with the comparisons between

estimation methods exhibited in Table 3.      This   table displays the end—point

values of       from the varying parameter regressions, the fixed—parameter

estimates with first—order autocorrelated disturbance, and estimates taken

from a naive OLS regression without a trend variable. The            estimates

in the naive model are typically the highest, followed by the      autocorrelated
model with trend, followed by the varying—parameter estimates.11


                            {Insert Table 3)


      Leaving aside comparisons with the previous work, the time pattern of

the coefficient estimates leaves no doubt that the conditions of agricultural

supply were undergoing significant modification during the period. Table 4

shows the simple correlation coefficients between the parameter values

calculated at 5—year intervals and a simple trend. The pattern for the

wheat states is unambiguously clear: 2' the short—run price elasticity,

declined over time, while        the coefficient of S_1        increased. There
are   only two exceptions to this pattern for          and three exceptions

for 83.     The long—run price elasticity, cz2,shows a negative trend in

15 of the IT wheat   states. If 83 is       interpreted as the
                                    18




parameter   A of equations (9) and (Ii), the implication is that as time
                                                                                   .
went on the farmers in the wheat states tended to put greater weight

on the whole history of the relative wheat price in formulating their

predictions, while the relative weight they gave to more recent observations

of this price declined.

     For cotton the picture is somewhat less clear. Five states of ten

show 82 declining over time, and the correlations seem, if anything,

a bit stronger in the states with increasing 82.   Eight   of the ten states

show a declining 83 indicating an increasing relative weight on recent

prices In formulating the price prediction. The long—run price elasticity

is negatively correlated with the trend in six of the ten states.



                            {Insert Table 4}




     The picture presented by the wheat estimates is one of declining

flexibility on the part of the farmers. Fifteen out of seventeen states

showed a fall in both the long-run and the short—run price elasticity,

and this decline was so severe that by 19124 four states (California,

Illinois, Missouri and Indiana) exhibited negative short—run price elasticities.

(Of course, negative price elasticities are highly implausible, but in no

case are these estimates significantly different from zero.) At the sante

time the price elasticities were declining, the estimates of 83 are

indicative of decreasing reliance on recent prices in forming the forecast

of the relative price. The increasing commercialization of wheat farming

does not appear to have led to more elastic price—responsiveness
                                    19




on the part of western and northern farmers.

    The parameter trends for the cotton farmers cast further doubt on the

possibility that they became increasingly committed to cotton and unable

to shift into alternative crops [DeCanio 19731. If an increasing proportion

of farmers were "locked in" to cotton production, the aggregate short—run

price elasticity might have declined in reflection of the changing aggregation

weights of the free and constrained farmers. No such uniform decline over

the entire South is observed; five of the states exhibit declining 2'

five increasing 2's. It is difficult to see how the increasing short—run

price elasticities of South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama and Texas could be

reconciled with the traditional hypothesis of increasing involuntary

specialization in cotton throughout the South due to credit conditions.12

     These overall trends in both the wheat and cotton parameter histories

should not obscure the fact that there are substantial variations within

the trends. Along the lines of inquiry suggested in Section II, it might

be asked whether the patterns of parameter variation reveal aspects of

farmers' behavior more subtle than the simple response to changes in the

relative price. Nerlove [1958] examined parameter differences across distinct

groups of farmers (defined by the different crops they grew), but our 5—year

interval parameter histories enable us to examine changes in the response

parameters of given groups of farmers defined by their geographical location.

Following Nerlove, we first examine the influence of differing degrees of

price variability.

     Obviously, there is no unique way to measure changes in the variability

of the price over time, so the method chosen carries no claim to any ideal
                                       20




properties. With this qualification, define Vt as sample variance of

the price variable computed over the 5—year interval ending in year t.

Denote this Vt as the "temporary variance" of the price. Define v. =

as the temporary price standard deviation over the same period. These

were computed for each state's price series, for each 5—year interval

ending in one of the base years for which the historical parameter values
                   13
were calculated.        For each state, the first differences of the v. were

correlated with first differences of the 82 and 33 estimates calculated

at the 5—year base intervals. First differences were used to eliminate

potentially spurious correlations due to the presence of common trends possibly

arising from different sources.       The resulting correlations indicate the

degree to which changes in price variability were matched by changes in the

parameter values.


                               {Insert Table 5)


The pattern of the correlation coefficients is initialLy puzzling. Both
the cotton states and the wheat states show a strong association between

changes in the parameters and in the v. However, the patterns of change

in the two regions are mirror images of each other. In the cotton states,

increases in price variance are associated with increases in 83 and with

decreases in 2' while in the wheat states increases in v are associated

with decreases in 83 and increases in 82. There are only two exceptions

to the pattern among the cotton states, and only three exceptions to the

pattern out of the seventeen wheat states. Before these results are judged
                                                  21




to reveal conclusive evidence of a fundamental difference in the behavior

of wheat and         cotton   farmers (and, by implication, the irrationality of one

group or the other), it is necessary to investigate further the link between

price   variability and the structural parameters which would be predicted by
theory.
       RecaLl from equations (9)—(n) of Section II that A (=                83)
represents the rule used by               farmers to "disountt'
the   information contained in past prices when forming their prediction of

the harvest—time price. A low A means that past prices are taken very

little      into account      in forming the optimal predictor; a high A means

that information from the more distant past is given a relatively                 high
weight      in predicting the current price. It can be shown from equation

(10) that A is a decreasing function of p =                  a2/a2,   the ratio of the

variance of the permanent component to the variance of the transitory

component of the price. This is plausible, for as Muth states [changing

his   notation       to conform]:

             If the changes in the permanent component are small relative
       to the 'noise," then A wifl be very nearly unity. The forecast
       then gives nearly equal weights to an past observations in order
       that the transitory couroonents tend to cancel each other out. The
       forecasts then do not depend very much on recent information because
       it saysvery little about the future. On the other hand, if changes
       in the permanent component are large relative to the noise, A would
       be small so as to weight the recent information heavily   [Muth 1960, p. 3O].

Decomposition of the price into permanent and transitory components suggests

that the relationship between price variability and                   viii not necessarily

be unidirectional.

                                     t
               V. =              +    Z                                             (23)
                       Var[flt       i=l
                                            Cj]


from    (T),   (8)    and the definition of V. Thus
                                                   22




             Vt =   2     +     t   a2                                                    (21)



since a = 0         and             and        are      independent for i   j.

Thus changes in V. may come about as a restU.t of either changes in
    2                      2                                                      2   2
a       or changes in a        ,    or both. And since A depends on a Ia                  ,a
change in the Vt might be associated either with an increase or a decrease

in A.     That differences in the source of change in the v. might be
important in explaining the different patterns of change in 83 associated

with change in v is suggested by a comparison of the a2/a2 ratios

for the cotton and wheat states. This ratio can be estimated for each

statets price series by application of the varying—parameter technique to

a regression of the price on a simple constant, specifying                        =    =

This procedure generates estimates of y = p/(l+p)                    for the price series of

each state. These          displayed in Table 6 show clearly that the cotton

price series differ from the wheat price series in having smaller ratios

of aC 2Ia    2



                                          Insert   Table 6)


Although most southern states have ratios of y/a                     suggestive   of some

permanent variation, the average y for the wheat states is more than four

times the average of                for the cotton states. Permanent changes in the

wheat price series were relatively more important than were permanent changes

in the cotton price series.

        The an&Lysis can   be       pushed even farther, and a direct test of the

Muth hypothesis (i.e., that farmers were rational in the Muth sense) performed.
                                         23




The   direct test involves estimating the vaLue of y or p for 5—year
segments of     the relative price series of each state. These estimates for

the 5—year period ending in year t           will be referred to as measures of
the "temporary relative variance" of the price series, and win           be written

as        and        in   analogy with the   5-year temporary variances V. These
successive         capture the changing decomposition of the price into permanent
and transitory    components only imperfectly, but they should nevertheless

contain some information on the relative contributions of permanent and

transitory changes. Correlations of the temporary relative variances with

the parameters estimated at the successive base years, as well as correlations

of the first differences of these estimates, are contained in Table 7.


                                 {Insert Table 7}


It is immediately seen that the Muth hypothesis is confirmed. In both the

cotton    states and the    wheat states, the overwhelming majority of correlations

between   the temporary relative variance and the           estimates are negative,
exactly   as required by the Muth analysis (since dA/dp <       0).   There is one

exception to the predicted pattern of first differences out of the 10 cotton
states, and five exceptions out of the 17 wheat states. The undifferenced
correlations show two exceptions in the cotton states, and either three or
four exceptions for the wheat states, depending on which measure of temporary

relative variance is used.

      Up to this point, the discussion has been primarily concerned with the

interaction between the price variable and.            the coefficient of S_1.
                                      24




Examination of the estimated form of the supply function shows why 2

(the coefficient of Pt1) and @3 might be expected to move in opposite

directions.      From equations (5) and (II), @3 =   A   and   @2 = a2(l—X).   If
a2 were constant, the correlation between the @2 and the          @3 would be —1.

However, given independent variation in the long—run elasticity a2, the
correlation between the B2 and the @3 wiiJ. not be perfect. Thus while
the various measures of temporary price variability (vi,     and

might be expected to be correlated with the 82 in the opposite direction
from their correlation with the 83 the correlations with 2 may not be
as unambiguous as those with 83. The correlations between              and Pt

with 2 are generaLly in the expected direction, although the associations

are somewhat weaker than the associations with @3 in both the cotton and

wheat states. This is consistent with the fact that the Muth hypothesis

makes no prediction of the direction of the relationship (or even the

existence of a relationship) between        and p, in contrast to the

unambiguous connection predicted between @3 and p.

       It should also be pointed out that the negative correlation between

      and.   p does not appear to hold across states. It would be too much
33
to    expect that the structural parameters of each state's supply function
were determined entirely by Muth—type considerations. Differences in the

crop mix, aggregation weights, and other underlying conditions of supply

an be expected to condition the values of the structural parameters,

leading to variation in those parameters across states and regions.

The unique advantage of the varying parameter estimation method in this

context is that it allows a test of the Muth hypothesis withIn each state.
                                           25




This is equivalent to controlling for all the other structural differences
between states. Indeed, such strong einpirica.L evidence of the Muth effect
could hard.Ly have been developed without the varying parameter estimation
methods.
       It might be thought that the evidence for the validity of the Muth

hypothesis is not overwhelming on the basis of the correlations of Table 7,

particularly for the wheat states. A two—tailed binomial 'test of the null
hypothesis of equiprobability         of positive and negative signs of the

correlations gives the following probability—values:


                                 {Insert Table 8}


The calculated probability—values are low for every sign count, especially

if all    27 states are joined into a single sample. But even in the wheat

states, the probability—values are .Low enough to provide strong support

for the Muth hypothesis. This is particularly so in light of aLL the things

that could go wrong with the test. Consider the following sources of "noise"

in the correlations: (a) There is no a priori reason for choosing a 5-year

interval for the successive estimates of t This choice was made arbitrarily

for computational convenience. The relevant period over which price variations

influence    the structural parameters might be either shorter or longer. (b) The
varying    parameter estimates calculated on      a base period are weighted averages
of the permanent components for periods both before and after the             base year

[Cooley    and Prescott   1974; see   also footnote   10   abovel.   The weights assigned

to   distant years decline, but nevertheless      the estimated values of the structural

parameters include information from the "future" occuring after each base period.

Needless to say, this information could not have been possessed by the
                                    26




farmers, and, it is riot included in the estimates of the 1 (c) The wheat
                                                                                   .
model may be less well specified than the cotton model. because of the problem

of aggregating winter wheat and spring wheat. The timing of the model matches

the timing of the decisions to plant spring wheat, but the price         is the

December J. price in year t—i) is only correlated with the price information

available to farmers making decisions about planting winter wheat   (Higgs 1971,

Fisher and Temin 1971].       Thus, as winter wheat became a more important

part of the wheat crop, the specification of the wheat model becomes poorer.

(d) As is obvious from equation (iO), 83 (=x) is not a linear function

of either p or y. This nonlinearity will tend to reduce the linear

correlation coefficient between      and     or between their first differences.

(e) In addition to all these difficulties, the correlations are all based on

relatively small samples———eight observations for the first—difference cor—

relations and nine for the undifferenced correlations. Thus, a substantial

amount of pure sampling error might be expected.

     Aside from any of these probabilistic points, however, the strongest

support these correlations provide for the existence of the Muth effect is

the way they totally eliminate the need for separate explanations of the

parameter trends and variations for the cotton and wheat states. The results

of Table 7 show that the behavior of both cotton and wheat farmers is

consistent with the same model of price prediction, a model based on a

natural optimal decision rule. There is no need for ad hoc theorizing

concerning the origins of structural variation. Differences in observed




                                                                                   .
                                     27




responses   on the part of the two major groups of farmers may therefore be

identified as stemming from differences in the structure and operation of

the output markets for wheat and   cotton.
     Given these strong indications of the presence of the Muth effect and

of the influence of price variability on the decision—making process, two

questions Thmain: (I) Exactly what was perceived by the farmers in their

scrutiny of the price history for their products? (2) Is there any way

to account for the difference in the nature of the relative cotton price

series from that of the relative wheat price series? When these two

questions are answered, or at least when plausible answers are sketched,

it will be possible to draw some final conclusions regarding the origins

and course of the agrarian unrest of the 1880's and 1890's.

     It is, of course, patently obvious that no nineteenty-century farmer

spent his time decomposing the time series of relative crop prices into

permanent and transitory components or mathematica.LLy computing variances

and standard deviations of the price over its recent history. However, the

farmers are likely to have been aware of price fluctuations, and of certain

qualities of those price fluctuations which appear in the mathematical

treatment   as the permanent and transitory components of variation. Permanent
changes in the price are just that———changes whose effects persist over time.
A high ratio of the variance of the permanent component of the price to the
variance   of the transitory component represents a relatively large amount

of permanent change in the price history as compared to the transitory

fluctuations. Is it likely that the farmers would have been aware of

this distinction?
                                      28




     In   reality, low p would be manifested in a price series that
                                                                                .
fluctuated "randomly."   Since the variance of the component of permanent
change would be small, almost all price fluctuations would be due to the
transitory   component, the effects of which do not persist. On the other

hand, if p were large, the price series would be characterized by large

shifts that would persist over time, and the magnitude of these shifts

would be large relative to the transitory fluctuations of the price.' One

characteristic of a price series with low p would be that it would display

hardly any autocorrelation of the residuals around its mean value, while a

series with substantial permanent variation would display substantial

autocorrejation of its residuals. In fact, the cotton and wheat price series

exhibit exactly the pattern of autocorre.Lation that would be expected, given

their y I:axid p] values of Table 6. Table 9 lists the Durbin—Watson            S
statistics computed for the residuals of the relative price series for

each state when regressed on a simple constant.


                              {Insert Table 9)


It can be seen from this table that only the price series for North Carolina

and Tennessee of the cottonstates show significant autocorrelation at the 5%

level, while only California, North Dakota and South Dakota of the wheat

states fail to show a significant degree of autocorre.Lation.15

     How would such price histories appear to the farmers? With small

values of p and slight (if any) autocorrelation, the relative cotton

price would appear to fluctuate randomly. There would be no tendency for

a year of high cotton prices (relative to the long—term average) to be

followed by another good year, or for a year of low cotton prices to be
                                       29




followed by another poor year. Any Large      increase      in the variability

of the cotton price would be interpreted (by an observant farmer) as only a

larger—than-average temporary fluctuation. Thus, for cotton farmers the

optimal prediction of the future price would tend to discount the information

contained in recent values of a widely-fluctuating price. The relative price

of wheat, on the other hand, was subject to permanent shifts. A year of

higher—than-average price was often followed by more years of higher-than—

average prices. The observant farmer might welL expect a large fluctuation

In the wheat price to persist, so his optimal prediction of the future price

would   heavily   weight the information of a recent fluctuation.

      This pattern of wheat price fJ.uctuations.has been commented upon

before, but the conclusion has always been drawn that farmers were confused

and   bewildered   by the behavior of the prices        [See quotation from North 19714

given in Section I; Gray and Peterson 1971i,       p.   320]. But the existence of the

Muth effect shows that at least a substantial number of both wheat and

cotton farmers were well aware of the price fluctuations for their crops,

as 'well as the pattern of those fluctuations, and acted accordingly. Wheat

farmers did weight current information more heavily just after a large

fluctuation,   and cotton farmers tended to discount such information in

predicting the future price. Both groups of farmers discounted recent

information when the variance of the transitory component of the price was

increasing relative to the variance of the permanent component of the price.

In short, the results confirm that a sizeable number of nineteenth—century

farmers were keen observers of not only the levels of relative prices for

their products, but also of the patterns of price variability. Agriculturalists
                                     30




in   both the wheat producing states and the cotton South were conscious of

far   more of the information contained in the price histories of their
outputs than they have hitherto been given credit for utilizing.

       Even if farmers were able to incorporate the information contained in

the price histories in making   planting   decisions, the source of the

difference in the behavior of the relative price series of the two regions

remains to be explained. Why did the wheat price show substantially higher

permanent variation than the cotton price? No final answer can be given

here, but an informed guess is possible. It is first necessary to digress

for a brief consideration of the economic forces affecting the price of an

agricultural   commodity.
       For any commodity produced under competitive conditions and traded   in


a   world market (as both wheat and cotton were after the Civil War), the
price   in any given year is determined by supply and demand. For these

agricultural products, supply at the end of any crop year depends on the

price which had been expected to prevail at harvest time (which influenced

the planting decisions of farmers) and weather conditions determining yields

in the current crop year. (We will ignore carry—over stocks and inventories

to simplify the discussion.) The year's crop will normafly be thrown onto

the market and the market-clearing price will be determined by the intersection

of the nearly vertical short—run supply curve with the demand curve. From

year to year, the short—run supply curve will shift according to the forces

listed above but the demand curve will be shifting as well, due mainly to

demographic changes, long—term economic growth, and income variations

associated with the business cycle.
                                        31




     Now suppose that one set of price—responsive suppliers produces most

of the world's output of a commodity. An exogenous and unforseen increase

in demand (due, for example, to a cyclical boom) will increase the price in

the current year, thereby stimulating increased production in the succeeding

years. If the expansion in demand does not persist, the observed annual

price    of the commodity will   fluctuate randomly. Even if demand shifts do

persist,   the increased production elicited by them viii.   to   some extent cancel
out the price increases brought about by     the   increases in demand. The same
process    applies to decreases in demand. Thus even persisting demand shifts

will not necessarily elicit large permanent changes in the price of the

commodity. On the      other hand, suppose the subset of price—responsive pro-
ducers contributes     only a small portion of the world's supply. In this

case, persisting shifts in demand would tend to be associated with larger

and, longer—lasting deviations of the world price from its average or trend

value.

     Just as the persistence of fluctuations in the commodity's price depends

upon the degree of price—responsiveness of the producers, the volatility of

demand   and   variance of yields will condition the mixture of "permanent" and

"transitory" components of price variation. Rapid and random shifts in

demand will tend to produce transitory price fluctuations, while factors

which reduce the yield variance of the agricultural commodity will increase

the ratio of permanent variance to transitory variance in the price. These

factors provide the key to explaining the difference in the behavior of the

cotton and wheat price relatives.

     First, wheat constituted one of the major food crops of the world, and

it is natural to think that demand for it would be less susceptible to cyclical
                                      32




 fluctuations in income than would be the demand for cotton products.

 Second, wheat was grown aJJ. over the world, while cotton production was

concentrated in the United States and a few other countries. This

geographical dispersion of the wheat crop may have tended to reduce the weather—

associated yield variance of the world wheat crop relative to the world cotton

crop, since cotton production was much more localized. Finally, both wheat and

cotton   producers in the United States were price—responsive, but while U.S.

cotton constituted the majority of the world's output after the Civil War, U.S.

wheat production amounted to only around one—quarter of the world's crop.


                             {Insert Table .L0}


It is not implausible to think that wheat producers in the other countries

of the world were less price—responsive than American producers. American

agriculture in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was surely

more progressive and commercialized than the agriculture of the non—European

wheat producers.

     Even if European producers were as price-responsive as their American

counterparts, European governments began erecting high tariff walls   around
their wheat farmers after 1880. By 1900, the effective levels of protection

in France and Germany amounted to       per bushel, and in Italy to over 2O

per bushel [Malenbaumk3,p. 162]. These tariffs were substantial in comparison

to the wheat price of 62.J. per bushel received by American farmers in 1900

[Agricultural Statistics 1937, p. 9],and France, Germany and Italy accounted

for an average of 56% of total European wheat production (excluding Russia)

over the period 18914—1899   [Computed from Ma.Lenbaum 1953, p. 238—239].
                                      33




Given a specific tariff of ip   on a bushel of wheat, an x% increase in the

world price per bushel   P results in only an x/(l + (ip/P))% increase in the

price in the protected region.16 The tariff therefore is responsible for a

less-than—proportional price Increase In the protected countries. The

effect Is to reduce the magnitude of the supply response from the protected

countries,even if the elasticity of response of the farmers In those

countries were Identicaj. to that of United States wheat producers. This

effect is likely to have been important, since over the years covered in

Table 10, United States wheat production accounted for only an average of

3.8% of European (excluding Russia) plus United States output.

     It is highly likely then, that differences in world market conditions

were responsibJ.e for the disparate characteristics of the price histories

of American wheat and cotton. This source of patterns in the price histories

coupled with Muth—optirnal behavior on the part of both cotton and wheat

farmers suggest some new interpretations of the economic basis of Populism

and Its related agrarian distress.


V. Concluding Speculations.


     The results of the previous section support the predictions of economic

theory in explaining farmers' response to price. Farmers were neither

unresponsiveto price changes nor insensitive to the history of fluctuations

in the prices of their agricultural   products.   Enough farmers behaved

optimally in the Muth sense to enable their reactions to be detected at the

state—wide level of aggregation. Of course, the rational behavior of a
                                     34




substantial   number of farmers does not preclude bewilderment or sub—optimal
reactions on the part of many other farmers. But in a larger sense, even
the farmers who were fully aware of their situation may not have been
immune from economic distress.

     For the wheat producers, the existence of permanent changes in the

price of their cash àróp presented them with unique problems of response.

Autocorrelatlon of the relative wheat price opened the possibility of

obtaining a real advantage by quick action in the event of a price change.

Since price increases could be permanent, a 'bonanza" approach to expansion

of wheat acreage could pay large dividends. On the other hand, not all

price fluctuations were permanent, so some farmers who rapidly revised

their price expectations in response to some of the fluctuations must

have been disappointed. Even if rapid expansion were temporarily successful,

a period of greater—than-average prices could be followed by a period of

less—than—average prices with distressing suddenness. And bad years

associated with worid business cycles might induce acreage contraction

without any subsequent price increase following the reduction in American

supply. The autocorrelated price series indicates that both good and bad

years tended to come in clumps. Painful experiences due to this fact may

have been responsible for the overall decline in price—responsiveness by

farmers over the entire period, but in any case, awareness of these

possibilities and attempts to adapt to them would not necessarily have

guaranteed even the most intelligent farmers security from disaster.

     As for the cotton farmers, it is possible that their preoccupation



                                                                                    .
with the issue of cotton "overproduction" [DeCanio, 1973 and l9TlLb] was derived from
                                          35




their awareness of the fact that the South domited. world cotton supply.

Perceptive men must have realized that if only Southern farmers had been

able to act in concert, they could have eliminated the depressing impact

of the increased production that inevitably followed a year or years of

high cotton prices. The very price—responsiveness of Southern farmers

prevented them from realizing the full benefits of demand—induced booms.17

       It   was not the farmers'         irrationality that led to their
                                    ignorance or

difficulties. On the contrary, all evidence points to a remarkable
degree      of sophistication in their evaluation of the   historical market data
available     to them. The perception of and adaptation to risks does not

make those risks easier to bear, especially when practicable alternatives

are severely limited. Despite the best efforts of the farmers to preserve

their situation, the ultimate outcome for American agriculture was its

reduction to the status of one sector among many,        although   It inherited its

minority position with a        rich patrimony of special economic privileges. In
the   process of the transition, many individual farming enterprises failed

and their owners or operators were        driven to other occupations in the urban
centers.       But   the sufferings and. discontents accompanying the final full
commercialization        of agriculture were not the result of the farmers' inability

to   function well      in a demanding market environment. Populist America would

have   had to transcend somehow its market institutions in order       to distribute

equitably      both the risks and gains offered by the technology and organization
of agricultural production, and it was this challenge which the Populists
and all     their contemporaries ultimately proved unable to meet.
                                       36


Notes




1. For a discussion of the possible types of structural change in models

    spanning extended periods of historical time, see [David 1971, pp. 161_167].

    A recent discussion concerning parameter change in agriculture in the

    context of a model slightly different from that employed in the present

    paper is contained in [Sahi and Craddock l974]. Lucas [1973] argues that

    dynamic economic theory implies that macro—economic parameters are

    unlikely to be stable over time.

2. In the subsequent section we shall clarify our view of "rational

    behavior" on the part of farmers; our on.Ly      purpose   here is to set

    the task and to anticipate some of the major findings and possible

    interpretations of the statistical results. It goes without saying that

    the   econometric results stand independent of the interpretations that
    may be placed upon them. The data and estimates derived from them
    give good advice in the writing of      history; it   is the historians who   are

    responsible   for aJJ. remaining errors.




                                                                                        .
                                      37




3. ALl variab.Les are in natural logarithms. For a discussion of the data and its

     sources, see [Fisher and. Ternin L970 and DeCanio 1973 and 197I]. The only

     difference in the data used in this paper and the data used in the previous

     studies is thatthe cotton price series was extended backward from 1882

     to 1870 by substituting an average U.S. cotton price [Historical Statistics l919,

     Series E 220, p. .1.08] for the unavailable state cotton prices used after

     1882. The correlation between the U.S. price and the state prices was

     quite high after 1882, because of the competitiveness of the national.

     cotton market, and it is unlikely that any substantial error is introduced

     by use of the national price for the years prior to 1882.

     1isher and Texnin 1970 and DeCanio 19714] estimated values of   from equations
                          which
     similar in form to (1)/were not significantly different from zero, and

     the estimates of 8 tQgether with the estimates of the other coefficients

     would, if taken at face value, have implied values of ji     and   0 which were

     either imaginary or outside the zero—to—one range.
5.    Ner.Love also finds it plausible "that the
                                                   elasticity of expectations is
      a decreasing function of the typical variance of prices....The result

      indicates that the behavior parameter
                                              8 [which is analogous to 0 of
      equation (14) in our notation] may be subject to a number of influences

     over time some of which are related to the characteristics of the market

     under investigation [Nerlove 1958, p. 59]." In addition to citing

     confirmation of an inverse relationship between the coefficient of

     expectations (8) and the variability of the outcomes found by Modigliani

     and Sanerlender [Nerlove 1958, p. 59], Nerlove himself finds the sane

     inverse relationship between his coefficients of expectations and the

     year—to—year variability of the pricesof the various crops [Nerlove

     1958, p. 221]. Nerlove does not explicitly provide an optimizing

     theory of this relationship, however.
                                        38




6.    At a minimum, the required data would include information on changes                   S
      in   the costs of being out of equilibrium and changes in the costs of

      shifting from one crop to the other. Furthermore, models relating

      partial adjustment to maximizing behavior on the micro level have not

      "fared as veil" as adaptive expectations formulations [Griliches, pp. 142—143].

7.    According to Muth, it is not necessary to assume that                and     are

      uncorrelated. "If Ectnt = a       and Ectri = 0 (t      5),   it   is only necessary

      to replace the ratio            in [equation (l0)]by a2/(a2+a)

      [Muth 1960, p. 3014j."

8. Cooley and Prescott [1973a, p. 2514]      report   the results of Monte Carlo

      experiments which lend support to this view.

9. It may be that the break which seems to have occurred around World War I

      is one of those historical instances alluded to by David which require

      a'buccession of working models, each appropriate to a particular social,

      temporal and technological setting [David 1971, p. 1466]." In any case,

      work is currently being planned to enlarge the model and extend the

      sample even beyond 1925.

10.   EStimation in this context resembles exponential smoothing with observations

      distant in time from the base period receiving small weights.

U. If the           coefficients estimated by the varying—parameter technique

      are least affected by misspecification bias, it follows that the

      estimated   "speeds of adjustment" (l_3) of     the fixed—parameter models

      are probably   too low.   The implication is that distress and temporary

      overproduction resulting from sluggishness in the response of farmers

      to relative price changes is even less likely than might have been

      thought on the basis of the previous results.
                                               39




2.    It   may ai.so be noted that if L—3 is interpreted as the "speed of

      adjustment" as in [DeCanio 1973], the fact that 13. decreases in eight of

      the ten Southern states suggests increasing flexibility in farmers'

      adjustments to price changes.

13. Except for the 1869 base year for the wheat states, since prices for the

      5—year period ending in 1869 were not available.



i4.    x = j + (i/2'o       -                       =   j. + (1/2)p   —

       dX/dp = (1/2) —          (1/2)(p+(i/14)p2Yhh'2)(i+(1/2)p)
       Let h(p) =

       Is h(p)>iforaiJ. p>O?
       First, h(p) is a monotonic function. This is true because h

       is continuous and h' # 0.            For if h'(p) =    0,
             h' =    (i+(l/2)p)(i/2)(p+(j/)p2)            3/2)(j+(j/2)p) +   (i/2)(p+(l/)p2)   1/2)
                                                                                                      0


       Multiply both sides by (p+(1/14)p2)'2

                                                     + (1/2) = 0

       Multiply by (p+(.L/14)p2):

              (—l/2)(1+(1/2)p)2 +         (1/2)(p+(1/1i)p2)   = 0

                                   +   (p+(i/1)p2) = 0
              —1 =   0,   a contradiction.

       So h'(p)       0 for any p, and h is a monotonic function.

       Now, as p + 0,           h(p) +

       As    p + , h(p) = ((i/p)+(1/2))((l/p)+(j/1))2) I
      • So as   p - , h(p) - I from above, so h(p) > I for all                p >   0.
       Thus dX/dp < 0.
                                        •40



15.   It should also be noted that the observations for North and South
                                                                                 S
      Dakota span a shorter period then the other wheat states, reducing

      the likelihood of finding significant autocorrelation in their price

      series.

i6.   x = P/P,   so If y =   the   percentage change in the protected country,
        =              = p/(p+)         (P/p)/(i÷(/p)) =   x/(l+(/p)).
11.   In addition, slow growth in total demand for American cotton       may
      have contributed to the relative stagnation of the postbeflum Southern
      economy    [Wright 197d.




                                                                                 .
                                              41




                                          TABLE       1

                   VARYING-PARTER                              =
                                     ESTIMATES, Z
                                                                        fg
                    COTTON
                             STATES, 1870—1914; WHEAT STATES, 1867—1914

   State    Base                              B                 B             U
   _____    Year                                  2                 3             2

North       1874 —1.466 (.193)          .273 (.066)       .537 (.131)        .b90
 Carolina              —7.600                4.118             4.090
            1914 —1.390 (.184)          .331 (.062)       .445 (.142)        .596
                       —7.563                5.349             3.131

South       1874    —.583 (.102)       .119 (.039)        .641 (.127)        .332
 Carolina                —5.742             3.079              5.051
            1914    —.542 (.095)       .150 (.032)        .605 (.136)        .379
                         —5.717              4.661             4.446

Georgia     1874    —.717 (.121)       .119 (.048)        .518 (.148)        .248
                         -5.920             2.472              3.502
            1914    —.646 (.114)       .158 (.042)        .465 (.158)        .295
                         —5.673             3.720              2.937

Florida     1874 —1.094 (.186)         .161 (.044)        .164 (.170)        .193
                        —5.898               3.645              .964

            1914 —1.191 (.198)         .064 (.046)        .236 (.153)        .084
                       —6.012               1.399              1.544

Tennessee 1874 —1.663 (.271)           .287 (.067)        .518 (.154)        .596
                         —6.132             4.291              3.371
            1914   —1.638 (.273)       .294 (.069)        .465 (.149)        .550
                         —6.004              4.245             3.122
                                           42



                               TABLE   1 (Continued)

    State    Base
__________   Year   _____________                      ____________
Alabama      1874   —.734 (.099)       .083 (.032)     .309 (.150)    .120
                         —7.398             2.578           2.067
             1914   —.687 (.095)       .116 (.032)     .286 (.156)    .163
                         —7.198             3.647           1.836


Mississippil874     —.620 (.082)       .107 (.030)     .379 (.142)    .172
                         —7,525             3.571           2.658
             1914   —.591 (.083)       .084 (.031)     .376 (.141)    .134
                         —7.116             2.692           2.658


Arkansas     1874   —.954 (.L30)       .181 (.041)     .389 (.152)    .296
                         —7.363             4.353           2.557

             1914   —.896 (.130)       .189 (.042)     .340 (.153)    .286
                         —6.895             4.497           2.223


Louisiana. 1874     —.528. (.119)      .142 (.049)     .566 (.185)    .328
                         —4.425             2.926           3.064

             1914   —.560 (.121)       .107 (.059)     .589 (.149)    .261
                         —4.642             1.809           3.945


Texas        1874   —.600 (.104)       .101 (.035)     .551 (.146)    .225
                         —5.775             2.892           3.779

             1914   —.494 (.090)       .145 (.033)     .490 (.158)    .284
                         —5.469             4.435           3.097




                                                                             .
                                       43




                             TABLE 1 (Continued)


  State    Base                             B2           B3          a2
           Year   ______________   ____________    _____________   _____
Iowa       1874 —1.099 (.243)      .196 (.051)     .783 (.113)      .899
                      —4.519            3.807           6.956

           1914 —1.130 (.259)      .153 (.074)     .806 (.094)      .790
                      —4.366            2.061           8.560


California 1874    —.349 (.406)    .040 (.089)     .735 (.125)      .149
 (1869—1914)             —.859           .444           5.864

           1914   —.367 (.407) —.031 (.097)        .744 (.106)     —.122
                        —.901        —.322              6.988

Kansas     1874 —1.588 (.380)      .168 (.109)     .430 (.182)      .295
                        —4.178          1.552           2.357

           1914 —1.548 (.391)      .288 (.121)     .359 (.213)      .449
                        —3.961          2.371           1.684


Nebraska   1874   —.788 (.156)     .100 (.035)     .487 (.132)      .195
                       —5.058           2.889           3.683
           1914   —.805 (.171)     .033 (.052)     .499 (.136)      .067
                       —4.705            .640           3.673

Minnesota 1874    —.725 (.118)     .148 (.027)     .750 (.104)      .592
 (1868—1914)           —6.146           5.475           7.179

           1914   —.747 (.123)     .096 (.035)     .766 (.099)      .412
                       —6.087           2.731           7.721


Illinois   1874 —2.409 (.397)      .091 (.078) —.232 (.183)         .074
                      —6.065            1.165       —1.266

           1914 —2.451 (.402) —.039 (.098) —.202 (.167)            —.033
                        —6.095          —.403          -1.213
                                        44




                              TABLE 1 (Continued)


  State    Base                                           6
           Year         .1.                                   3


Maryland   1874   —.566 (.139)     .048 (.023)      .687 (.114)    .152
                       —4.068           2.053            6.039
           1914   —.563 (.139)     .056 (.024)      .684 (.114)    .178
                       —4.061           2.331            5.975


Michigan   1874 —1.770 (.333)      .285 (.067)      .584 (.132)    .686
                       —5.314           4.278            4.428
           1914 —1.795 (.336)      .223 (.079)      .608 (.118)    .568
                       —5.349           2.830            5.140

Missouri   1874 —1.018 (.246)      .004 (.043)      .439 (.139)    .007
                       —4.137            .090            3.154

           1914 —1.004 (.251) —.001 (.053)          .399 (.143)   —.002
                       —4.008           —.019            2.785

Wisconsin 1874 —1.658(.422)        .322 (.090)      .807 (.106)   1.671
                       —3.930           3.594            7.617
           1914 —1.683 (.427)      .241 (.101)      .830 (.083)   1.413
                       —3.944           2.381           10.040


Indiana    1874 —1.630 (.431)      .055 (.094) —.190 (.182)        .046
                       —3.786            .583        1.040

           1914 —1.663 (.432) —.064 (.110) —.168 (.167)           —.055
                       —3.849           —.582          —1.010


Virginia   1874   —.812 (.185)    .075 (.025)       .668 (.115)    .226
                       —4.385          2.959            5.803
           1914   —.813 (.186)    .075 (.030)       .669 (.114)    .227
                       —4.369          2.542            5.896
                                         45



                              TABLE   1 (Continued)

  State    Base
           Year   _____________               2               3     _g_
Pennsyl—   1874 —1.143 (.229)         .062 (.026)     .466 (.139)   .117
 vania                  —5.002             2.427           3.361
           1914 —1.150 (.230)         .041 (.030)     .475 (.135)   .077
                        —4.998             1.348           3.513

New York   1874 —2.289 (.451)         .122 (.056)     .317 (.149)   ,179
                      —5.079               2.183           2.131
           1914 —2.302 (.453)         .064 (.062)     .347 (.138)   .099
                        —5.079             1.037           2.520


Ohio       1874 —1.398 (.306)         .119 (.067)     .413 (.162)   .203
                        —4.572             1.771           2.553
           1914 —1.412 (.307)         .096 (.078)     .416 (.157)   .164
                      —4.598               1.228           2.655

North      1884    —.767 (.268)       .137 (.060)     .226 (.180)   .177
 Dakota                 -2.862            2.290            1.255
 (1883—1914)
           1914    —.784 (.270)       .083 (.059)     .229 (.177)   .107
                        —2.904             1.403           1.293

South      1884    —.572 (.181)       .067 (.038)     .594 (.153)   .166
 Dakota                 —3.169             1.764          3.879
 (1883—1914)
           1914    —.586 (.182)       .035 (.041)     .608 (.151)   .089
                        —3.220              .840          4.018



Notes: The numbers in parentheses just to the right of the parameter
        estimates are the standard errors of the estimates; the numbers
        directly below the standard errors are the t—ratios of the parameter
        estimates to their standard errors.
                                    46




                               TABLE 2

   ESTIMATES OF y AND       IN SUPPLY FUNCTIONS, WITH yb      RATIOS


  Cotton   State                                8
                           ______

North   CarolIna           .5131              .2118         2.389
South Carolina             .2578              .2018         1.278
Georgia                    •3155              .21l6         1.30
Florida                    .3266              .1823         1.792
Tennessee                  .3796              .2255         1.683
Alabama                    .3098              .2117         1.63
Mississippi               .5251               .2213         2.373
Arkansas                  .2832               .2139         l.32
LouIsiana                 .6833               .2052         3.330
Texas                     .3221               .2262         l.1t25




Note;                                          =
                                                    100
           Sample period 187019114, Z =   Z         0 1 0
                                                    001




                                                                       .
                                            47



                            TABLE    2 (Continued)
 ESTIMATES OF y AND a IN SUPPLY FUNCTIONS, WITH y/a RATIOS

                                                     8
Wheat    State                _____                   V   _____
Iowa                              .5373          .2222    2.)418

California                        .3207          .2201    1.)457

Kansas                            .3390          .2699    1.256

Nebraska                          .5691          .2283    2.)493

Minnesota                         .6557          .2032    3.227

Illinois                          .3808          .1958    1.9)45

Maryland                          .355)4         .2288    1.553

Michigan                          .2671          .1903    i.)40)4


Missouri                          .)4999         .2558    1.95)4

Wisconsin                         .1838          .1551    1.185

Indiana                           .2190          .1397    1.568

Virginia                          .)4)496        .2376    1.892

Pennsylvania                      .3980          .2767    1.)438

New York                          .)4153         .2709    1.533

Ohio                              .2126          .1992    1.067

North Dakota                      .3989          .2390.   1.669

South Dakota                      .)4178         .2)496   1.67)4




Note:. Sample period 1867—191)4, except California, 1869—191)4;
       Minnesota 868—191)4; North and South Dakota, 1883—191)4.
                           100
           1           =   010
               U   W
                           .001
                                           48



                                       TABLE 3

                COMPARISON OF VARYING-PARAMETER, OLS, AND FIRST-ORDER
                      AUTOCORRELATED DISTURBANCE ESTIMATES OF



                          Va±ying—Parameter Estimates
                            Base Year     Base Year                      Autocorrelated
 Wheat State
                              1874          1914             OLS           Disturbance

  Iowa                         .783             .806         .9140                .8148

  California                   .735             .7144       1.022                 .933
 Kansas                        .1430            .359         .897                 .7146

 Nebraska                      .487             .499         .937                 .929

 Minnesota                    .750              .766        1.020                 .765

 Illinois                    —.232          —.202            .737                 .720

 Maryland                     .687              .684         .899                 .815

 Michigan                     .584           .608            .922                 .755

 Missouri                     .439           .399            .803                 .590

 Wisconsin                    .807           .830            .976                 .728

 Indiana                     —.190          —.168            .580                 .0682

 Virginia                     .668           .669            .826                 .7814

 Pennsylvania                 .1466          .475            .8814                .909

 New York                     .317           .3147           •908                 .8148

 Ohio                         .413           .1416           .809                 .789

 North Dakota                 ,226           .229           .8145                 .650

 South Dakota                 .594           .608          1.0014                 .880




Notes: (1) The OLS regressions did not include a trend; sample period
                 1868_19114; except 1869—19114 for California and    Minnesota;
                 1883—19114 for North Dakota and South Dakota.
          (2)    The autocorrelated disturbance regressions did include a
                 trend; the sample period was 1867—19114. These      estimates
                 are taken from 'isher & Ternin 1970].
                                         49




                              TABLE 3   (Continued)
            CONPARISON OF VARYING-PARETER, OLS, AND FIRST—ORDER
                   AUTOCORRELATED DISTRUBANCE ESTIMATES OF


                       Varying—Parameter Estimates
                        Base Year    Base Year                     Autocorrelated
Cotton State                 18714            19114     OLS         Disturbance
North   Carolina             .537             .11#5     1.029           • 59].

South Carolina               .64i             .605       .9514          • 576


Georgia                      .518             .1465          967        .589

Florida                      .164             .236       .912           •461i


Tennessee                    .518             .1465      .700           • 7147

Alabama                      .309             .286       .862           .539

Mississippi                  .379             .376       .826           .1453

Arkansas                     .389             .3140      .5614          • 560

Louisiana                    .566             .589       •   942        .679
Texas                        .551             .1490      .978           • 1457




Notes: (1) The OLS regressions did not include a trend; sample period
               1870—19114.
           (2) The autocorrelated disturbance regressions did include a
               trend, and the sample period was 1883—1914. These estimates
               vere taken from [DeCanio 19731.
                                          50




                                     TABLE 4 -
                                                                                        .
           SIMPLE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN VARYING-PARAMETER
                       ESTIMATES AND TREND


  Cotton State             Corr( 2    ,   t)     Corr(
                                                         3
                                                             ,   t)   corr(a
                                                                            2    , t)
North Carolipa                 .599                —.928                —.454
South Carolina                 .593                —.953                  .255

Georgia                       .578                 —.980                  .237

Florida                      —.891                  .883                —.893

Tennessee                    —.466                 —.672                —.897
Alabama                       .817                 —.967                 .782

Mississippi                  —.388                 —.480                _•1433

Arkansas                     —.244                 —.951                —.575
Louisiana                    —.544                  .688                —.505
Texas                         .911                —.993                  .823




Notes: (1) Sample period 1870—1914; parameters estimated at five—year
             intervals, beginning in 1874 and ending in 1914. Number
            of base years at which parameters estimated = 9.
          (2) &2 =
                     821—83)
                        100
          (3)   U
                  = z = 0 10
                     (A)
                        001
                                          51



                              TABLE   4 (Continued)
           SIMPLE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN VARYING-PARAMETER
                        ESTIMATES AND TREND



WheatState
                             Corr(8 • t)
                                   2           Corr(8 3   ,   t) Corr(a
                                                                      2 , t)

Iowa                           —.676              .731             —.510

California                     —.902              .8142            —.898

Kansas                          .850             —.921              .812

Nebraska                       —.727              .568             —.725

Minnesota                      —.961              .985             —.950
Illinois                       —.895              .7148            —.893

Maryland                        .671             —.7814             .663

Michigan                       —.908              .930             —.890

Missouri                       —.687            _.9014             —.687

Wisconsin                      —.967              .950             —.962

Indiana                        —.9145             .9014            _.9145

Virginia                       —.221              .509             —.1914

Pennsylvania                   —.826              .8146            —.8214

New York                       —.931              .925             —.928

Ohio                           —.619              .1498            —.627

North Dakota                   —.950              .812             —.951

South Dakota                   —.787              .971             —.775




Notes: (1) Sample period 186719114 except CalifornIa (1869—19114),
            Minnesota (1868—1914), and North and South Dakota
            L883—19114). Parameters estimated at five—year intervals
            beginning in 1869 and ending in 19114. Number of base
            years at which parameters estimated = 10 (7 for N. and S. Dakota).
          (2)   &2 =
                       2"'        0   0
          (3)   Z               010
                U      (*)
                                001
                                   52




                                                                            .
                              TABLE 5

 SIMPLE CORRELATIONS OF FIRST DIFFERENCES OF VARYING-PARATER
  ESTIMATES AND FIVE—YEAR TEMPORARY PRICE STANDARI) DEVIATIONS


 Cotton State         Corr(2 ,     v)         Corr(3 ,
North Carolina            —.606                    .627
South Carolina             .7145                   .641

Georgia                   —.704                    .481

Florida                  —.456                     .101;


Tennessee                —.189                     .223

Alabama                    .029                   —.100

Mississippi              —.343                     .172

Arkansas                 —.344                     .160

Louisiana                  .436                   —.470

Texas                     —.316                    .337




Notes: (1)       represents first differencing operator.
          (2) Sample period 1870—1911;. Parameters estimated at five—year
               intervals beginning in 1874 and ending in 1911;. Number of
               first differences correlated for each state = 8.




                                                                            .
                                      53



                      TABLE 5        (Continued)

 SIMPLE CORRELATIONS OF FIRST DIFFERENCES OF.. VARYING-PARMIETER
  ESTIMATES AND FIVE-YEAR TEMPORARY PRICE STANDARD DEVIATIONS

Wheat State           CorT(A82 ,                   Corr(A83   ,
                                                                  Av)
Iowa                       .816                         —.662

Californil                 .7148                        —.637

Kansas                     .1469


Nebraska                   .505                         —.1484


Minnesota                  .793                         —.622

Illinois                  —.328                          .290

Maryland                    .14147                      _.1#31


Michigan                   .597

Missouri                    .398                        —.526

Wisconsin                   .339                        —.14148


Indiana                   —.192                          .092

Virginia                    .563                        _.5145


Pennsylvania                .006                        —.010

New York                    .417

Ohio                        .346                        —.415

North Dakota              —.107                           .035

South Dakota                .125                        —.023




Notes: (1) A represents first differencing operator.
           (2) Sample period 1867—19114, except California, 1869—19114;
                Minnesota, 1868—].9114; North and South Dakota, 1883—1914.
           (3) Parameters estimated at five—year intervals beginning in 18714
                and ending in 19114, except North and South Dakota, which begin
                in 1889.
           (14) Number of first differences correlated for each state = 8
                (5 for North and South Dakota).
                                       54




                                                                               .
                                    TABLE 6

             ESTIMATES OF RELATIVE VARIANCE OF PERMANENT
           AND TRANSITORY COMPONENTS OF THE OBSERVED PRICE


Cotton State
North   Carolina            .152              .0914        1.613
South Carolina              .0140             .058          .700
Georgia                     .098              .081         1.212
Florida                     .129              .101         1.279
Tennessee                                     .095
                            .153                           1.609
Alabama                     .081              .076         1.069
Mississippi                 .050              .062          .802

Arkansas                    .0614             .065          .985
Louisiana                   .084              .078         1.080
Texas                       .0148             .063          .751

Unweighted
  Average                   .090




Note:     The equation              was estimated by the varying   parameter
          technique. The sample period was 1870—19114.




                                                                               .
                                    55




                        TABLE   6 (Continued)
          ESTIMATES OF RELATIVE VARIANCE OF PERNANENT AND
            TRANSITORY COMPONENTS OF THE OBSERVED PRICE


Wheat State                ____              ____          _____
Iowa                       .200              .220           .908

California                 .079              .1114          .698

Kansas                     .131              .1141          .925

Nebraska                   .2114             .197          1.0814

Minnesota                  .2514             .228

Iflinois                   .1412             .303          1.359

Maryland                   .597              .2142         2.1465

Michigan                   .1421             .291          1.14148


Missouri                   .1147             .162           .908

Wisconsin                  .589              .299          1.972

Indiana                    .5814             .279          2.093

Virginia                   .6414             .222          2.896

Pennsylvania               .792              .166          4.786

New York                   .7614             .175          14.361

Ohio                       .573              .276          2.079

North Dakota               .i68              .205           .820

South Dakota               .203              .233           .869

Unveighted
  Average                 .398


Note:     The equation P= was estimated by the varying parameter
          technique. The sample     period   was 1867—19114, except California,
          1869—19114; Minnesota,   1868—19114; and North and South Dakota,
          1883—19114.
                                                   56




                                                TABLE 7
                                                                                                .
                 SIMPLE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN PARAMETER ESTIMATES AND MEASURES
                       OF THE TEMPORARY RELATIVE VARIANCE OF PERMANENT
                            AND TRANSITORY COMPONENTS OF THE PRICE


   Cotton    State       Corr(A3 ,              Corr(3     ,
                                                               y)   Corr(3 ,    p)   Corr(3 ,
  North Carolina                 —.355               —.320              .079             .049

  South Carolina                 —.118               —.112                              —.404

  Georgia                        —.120               —.095             —.298            —.261
  Florida                        —.257               —.289             _.3ui8           —.310
  Tennessee                      —.079               —.078             —.095            —.038
  Alabama                        —.419                                 —.425            —.397

  Mississippi                    —.389                                 —.376            —.387
  Arkansas                       —.129               —.146             —.265            —.249
  Louisiana                       .880                  .823            .843             .807
  Texas                          —.607               —.628             —.433




otes: (1)
                (ae2/a2)t   ,   the   ratio of permanent to transitory components of variance
            in the price series, estimated by the varying parameter technique, for the
            five—year period ending in year t. Note that      =
      (2)       represents first—difterencing operator
      (3) Sample period is 1870—1914. Parameters estimated at five—year intervals
           beginning in 1874 and ending in 1914
                   'irst
      (4) Number of/differences correlated for each state = 8; number of undifferenced
           estimates correlated for each state = 9.




                                                                                                .
                                             57




                                  TABLE   7 (Continued)
             SIMPLE CORRELATIONS BETWEEN PARAMETER ESTIMATES AND MEASURES
                  OF THE TEMPORARY RELATIVE VARIANCE OF PERMANENT
                       AND TRANSITORY COMPONENTS OF THE PRICE


Iheat    State       CorT(3 ,              Corr(A3    ,
                                                          y)   Corr(3   , P)   Corr(3 ,

Iowa                      —.212                   —.244            —.317           —.365

California                —.691                   —650             .096            —.159

Kansas                     .138                    .053            —.195           —.173

Nebraska                  —.202                   —.284            —.447           —.526

Minnesota                 —.363                   —.394             .025           —.118

Illinois                  —.046                   —.019            —.431           —.354

Maryland                  —.051                    .020             .441            .519

Michigan                  —.216                   —.204            —.079           —.066

Missouri                   .635                    .556             .460            .1135


Wisconsin                  .158                    .133            —.168           —.228

Indiana                   —.061                   —.157            —.340           —.311

Virginia                  —.027                   —.021            —.235           —.208

Pennsylvania               .354                    .327             .027           —.022

New York                   .106                    .160            —.167           —.116

Ohio                      —.175                   —.206            —.163           —.171

North Dakota              —.511                   —.470            —.037           —.065

South Dakota              —.007                   —.002             .433            .446




Notes: (1) and (2) same definitions as for cotton states
        (3) Sample period is 1867—1914, except California, 1869—1914; Minnesota,
             1868—1914; and North and South Dakota, 1883—1914. Parameters estimated at 5—
             year intervals beginning in 1874 and ending in 1914, except North and
             South Dakota, which begin in 1889.
        (4) Number of first differences correlated for each state = 8 (5 for North
             and South Dakota); number of undifferenced estimates correlated for each
             state = 9 (6 for North and South Dakota).
                                      58




                                TABLE      8
                                                                            .
PROBABILITY—VALUES OF SIGN FREQUENCIES OF CORRELATIONS BETWEEN PARA1tETER
     ESTINATS AND ESTIMATED VALUES OF TEMPORARY RELATIVE VARIANCE


                        Cotton States: r = 10
                    Pr(No. of f's   <1     or >     9) = .021
                    Pr(No, of +'s . 2 or            8) = .109


                         Wheat States: n = 17

                    Pr(No. of +'s < 3 or                = .013

                    Pr(No.or+'s<]4or>13)=.o19
                    Pr(No. of f's <    5 or     >   12) = .143


                          All States: n = 27

                    Pr(No. of +'s     5    or       22) =   .001*
                    Pr(No. of +'s     6    or       21) =   .003*




Note: *Noa1 approximation to the binomial.




                                                                            O
                                              59




                                           TABLE 9

        DURBIN—WATSON STATISTICS FOR TESTING AUTOCORRELATION OF TUE
                          OBSERVED RELATIVE PRICE

     Cotton                                                 Wheat
      State                         DW                      State        DW
North Carolina                    1.1903             Iowa             1.1976
South Carolina                    2.1625             California       1.6789
Georgia                       1.70148                Kansas           1.2818
Florida                       1.6108                 Nebraska         1.2568
Tennessee                     1.1651                 Minnesota        1.2869
A.labanta                     1.8208                 IllInois         0.9693

Mississippi                   2.0332                 Mary-land        0.7295
Arkansas                      2.0000                 Michigan         0.9679
Louisiana                     1.8039                 Missouri         1.2187
Texas                         2,09114                Wisconsin        1.0056

                                                     Indiana          0.8931

                                                     Virginia         0.63148

                                                     PennsylvanIa     0.5609

                                                     New York         0.5639

                                                     Ohio             0.8628

                                                     North Dakota     1.5590

                                                     South Dakota     1.14876




Notes: (1) Sample period 1870_19114 for cotton states; 1867—19114 for 'wheat
             states, except California 1869—19114; Minnesota 186819114; and
             North and South Dakota, 1883—19114.
        (2) Durbin—Watson statistic calculated for residuals of      =
                                                                           + et
             estimated by OLS.
        (3) For test of autocorrelation at the 5% level of significance, the
             upper and lower bounds of the DW statistic are 1.57 and 1.148 for
             the cotton states, and 1.58 and 1.149 for the wheat states (except
             1.50 and 1.37 for North Dakota and South Dakota). Source: [Johnston .1.972,
              pp. 143().,.143]]
                                   60




                              TABLE     10
                                                                       .
SHARES OF REGIONS IN WORLD PRODUCTION OF WHEAT AND COTTON, 1869—1914

                          Cotton                        Wheat
   Year                             (2)         (3)
  1859—60                          77.9
  1869—70                          56.
  1880—81                          72.5


  1885—89                                      21.6             33.0

  1889_91                                      29.1             37.2




  1890—91                          70.3        20.1             29.3
  1891—92                          72,6        29.2             Ii.7
  1892—93                          6b.                          36.1

  1893—9h          56.2            66.9        19.8             32.0

  189b—95                                       21.0            33.2

  1895—96                                       21.8            33.0

  1896—97                                       20.6            31.2

  1897—98                                       26.2            10.9

  1898—99                                       214.8           38.8

  1899—1900                                     214.1           36.3
                            61




              TABLE 10      (ContInued)
                   Cotton                         Wheat
Year        (1)                  (2)       (3)             (Ii)

1900—01                                   22.0            31.6
1901—02                                   25.9            0.2
1902—03                                   21.9            35.7
19O3_O1                                   19.7            33•7
19OI_05                                   17.14           32.5

1905—06                                   20.8            35.8

1906—07                                   20.8            314.6


1907—08                                   19.3            314.3


1908—09                                   19.8            314.8


1909—10    59.2                           18,5            35.1

1910—11    63.1                           17.1            33.9

1911—12    71.7                           16.9            31.1

1912—13    614.9                          18.5            35.8

1913—114   63.8                           18.1            36.2
                                  62




                         TABLE 10 (Continued)
                                                                                   .
   to the Columns of Table 10:


(1) U.S. cotton as percentage of total world crop
     Sources: 1893: [United States Congress, Senate 1895, vol. I, pp. 501—506]
               1909—1914: United States Department of Agriculture 1937, p. 92]

(2) U.S. cotton as percentage of cotton crop of U.S. + India + Egype +    Brazil
     Source: [United States Congress, Senate 1895, vol. I, pp. 501—506]

(3) U.S. wheat as percentage of world wheat crop
     Sources: 1885—.L894:  [Ma.Lenbaum 1953, pp. 238—239 (excludes China)]
               1890—1914: [United States Department of Agriculture 1937, p. 18]

(4) U.S. wheat as percentage of wheat crop of U.S. + Europe excluding Russia
     Sources: 1885—1894: [Maienbaum 1953, pp. 238—239]
              1890—1914: [United States Department of Agriculture 1937, p. 18]
                                             63




 References


 Bowman, John D. 1965. "An Economic Analysis of Midwestern Farm Land Values

       and Farm    Land Income, 1860   to   1900." Yale Economic Essays 5, 2

       (Fall 1965): 317—352.

 Coo.Ley, Thomas F. 1971. Estimation in the Presence of Sequentia.L Parameter

       Variation, Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 1971.

 Cooley, Thomas F.,, and Prescott, Edward. 1973a. "Tests of An Adaptive Regression

       Model." Review of Economics and Statistics LV, 2 (May 1973): 2148—256.

_________      1973b.    "An Adaptive Regression Model." International Economic

       Review i14, 2 (June 1973): 3614—371.

__________     1973c.    "Varying Parameter Regression: A Theory and Some

       Applications." Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 2, 14 (October

       1973): 1L63473.

__________     19714.   "Estimation in the Presence of Stochastic Parameter

      Variation." Unpublished manuscript (February 19714).

David, Paiij. A. 1971. "Conunent" in Frontiers of Quantitative Economics, ed..

     Intri.Ligator, Michael D. (Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Co., 1971):

      1459—1467.


DeCanio, Stephen. 1973. "Cotton 'Overnroduction' in Late
                                                         Nineteenth_Century
      Southern Agriculture." Journal of Econoiijic History XXXIII, 3

      (September 1973): 6O8—63'.

___________   19714a.   "Productivity and Income Distribution in the Post—Beilum

      South." Journal of Economic History         XXXIV, 2   (June 19714):   1422—14146.

_________     19714b.   gricuIture in the Postbeliujn South: The Economics of

      Production and Supply. Cambridge, Mass.:         M.I.T. Press, 19714 (forthcoming).
                                           64




Fisher,   Franklin M., and Temin, Peter. 1970. "Regional Specialization and the

      Supply of Wheat in the United States, 1867_19114." Review of Economics
                                                                                      .
      and Statistics       52, 2 (May 1970): 1314_l149.

__________      1971.   "Regional Specialization and the Supply of Wheat in the

      United States, 186719114: A Reply." Review of Economics and Statistics

      53, 1 (February 1971): 102—103.

Gal.Lman, Robert E., and Howle, Edward S. 1971. "Trends in the Structure of the

      American Economy Since 18140." The Reinterpretation of American Economic

      History, ed. Robert W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman. New York: Harper

      & Row, 1971.

Gray, Ralph, and Peterson, John M.        19714. Economic Development of the United

      States. Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin, Inc., 19714.

Griliches, Zvi. 1967. "Distributed Lags:            Survey." Econometrica 35, 1

      Tanuary 1967): 16149.

Harvey, William H. 1895.        Coin's   Financial School, ed. Richard Hbfstadter.

      Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1963.

Higgs, Robert. 1970. "Railroad Rates and the Populist Uprising." Agricultural

      History XLIV, 3 (July 1970): 291—297.

__________      1971.   "Regional Specialization and the Supply of Wheat in the

      United States, 1867—19114: A Cpmment." Review of Economics and Statistics

      53, 1 (February 1971): 102—103.

 Johnston, J. 1972. Econometric Methods, 2nd edition. New York: McGraw—Hill

          Book Company, 1972.
                                     65




Lebergott, Stanley. 1966. "Labor Force and Employment, 1800—1960." National

      Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 3O

      Output, Employment and Productivity in the United States After 1800.

      New York: Columbia University Press, 1966.

Lucas, B. 1973. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." Carnegie—

      Mellon Working Paper, 1973.

Malenbauin, Wilfred. 1953. The World Wheat Economy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard

      University Press, 1953.

Mayhew, Anne. 1972. "A Reappraisal of the Causes of Farm Protest in the

      United States, 1870—1900." Journal of Economic History XXXII, 2

      (June 1972): I6175.

I4uth, John F. 1960. "Optimal Pronerties of Exponentially Weighted Forecasts."

      Journal of the American Statistical Association 55, 290 (June 1960):

      299—306.

Nerlove, Marc. 1958. The Irnajnics of Supp4: Estir-iation of Farrers'     Response
      to Price. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1958.

North, DourUass C. 1971. Growth and Welfare in the American Past, 2nd edition.

      EngJ.ewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice—Hall, Inc., 1974.

Nowshirvani, Vahid. 1971. " Modified      Adaptive Expectations Model."

      American Journal of AgriculturaL Hcor.omics 53, 1 (February 1971): 116—119.

Popper, Karl H. 1966. The 9en Society and Its Enemies. 2 Vols., 5th edition

     (1st edition 193). Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1971.

Rosenherrr, Barr. 1073.   "The Anaivsis of   a Cross Seetion of Time Series by

      Stochastjcaliy Convergent Parameter Hegression." Annals j. Economic and

      Social Measurement 2, ) (October 1973): 3°9—128.
                                       66




Sahi, R. K., and   Craddock, W. J. 19714. "Estimation of Flexibility CofTicients
      for Recursive Programming Models——Alternative Approaches." American

     Journal of Agricultural Economics 56, 2 (May 19714):    31414—350.


United States Bureau of the Census. 19149. Historical Statistics of the United

      States, 1789—19145. Washington: Government Printing Office, 19149.

United States Congress, Senate. 1895. Report of the Committee on Agriculture

      and Forestry on Condition of Cotton Growers in the United States, the

      Present Prices of Cotton, and the Remedy; and on Cotton Consumption and

      Production. 53d Congress, 3d Session, Report 986, 2 Vols. Washington:

      Government Printing Office, 1895.

United States Department of Agriculture. 1937. Agricultural Statistics 1937.

     Washington: United States Government Printing Office, 1937.

Wright, Gavin. 19714? "Cotton Competition and the Post—BeLLum Recovery of the

      American South." Journal of Economic History (forthcoming).

Zeilner, Arnold. 1971. An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics.

      New York: John Wiley& Sons, Inc., 1971.




                                                                                   .
