NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN ANALYSIS OF FIRM DEMAND
FOR PROTECTION AGAINST CRIME

Ann P. Bartel

Working Paper No.

59

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016

October 1974

Preliminary; Not for Quotation
NBER working papers. are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.

This research was partially supported by a grant (No. 73—NI—99—l005)
from the Manpower Development Assistance Division of the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration to Columbia University.

AN ANALYSIS OF FIRM DEMAND FOR PROTECTION AGAINST CRIME
Ann P. Bartel*

It is well known that as a result of spiralling crime rates, public
expenditures for police protection have been risinci at a rapid rate. It
is less well known, however, that private expenditures for quards, protective services and equipment have kept pace with the increasing public

expenditures. The data in Table 1 show that durin the 1960's per capita
private protection expenditures and per capita public protection expendi-

tures both rose by 75 per cent in constant dollars. Despite the fact
that in 1970 the private sector allocated at least $3.3 billion of its
resources to protection,1 and this sum is two—thirds the size of the
corresponding public outlay no one has explicitly analyzed the determinants of the private sector's demand for protection.2

*

Assistant Professor of Economics, University of Pennsylvania and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I would like to
thank Professor William Landes for his valuable suggestions and criticisms
and Professor Jacob Mincer for his helpful comments. Partial financial support was
provided by a grant (No. 73-NI-99-1005) from the Manpower Development
Assistance Division of the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration to
Columbia University.
'Total private
by the fiiures in
would include the
keeping lights on

orotection expenditures are certainly underestimated
Table 1 since a complete measure of private outlays
cost of substituting taxi rides for subway trips,
at night, staying home after dark, etc.

2Three other research projects that analyzed private protection but
did not estimate derand functions are J. Kakalik and S. Wildhorn,
Private Police in the United States, The Rand Corporation, 1971; Neil
Komesar, 'A Theoretical and Empirical Study of Victims of Crime,'
Journl of Legal Studies, Volume 2, June 1973; and Tim Ozenne, 'The
Economics of sank Robbery," Journal of Legal Studies, Volume 3,
January 1974.

—2—

TABLE 1
Per Capita Amounts of Public and Private
Outlays for Protection

Public police protection
Constant dollarsa

Private guards, protective
services and equipment
Constant dollarsa

1960

1970

11.28

24.50

(10.94)

(19.19)

7.33

16.20

(7.11)

(12.69)

a195759 = 100.
Sources: Public expenditure data for 1960 are from
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics on
Governmental Finances and Employment, 1967 Census of
Governments, Volume 6, 1969.
Public expenditure data for 1970 are from
U.S. Law Enforcement Assistance Administration and
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Expenditure and Employment
Data for the Criminal Justice System: 1970—71, 1973.
Private expenditure data are from J. Kakalik
and S. Wildhorn, Private Police in the United States,
The Rand Corporation, Volume 2, 1971.

This article, which summarizes a larqer study, 3attempts to fill this

gap by considering firm demand for protection. Since about 85 per cent of
total private security spendinq is by firms an analysis that concentrates
solely on firms explains almost all of the private sector's security

3See Ann P. Bartel, "The Demand for Private Protection," Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, Department of Economics, 1974.

—3—

outlays. The main purpose of this article is to answer three questions.
One, how is firm demand for protection related to business losses from

crime and the probability of crime? Two, are public and private expendi—

tures substitutes or complements? Three, does a firm choose selfprotection as a substitute for market insurance or will it spend more on
protection if it has insurance?
Part I describes a theoretical framework for analyzing a firm's

protection decisions. In Part II I discuss the data set that is used
to test the model and the methods of proxying some of the unobserved

theoretical variables. Part III presents the results of the empirical

analysis. In Part IV the data are used to test what factors, holdinq
protection expenditures constant, predict whether or not a firm will be
victimized.

I. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

A. The Model
A firm's decision to purchase protective services and/or market insurance can be analyzed within the context of the "state preference"

approach to behavior under uncertainty. Ehrlich and Becker have developed
an expected utility model within this context to analyze protection and

insurance decisions of individuals.4 In what follows I apply their basic
framework to firms but make several important extensions on their model.

4See I. Ehrlich and G. S. Becker, "Market Insurance, Self—Insurance,
and Self-Protection," Journal of Political Economy, \olume 80, July 1972.

.

—4—

The firm is assumed to produce an output X using two inputs: M,
which is hired labor measured in manhours, and T , which is the entre-

preneur's time.5 For simplicity, X is assumed to be produced according
to a Cobb—Douglas decreasing returns to scale production function:

cx

X = AM

Tm8

where a +

8 <

1

(1)

The firm is also assumed to be subject to the possibility of losses
from crimes such as burglary, robbery, vandalism, shoplifting and employee

theft. These losses will be denoted L (a composite loss) where L (measured in dollars) is a function of factors that are exogenous to the firm
as well as being a function of the size of output:

L = L (Le, X)

(2)

Le, the so-called endowed or exoqenous loss is determined, by among
other things, the firm's industry group and its location (i.e. urban vs.

nonurban). Type of industry can affect Le in one of two ways: the ease
with which merchandise can be transported and the accessibility of the

merchandise. For example, a bank would have a higher Le than a manufacturing plant of the same size since banks hold a larger inventory of

have ignored the obvious third input, capital, because I primarily
wish to emphasize the market—nonmarket dichotomy between certain inputs
in the production process. To the extent that I am dealing with shortrun decisions by the firm, capital could be treated as a fixed factor
and need not enter the short—run production function.

—5—

cash; while the cash is not readily accessible, it is easily transportable
once the criminal has access to it and this would enable him to steal a
larger dollar amount from a bank than from a manufacturing plant for any

given criminal action against these two firms. Alternatively, if one
compared a retailer with a service firm of the same size one would expect
the retailer to have a higher Le since his output is readily accessible to
customers, employees, and burglars, whereas the output of a service firm

is usually not a tangible item. The effect of location on Le is less
clear. An urban firm might have a higher Le than a nonurban firm since
the high population density of urban areas would result in an urban
criminal being more likely to take the risk of stealing a larger amount
than a nonurban one because he could be less easily detected.
It should be noted that I am assuming that type of industry and
location are fixed for the short-run decisions of the firm which I am

analyzing. of

course,

in the long run the firm could affect Le by

moving to a new neighborhood or changing the nature of its business.
X, the size of output, has a positive effect on L since the more

the firm produces the larger its potential losses. While protection
expenditures can reduce the probability of a loss they are assumed not

to reduce the size of the loss.6 This relationship enables me to

6For example, the main function of a security quard is to deter a
criminal frQm attempting to steal from the firm. However, once the crime
takes place, the presence of the guard will have little effect on the
dollar amount that the criminal is actually able to remove from the store.
This distinction between protection affecting probability and not loss is
used by Ehrlich and Becker (1972).

.

—6—

assume that -

. - = 1,

a 1 per cent chance in output X results in a

1 per cent change in L and the loss—output ratio remains fixed as firrn

size increases. This is a valid assumntiori since I am merely trvina to
capture a scale effect and there is no obvious reason to assert that L
should increase either at a slower or faster rate than
The loss, L, is assumed to occur with probability, p, which is a
function of exogenous factors as well as decisions made by the firm:

p =

c)

(3)

is the endowment or exogenous probability and it is determined

by the firm's location and tvne of product or industry. Acain one might
expect a retailer to have a higher pe than a service firm because of the

greater availability of merchandise in a retail store. Location in an
urban area would result in a higher e because of the greater supply of

potential criminals.8 The firm can, however, change e by self-protecting.
Let c be the level of self—protection where ap/c < 0 and

71f protection expenditures could
ticity would have to be greater than
puted with protection held constant.
output without changing its level of
increase by more than 100 per cent.

<

ej

c > 0.

reduce L, then the loss-output elas1 because this elasticity is comThen if the firm were to double its
protection its losses would have to

8Urban areas would have a greater supply of potential criminals than
nonurban areas because the median family income is higher in urban areas:
(continued on next page)

—7—

Self—protection, c, is assumed to be produced according to a decreasing return to scale production function9 with two inputs: G, guard hours

purchased in the market, and T, time went by the entrepreneur policing
his firm. Thus since c, self—protection, is some function of G and T we
can write the p function as:

=

(e

G, T)

(4)

For simplicity I have not considered the third protection input, capital,
since I am primarily interested in emphasizing the idea that an entrepreneur can purchase protective services not only in the market but also
from himself.

8 (concluded)

Rural
Urban

Median income
Per cent below 1/2 median

$10,196
19%

Nonf arm

$8,248
20%

Source: 1970 Census of Population, General Social
and Economic Characteristics, Table 105.

Ehrlich (1973) has shown that when income inequality is held constant,
median family income has a positive effect on crime rates because it
measures the criminal's potential illegal payoff.
9Decreasing returns to scale is required by the second-order maximum
condition. See Appendix A in Bartel (1974).

.

—8—

The role of the entrepreneur as a policeman can be compared to the
analysis by Aichian and Demsetz of the entrepreneur as the monitor of

team production who reduces shirking by team mernbers)0 They show that
the monitor has the incentive not to shirk as a monitor because he has

title to the net earnings of the team. Similarly, in my model, the entrepreneur has an incentive to reduce the probability of crime against the

firm because in that way he maximizes the net earnings of his firm. Any
other non—guard employee would not have this incentive and he might in
fact try to steal from the firm.

The function in (4) has the following properties: An increase in

G reduces p and an increase in T reduces p. Also

ap'G
ac

> 0

and

3p'T
>

0; G and T have diminishing marginal products. In addition

it is assumed that

ap'T
S

> 0;

an increase in the number of guard—hours

reduces the marginal product of one hour of own policing time. This
occurs sLnce guards and entrepreneurial time perform essentially the
same type of protective service and the deterrent effect of an increase

in guard—hours reduces the contribution that T makes to a reduction in

°See their "Production, Information Costs, and Economic Organization,"
AER, 62, December 1972. Their model requires the entrepreneur to specialize in monitoring whereas I view the entrepreneur as playing two roles,
that of policeman and that of production input (in this latter role he
could in fact be a monitor). Another article dealing with the entrepreneur's enforcement role is M. Silver and R. Auster, "Entrepreneurship,
Profit, and Limits on Firm Size," Journal of Business, 42, July 1969.

—9—

p. While one could argue that the cross-partials should be negative (i.e.,
the marginal products increase) since the hirinq of a guard may enable the
entrepreneur to allocate his policing time more efficiently (i.e., a division of labor effect) it seems more likely that the otposinq effect
dominates, especially as guard time is increased, since division of labor
would only be important when guard usage is first introduced.11 In spite
of the positive cross—partials, however, the self—protection isoquants are
still assumed to be convex.12
Given that the firm faces two states of the world, the no—loss state
and the loss state (where losses L occur), it maximizes the expected
utility of its net income prospect:

= (l—p) U (Ii) + pU
(11—L)

(5)

sublect to the production function for output X in (1), the constraint on
L in (2), the constraint on p in (4), and a constraint on the entrepreneur's time:

T=T s +Tm

(6)

HOne other possible source of complementarity is that the entrepreneur must police the guards themselves. I have, however, ignored or at
least minimized the importance of this relationship.
12Convexity is required by the second-order maximum conditions. See
Appendix A in Bartel (1974).

— 10 —

where T is the total time the entrepreneur spends on the job, T is the
entrepreneur's policing time, and Tm is the time he allocates towards

producing output

If initially we assume that insurance is unavail-

able to the firm, net income can be exoressed as:

(7)

Il=kX_wM_wGG

where k is the market price of the output and is assumed fixed for the
firm, w is the waqe rate of the hired input (also constant) and WG is
the wage rate of security guards (also constant for the firm).
If the firm is risk neutral it maximizes exnected profits and
equation (5) reduces to:

*kX_wM_wG_pL

(8)

The firm maximizes rr* with respect to the variables it controls: M, G,

and T, subject to the four constraints. Internalizing the constraints,
the resulting first order conditions are:

L X

C-i (k-p)
C-2 - P

GL =

=

w

WG

L

C_3_PTs L= (k-pa)

X
M

is fixed because the amount of leisure and consumption time are
assumed to be previously determined.

— 11 —

Condition

C-i states that in equilibrium the marginal revenue from

hiring an additional manhour, M, must equal the marginal cost of hirinq

him. Note that labor is not paid the value of its marginal product

kX/M; rather there is a wedge between the wage and the VMP that is
equal to the expected loss due to hiring the extra manhour and thereby

increasing output. Condition C-2 states that the marginal revenue from

hiring an additional guard hour must equal the guard wage rate. Condition C-3 states that the marginal revenue from using an additional hour

of own policing time must equal the marginal cost of that hour. Note

that the marginal cost of own time, T, equals the value of the foregone
output X adjusted for the decrease in the expected loss due to the cut-

back in output x. Whereas the entrepreneur can purchase guard time at
constant cost, the marginal cost of T is increasing since Tm has a

diminishing marginal product and since p falls as T is increased. In
addition, since C reduces p, the price of T is not independent of the
number of guard hours the firm

hires.

Conditions C-2 and C-3 can be combined to form the equilibrium
condition

p'G -—
p'Ts

w

G

L X
(k-p) m

which states that the ratio of the marginal products of the two protection

inputs must equal the ratio of their marginal costs. This equilibrium

— 12 —

condition

can be represented as in Figure 1:

T
DefermitVtnj W-€. Op+,,-noi

Guards *, Ent

neu.dctf 7t

L kv'4 of seIf-protedit

Since G and T are imperfect substitutes the self-protection isoquants are
convex. The slope of the isoquant equals

whose slope equals

,

is

The transformation curve,

nonlinear because T can not be pur—

(k-pa)
chased at constant cost. Equilibrium occurs at the tangency of an isoquant
and the transformation curve.

Equation (9) points out that guards and entrepreneural time are
asymmetric in the sense that an increase in G reduces p while an increase

in T reduces p and L. (This asymmetry has important implications for comparative statics predictions as will be shown below.) Another distinction
between G and T is that there may be some "lumpiness" in the hiring of
guards. For example the optimal decision for a small firm might be to
hire a guard for fifteen minutes out of every hour but contractual con-

straints would not permit this arrangement. Entrepreneurial time, on the
other hand, could be adjusted more precisely. Therefore small firms

— 13 —

might be forced to specialize and only use T to produce protection.14
B. Comparative Statics Predictions
By differentiating the first order conditions at the maximum the
effects of several exogenous factors on the amounts of G and

that

are used 'can be determined. Complete explanations and proofs of these
results can be found elsewhere;15 a brief summary of the predictions
is presented here.

1. An increase in the guard wage rate results in a decrease in
the number of guard hours hired and an increase in the amount of the
entrepreneur's time used in self-protection.

2. An increase in the parameter

in the production function in

(1) causes an increase in guard hours and a decrease in the entrepreneur's time.

3. An increase in the endowed loss results in an increase in

bothGandT.
S

4.

An increase in the endowment probability will cause an in-

crease in both G and T if the increase in e raises the marginal
products of the two protection inputs.

16

14sman firms could avoid this problem by organizing in a group which
would hire a full-time guard. Each firm could then get a few minutes
out of every hour of the guard's time. An alternative solution may be
to hire a guard just for a few key hours out of every day.
'5See Bartel (1974), Chapter II and Appendix A.

dT

161f the marginal products of G and T are unchanged then we have
S

—- >
dp

0 because the marginal cost of T falls (see condition C-3) and
S

(continued

on next page)

— 14 —

5.

An increase in public protection expenditures will reduce G

and,T if their marginal products fall as a result of the increased
level of public protection.

6. If an increase in the education of guards raises their marginal
productivities, then holding WG constant, this will result in an increase
in G and a decrease in T
S

7.

An increase in the entrepreneur's experience will cause an

increase in G and a decrease in T if experience has a relatively larger
effect on the entrepreneur's marginal product in output production than
on his marginal product in protection.

17

16 (concluded)

—e

dG < 0

because losses fall since M and T are reduced and the marginal

m

dp

product of C falls because T rises. I am postulating that the guards
and entrepreneurial time that are currently employed should become more
valuable after an exogenous increase in the crime rate. The protection
inputs would have a higher marginal product, the higher the initial o
since,it is easier to reduce the probability from, for example, .8 to .7
than it is to reduce it from .5 to .4. Diagrammatically this could be
pictured as a nonparallel shift of the p(G)T and p(T)
functions:
S

C

dT
17We have

dEXP <

0

as

ax
d
dp'T
- s EXP>
EXP
dEXP
dEXP •iT

m

m

If T increases then G will fall because C's marginal product falls and
because losses fall as a result of the decrease in T
m.

— 15 —

In

the expected utility literature it is often noted that a 1 per

cent change th Le has the same, larger or smaller percentage effect on

expected utility as does a 1 per cent change in e according to whether
the individual is risk neutral, risk averse or a risk preferrer; hence
the deterrent effect on a criminal of a 1 per cent increase in the prob-

ability of apprehension exceeds, equals, or falls short of the effect of

a 1 percent increase in the fine according to whether he is a risk
preferrer, risk neutral, or a risk avoider)8 A similar test can be
applied to the protection response of firms to an increase in Le and
e
an increase in p .

In

my model, even though firms are assumed to be

risk neutral, a 1 per cent change in Le has a larger percentage effect

on G than does a 1 per cent change in e19 The reason for this is that
when the increase in e takes place, the firm can maximize expected
profits not only by hiring G, but also by hiring fewer M and thereby

18See Gary S. Becker (1968) and Issac Ehrlich (1973) for proofs of
this result.

19See Bartel (1974), Appendix A for proof. Note I assume there that

ap'G e.PtT ,
G
ape

39e

= 1.
T

As

pG
ape

becomes larger than 1,

p'G

EPe rises relative toSELe and euality or even EPe >

Since I have no prior information on the size of

EL could

'G
ap

it to be equal to one is the most neutral assumption.

result.

assuming

— 16 —

reducing losses. Since the loss itself is endogenous the firm has another
alternative when e rises; this alternative is usually ignored in the
standard expected utility models.

In the case of the entrepreneur's time, if the loss is completely
exogenous, a 1 per cent increase in Le will have the same relative effect

on T as will a 1 per cent increase in e the usual risk neutral result.
ut since my model treats the loss as endogenous, risk neutrality results
in a 1 per cent increase in Le having a smaller relative effect on T than
does a 1 per cent increase in pe• This is because the increase in
reduces the marginal cost of T thus causing a further expansion of T
20

beyond that of the case of an exogenous loss.

C. Risk Aversion and the Availability of Insurance
If the assumption of risk neutrality is relaxed such that the firm's
utility function now has a negative second derivative then the firm maximizes the utility function in (5).
requires

Introducing

insurance into the

model

the insurance premium, q, to be subtracted from I, income in

state one, and the quantity A-qto be added to income in state zero where
A is the amount of insurance the firm purchases and q = ApA.

ance is actuarially fair, A =

1,

If insur-

and all the predictions derived above

hold since the firm acts as if it were risk neutral.

20Although M is reduced when e rises and this lowers L, CT,Pe is
not reduced because the reduction in M also lowers the marginal cost of
T and these two factors are perfectly offsetting:
d(C-3) =

0

because

L
—

X— = 1.

— 17 —

The effect of insurance on the demand for guards and entrepreneurial
time is unclear. An increase in A reduces the net loss to the firm

and

the marginal gain from self-protecting either via C or T diminishes.
This is the source of the moral hazard problem; if a firm has loss coverage it has no incentive to reduce the probability of the loss occurring.

On the other hand, an increase in G or T reduces the price of insurance
since p falls and q = ApA, thereby implying a complementary relationship

between protection and insurance. However one would expect to observe a
stronger complementary relationship between guards and insurance than
between entrepreneur's policing time and insurance because there is an

additional negative relationship between T and A that does not exist
for G and A; that is, an increase in T reduces L since output falls
and the reduction in L lowers the demand for insurance.

D. Industry Equilibrium
The model described above considered the reactions of a single firm

in a competitive industry to losses from various crimes. One of the basic
assumptions of the model was that the firm could not affect the price of

its output. Althouqh crime increased the firm's costs the firm reached
an equilibrium by producing that output where its new marginal cost

equalled the fixed market nrice. However, as discussed in Section A, all
firms in a particular industry in a given location will be faced with a

certain amount of crime as described by the variables e and Le. Since
all of these firms will face higher marginal cost curves as a result of

.

— 18 —

crime the industry supply curve will shift to the left and the market price
will rise. Of course if one firm in the industry is especially vulnerable
to crime it may be forced out of business since the leftward shift in its
marginal cost curve will outweigh the increase in the market price; the
intersection of its marginal cost curve and its horizontal demand curve
may only occur at an output of zero units.
Since firms in different industries in a particular location and
firms in a single industry in varying locations will face different
endowed losses and endowed probabilities one would expect to observe

changes in relative prices across these groups. For example, if over
time, crime against retailers increases relative to crime against service
firms, then one should observe an increase over time in the price of retail goods relative to the price of services, holding location and other

shift factors (e.g., technological change) constant. Alternatively, if
crime against urban firms increases over time relative to crime against
nonurban firms then one should observe an increase over time in the price
of retail goods in urban areas relative to the price of retail goods in
nonurban areas.

Similar predictions would hold in the cross-section. Using data
on industries in a given location and choosing one industry as the
nuzneraire, a regression of industry price on demand factors and supply

factors should yield positive siqns on the independent variables measuring the probability of crime in the industry and the endowed loss in
the industry.

— 19 —

E.

Reaction of Offenders
The model as developed up until this point is still only a partial

equilibrium model. It is a model of how firms react to the possibility
of losses from various crimes and describes how market prices are affected

by crime. One assumption of the model was that if a crime took place, a
firm would lose $L where L was determined by Le, a set of exogenous fac-

tors, and X, size of output. Each firm, therefore, had a specific L.
Why is it that the market can tolerate loss differentials across firms?
The answer lies in the fact that the offender's cost of committing a crime

will differ across firms. In evaluating possible targets, the offender
considers a net return function for each firm:

N. = (1 —
1

where

f.)
1

L. — R. —
1
1

f.1 F.1

(10)

L. is the gain to the criminal if he successfully carries out the

crime, f. is the probability of his being apprehended, R. is his resource
costs in perpetrating the crime, and F. is the punishment for committing

the crime. For simt1icity I assume that all offenders have equal
productivities so that every offender has the identical net return for
.th

the i

firm. 21
.

The firm is able to raise f. and R. by self-protecting. If the
entrepreneur hires a guard and/or spends his own time policing, the

21T. Ozenne (1974) also makes this assumption in developing his general eguilibrium model of theft and protection.

.

— 20 —

probability

of a criminal being apprehended in his store increases and

moreover, the criminal may have to engage more of his own resources in

order to successfully commit a crime in this store. The entrepreneur
has the incentive to increase f. and R. because this will reduce the
1
1
probability of a crime being committed against his firm and expected

profits will thereby increase. Also, he can reduce L. by cuttinq back
on his output. F. is presumably out of the entrepreneur's control
since it would be decided by public officials.
Then, in order for the market to tolerate loss differentials
across firms, net returns to crime must be equalized across firms.
This implies that, in the cross—section, the occurrence of higher
losses, L., should be associated with hiqher exnected --punishments and
-

higher

criminal resource costs.

II. EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATION
Data limitations make it impossible to test all of the implications

of the theoretical model. The market equilibrium conditions discussed
in Sections D and E of Part I are not considered in the empirical work.
Moreover only those comparative statics predictions outlined in Sections
B and C of Part I that deal with the demand for guards are tested here.

A. The Data
The data set used to test some of the implications of the theoretical

model is the Small Business Administration's 1968 Survey of Crime Against

— 21 —

Business.22 While the survey was performed by the Small Business Administration, it should be pointed out that the survey was not limited to small
businesses; in fact annual gross receipts for the firms included in the

sample ranged from under $10,000 to over $10,000,000. The survey was
designed to measure business losses from various crimes and protection

decisions and expenditures by individual firms. The sample of firms was
selected from corporate and business tax returns for fiscal years ending

between July 1, 1965 and June 30, 1966. After excluding returns filed
for agriculture, forestry, and fishery businesses, the sample was
stratified by type of business ownership and by size of business receipts.
A self—weighted 1 in 1,400 sample was then selected; however, only 50 per
cent of the businesses were actually interviewed in the summer of 1968

resulting in a final group of approximately 2,450 firms. I reduced the
sample to 1,941 firms because many firms failed to provide information
on their losses and protection expenditures.
The crime cateqories included in the survey were shoplifting,

burglary, robbery, vandalism, and employee theft.23 The Small Business
Administration asked each firm to give dollar amounts for each of the
above types of loss that it incurred during the twelve—month period

22See U.S. Small Business Administration, "Crime Against Small Business," a Report Transmitted to the U.S. Senate, U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1969, for a complete description of the survey.
23The firms were also questioned about their losses from bad checks
but I excluded these losses.

22 —

prior

to the date of the interview, i.e., between July 1967 and July

1968.24 Table 2 shows the distribution of the reported losses broken
down by type of loss and location of firm.

The relatively low loss

figures in lines 1 and 4 are explained by the fact that many firms experienced no losses at all. 2mong those firms with a loss, however,
the averaqe loss for urban firms was $1,400 while for nonurban firms

it was $600. While urban firms incurred laraer losses than nonurban
firms in every category the distribution of the total losses into the

separate categories differs by location. Burglary and vandalism comprise 64 per cent of urban losses but represent only 51 per cent of
nonurban losses; employee theft and shoplifting account for only 33
per cent of urban losses but they comprise 46 per cent of nonurhan
losses.

B. Demand for Guards Equation
The basic reduced form equation from Part I which will be tested
on the Small Business Administration data is as follows:

Guards = a +
+
+

b1

Endowed Loss +

b2 Endowed Probability

b3

Public Protection +

b5

Education of Guards +

Entrepreneurs +

b7

b4

Wage of Guards
(11)

b6 Experience of

Insurance + u

24The firms actually picked a loss interval into which their loss fell.
I used the midpoint of the interval to measure the actual loss value. For
the open-ended intervals arbitrary values were used but very few firms had
losses which fell into these upper intervals.

— 23

—

TABLE 2

Distribution

of Losses

Employee
Theft

Total
Losses

Shoplifting

Burglary

131.33

234.31

16.35

215.50

102.74

700.17

.14

.18

.04

.33

.08

.50

1,316.35 441.89

657.01

Robbery

Vandalism

Urban
1. Average losses
2. Fraction of
firms with
a loss

3. Average

losses

those firms
with a loss
for

931.42

1,252.93 1,397.54

Nonurban
4. Average losses

60.13

59.74

4.42

49.73

38.54

212.59

.14

.10

.01

.21

.06

.36

438.91

597.40

315.71

239.09

688.21

593.83

5. Fraction of
firms

with

a loss
6. Average losses
for those firms
with a loss

.

— 24 —

The empirical proxies of the theoretical variables re discussed below.

C. Dependent Variables
The SBA asked each firm whether or not it (a) employed a guard or
watchman or hired a guard throuch a security auard service, or (b) sub-

scribed to a protective service. Firms that did subscribe to a protective service were asked to give the monthly fee they paid for this

service. The difference between a guard or watchman and a protective
service is in the amount and type of protection each provides. A guard
is assigned to patrol a store for a specified period of time. Hence,
if he works for a retailer during the day, he is able to reduce the prob-

ability of shoplifting, employee theft and robbery. If he is a night
watchman for a manufacturing plant his primary responsibility is to re-

duce the probability of burglary and vandalism. If a firm subscribes
to a protective service, however, it does not aet full—time protection

from a guard or watchman. Rather a group of firms, in ore neighborhood,
hires a guard service to patrol the entire area and each individual firm,
therefore, may receive only a few minutes of actual protection out of

every hour that the guard is on duty in the neighborhood. Since a protective service patrols outside the store and usually at night, the
service is primarily aimed at reducing the probability of burglary and

vandalism. The average monthly expenditures for these protective services
is approximately $50. Moreover, 7 per cent of the firms in the sample reported subscribing to a protective service while 6 per cent reported that
they had a guard.

— 25 —

Since the SBA survey made the above distinction between the two
types of guard service, I was able to test the model in Part I using

two dependent variables. Unfortunately, the data only enabled me to
approximate the number of guards by a dummy variable (GD) which eauals

one if the firm has a guard and zero if it does not. The presence or
absence of a protective service is similarly measured with a dummy
variable (PSER).

D. Independent Variables
e
1. Estimate of the endowed loss (L
The model in Part I assumes that the firm has some subjective
measure of Le, the dollar loss that it will incur qiven that a crime
takes place and also ignoring scale effects (i.e., the effect of size

of output on absolute losses). Le was assumed to be determined by
the type of industry and location of the firm. The empirical specif ication in equation (11) requires that a dollar figure be assigned to

each firm to measure its Le. I assume that the
its

.th

firm decides what

is by looking at the recent loss experience of other firms that

have similar industry and location characteristics. The th firm looks
at the losses experienced by these firms in the previous twelve months
and uses this information to predict what it thinks its own Le will be

for the coming period. In other words, if firms in the surrounding
neighborhood (or in the same industry) have been experiencing very high

losses, (when a crime takes place), the th firm in that neighborhood

.

— 26

(industry)

—

realizes that it faces a high Le and it will be more likely to

hire a guard than a firm in a neighborhood (industry) with a low Le. It
is not important that the 1th firm might have had the guard during the
past year; what matters is that it currently has a guard and this is in
part determined by its estimation of the losses it thinks it will incur
in the next few months if a crime is committed against the firm.
The estimation of Le requires grouping the firms in the sample into

cells of "similar" firms. I used two grouping methods. For the first
method, the firms were stratified by industry group (nine categories),
urban/nonurban, and three size categories (gross sales less than
$50,000, between $50,000 and $500,000, and greater than $500,000), re-

sulting in fifty-four cells. Although the theoretical model describes
Le as being unrelated to size of firm, I used the three broad size
categories because there was a tremendous range in the sizes of the
firms

in the sample and it seemed unreasonable to assume that an urban

grocery store with $10,000 gross sales would gain any information from

the loss experience of an urban department store with $1,000,000 gross

sales.

Size, however, is really not held constant in the construction

of Le since within each of the three categories there is still much size
variation.

The second grouping method is to stratify by geographic region of
the country

(nine regions),

urban/nonurban, and the three size cells.

method is not as attractive as the first one since it is unlikely
that a retailer in a certain area would use the losses of a bank (in

This

— 27 —

the

same area) as a measure of its own endowed loss; but stratifying by

industry, region, urban and size was impossible because too many small
cells would be produced.

After the firms were appropriately grouped, Le was computed by
taking the mean loss in the twelve—month period of those firms in the

cell that had a positive loss. The five types of losses were added
together in computing this variable

The above argument assumes that the th firm relies on the loss
experience of similar firms in predicting its endowed loss. It is, of
course, possible that if the 1th firm itself experienced a very high
loss during the previous twelve months then the average loss of the
other firms may be an underestimate of this firm's Le for the coming

period. On the other hand, a high loss during one particular twelvemonth period could be due to special random events in that period and,

therefore, the th firm's actual loss last year may provide no information for its future losses. One could therefore express Le as:

Le =

+

(La

—

)

(12)

where L is the mean loss in the firm's cell, La is its actual loss and
S1is an adjustment coefficient that lies between zero and one. Information on La is, of course, only obtained for those firms (40 per cent
of the sample) that had a positive loss during the twelve-month period.
Also La embodies the scale effect of output on L and size of firm must

.

— 28 —

therefore

be held constant in the regression. Of course the importance of

a $1,000 deviation will probably differ if L is $500 or $5,000 and therefore a more useful way of incorporating the firm's own loss is to consider
the relative deviation of its dollar loss, i.e.

Le=L+l(LL)

(13)

L (LOSS), and the expression in (13) are tested in Part III as empirical
estimates of the firm's

2.

endowed loss.

Estimate of the endowed probability (re)
The two methods of grouping described above were also used to com-

pute

For the th firm, an estimate of its endowment probability is
•

. th

the ratio of the number of firms in the i

firm's cell that reported a

loss over the total number of firms in the cell (PROS). The second
grouping method, usinq region rather than industry, may be more appropriate since the fact that a bank in a given area experienced a loss
indicates to a retailer in the same area that businesses in the neighborhood are incurring losses from crime; the fact that a retailer in another
area experienced a loss would not provide information on the local crime
rate but would indicate that retailers are more susceptible to crime than,

for example, service firms. Therefore, both methods should provide suit-

able measures for e whereas in the case of Le the industry grouping should
be far superior to the regional grouping.

One problem with measuring e in this manner is that the actual
incidence of crime in a given cell is determined not only by endowment

— 29 —

factors

like industry and location but also by the protection expendi-

tures of the firms in the cell.25 Therefore if p,
crime, in one cell is greater than p

in

the

incidence of

another cell this could in part

be due to the fact that the average protection expenditures of the firms
in the first cell are less than those of the firms in the second cell.

In order for p to measure e, the mean protection expenditures in the
cell must be held constant. The variable used to construct this mean
(AVG) is the totaléxpenditure of each firm on all protective devices
that it had purchased up until the date of the interview. Using the
average monthly expenditures on protective services would not have been
preferable since labor is a variable factor and one cannot be sure that
these same expenditures were beinq made eight or ten months ago since
the firm could have easily adjusted its expenditures in response to

new information about future losses. While total expenditures on protective devices may also reflect responses to recent events, they do
include past expenditures, e.q., an alarm system that was installed a
few years ago, so that this variable serves as a much better control
for the level of protection during the rrevious twelve-month period.
Although the relationship between probability and protection expenditures should be nonlinear (because protection has a diminishing marginal

25This problem does not occur for Le, because according to the assumptions of the model in Part I, protection reduces the probability of a
crime, hut once the crime ta]•:es place, it has little effect on the size
of the loss incurred.

.

— 30 —

product),

let us assume that we can express the observed probability in a

cell as:

C,

+

p. =

(14)

where p. is the observed incidence of crime for the

cTroup, C. is the

mean protection expenditures for the qroup, and 8 is neqative. If C.

equals zero then p. perfectly measures p; hence
not independent of

=

1.

8, however, is

since an increase in crime rates is assumed to raise

the marqina]. product of the nrotection inouts.26 In other words,

(15)

where A is negative since it measures the effect of orotection on nrobability that is independent of the level of

and y is also negative

because at a given C the slope of the p(C) function is steeper the hiqher
,e

Substituting for 8

-p.

=

in

(14) and solving for p we have:

AC
(16)

l+y

and since the th firm's demand for guards can be written as:

G. = a

+

e

h1

+

82x

See the discussion in footnote 16.

(17)

— 31

—

where X is a vector of all other independent variables, we can substitute
for

e

and obtain

-

b1p

G. = a +
1

l+yC

b1XC

+

l+yC

(18)

b2X

where p is measured by PROB and C is measured by AVG.

The true partial effect of e on G. is b1, but we observe the coefficient on p which is

G.1

b

1

=

(19)

l+yC

Since the absolute value of yC is less than one27 the coefficient that we

observe overestimates the true effect of e on G.. This happens because
we underestimate the true difference between, for example, p and p, when

we use p and

To get b1, therefore, requires iterating on different

values of y that satisfy 1 > 1 + yC >

0.

Note that equation (18) shows
(—

that the coefficient that we observe on AVG,

b1

A)
,

will

be positive

l+yC

since

is positive and A is negative.

27Substituting (15)

into

=

e

(14) we have

(1 + yC) + AC

Since A is negative, in order to guarantee that p. lies between 0 and 1,
the quantity 1 + 1C

must

be a positive fraction.

.

— 32 —

As with the endowed loss, the firm's own experience can be used to
modify the estimate of the endowment probability as follows:

e

=

-

XC

+

. POSLOS

(20)

l+yC

where POSLOS eauals one if the firm had a loss durinq the previous twelve

months and zero if it did not. In Part III

e

is estimated by

the

expressions in (16) and (20).

3. Public protection
The level of public molice protection in the firm's area is measured
by per capita nolice protection exnenditures by state and local aovernments
in the firm's state (PUB) for the qovernment fiscal year endinq June 30,

1968.28 In order to correctly measure the effect of public protection,
however, the crime rate in the firm's area must be held constant. For
each state it is possible to construct separate crime rates for SMSAs, for

other cities, and for rural areas. Since the property crime rate can have
an independent effect on the firm's decision to hire a quard or protective
service (apart from servinq as a control variable for public protection)

because it is an alternative way of measuririq a firm's e I include only
burqlarv, robbery, and larceny in the construction of the crime variable.
Then for the .th firm the value of the local crime rate (CRIME) is the
number of burglaries, robberies and larcenies per 100,000 inhabitants in

28From U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, "Covernment
Finances in 1967—68," GF68, No. 5.

—33—

areas in the

.th

firm's state which are similar in size to the

.th

firm's

locality in that state.29

4.

Price and

nroductiviy

variables

The real waqe of private guards (CDI) is measured by the ratio of the

median earnings of male full-time employed guards and watchmen in the state
in

which the firm
earnings

hourly

is located to a once index computed from the averaae

of manufacturing workers in the state.3°

The education of guards is measured by the average number of '7ears of

school completed by male emplored protective service workers in the firm's

state (EDtJC) 3l Since the protective service worker cateory includes
oublic policemen and firemen as well as private guards, the ratio of muards
to all protective service workers in the state is included (PCT) in the
regression equation.

32

29The crime rate data are taken from U.S. Department of Justice, FBI,
Crime in the United_States, 1967 Uniform Crime Reports.

30Median earnings of guards are from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
the Census, Detailed Characteristics, 1970 Census of Population, Table 175.
Hourly manufacturing wages are from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1970, Table 344. The
index is computed by choosing one state's wage as the numeraire and dividing
all manufacturing wages by this number.
31From U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Detailed
teristics, 1970 Census of Population, Table 179.
32Ibid., Table 170.

S

— 34 —

The entrenreneur's experience must be proxied by the nuxrtber of years
the firm has been at its present location (YRS). This variable would he
hiahlv correlated with the aqe of the firm and the firm's aqe would be a
proxy for the owner's experience and hence his productivity as a businessman

and as a nrotector of his firm. There may be a bias due to the possibility of
non-mobile firms being in urban, hich—crime areas. This can be accounted for
by controllina for location in the reciression. A descrintjon of the location
variables is qiven below in number 6.

5. Insurance
The model in Part I treats insurance as an endoaenous variable.

Unfortunately the available data do not enable me to identify a system
of protection and insurance equations and my empirical analysis assumes
that insurance can be used as an indenendent variable in the demand for

quards equation. The firms in the sample indicated whether or not they currently had burcTlary insurance, robbery or theft insurance, and vandalism in-

surance. Those firms that renorted nositive burqlarv losses also reported
how much the insurance company reimbursed them for their loss.

A dummy variable (ANYINS), which equals one if the firm has any tvne
of insurance and zero if it has none, is used to emnirically examine the
relationship between insurance and protection. Simultaneity may haraner the
estimation of the ANYINS coefficient since if a firm hires a quard it is
able to purchase insurance at a lower rate and would therefore be more likely
to have insurance coverage; a positive coefficient could reflect the influence
of protection on insurance.

— 35 —

Tjsjna the dollar amount that the firm was reimbursed by the insurance company after a burglary took place (At1T3INS) should avoid this

problem. Since the reimbursement took olace several months ago, ArITBINS

can he treated as an exogenous variable referring to an insurance decision
made by the firm in a previous period. GD (PSER) would not have any effect on AMTBINS as long as the firm did not have a guard (protective

service) at the time it purchased the burglary insurance policy. While
ANTT3INS

does

not really measure the amount of coverace the firm had since

the loss could have been less than the face value of the nolicy, it does
capture the effect of insurance on reducing the net loss to the firm.
Then if the value of the actual burqlary loss is held constant (BGLOS)

and a dummy variable for the presence of burqlary insurance is also used
(BINS), the coefficient on AMTBINS should be negative since it provides

information for the firm on how much it can exmect to he reimbursed if

future burglary losses occur, Of course, if the firm had a guard (or
protective service) at the time of last year's burglary then it may have
been more likely to have insurance coverage and would therefore report a
larger reimbursement; this would bias the coefficient on N4TBINS towards

zero. Note that the testing of AMTBINS can only be done on the subset
of firms that had positive burglary losses.

6. Other variables
Some other variables not specified in equation (11) are also added.
They are as follows:

.

— 36

REC:

—

Annual gross receipts in thousands of dollars.

REC2: Square of annual receipts.
URB:

Dummy

variable whiöh equals one if

the firm is

located in a metropolitan area of 50,000 or
more but not in a suburb; zero otherwise.
Dummy variable which equals one if the firm

GilT:

is located in a ghetto in a city of 50,000
or more; zero otherwise.

III. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS OF THE DEMAND FOR Pi)TECTI0N
Since

dichotomous

dummy dependent variables are

used to test equation

logit function must be employed.

33

(11) a

The logit model, which

is estimated by the method of maximum likelihood, specifies the probability that the firm hires a guard as:

=
G.

1

(21)

l+e—a-8x.

where X. is a vector of exogenous variables. Tables 3 and 4 contain the
results of the maximum likelihood estimation of equation (21) using GD

33A linear probability function cannot be employed because the usual
tests of a significance of the estimated coefficients cannot be used;
predicted values of some observations may lie outside the zero to one
range since a linear function is unbounded, and the residuals are not
homoskedastic. The logit function avoids these problems.

— 37 —

and PSER as the dependent variables. Analyzing these two tables simulta—
neously facilitates a comparison of the factors that determine the hiring

of a security guard and the subscription to a protective service. Insurance variables are excluded from the regression in Tables 3

and

since

4;

inclusion in the equation did not affect the other variables the
effect of insurance on the demand for protection is discussed later.
their

A. Endowed Loss, Endowment Probability, and the Effect

of Protective Devices on the Probability of a Loss

1. Endowed loss
In Tables 3 and 4 the firm's endowed loss is estimated by LOSS,

the

mean loss of other firms as described in Part II. Regressions 3.1, 3.2,
3.4

and

positive

4.1, 4.2, 4.4

use

the industry grouping

a

method. LOSS1 has

and significant34 effect in all the equations. When size of

firm and location are not held constant, an increase of $1,000 in the
endowed loss makes the firm 32 per cent more likely to hire a guard and

26 per cent more likely to subscribe to a protective service.35 When
size and location are held constant the partial effect of LOSS1 is reduced because size and location are used in the construction of the

34The significance level in regressions 3.2 and 3.4 is 12 per cent.
35These effects are computed by using the mean probability of hiring
a guard which is .059 and the mean probability of subscribing to a
protective service which is .069.

— 38 —

TABLE 3

Maximum Likelihood LOGIT Regressions
Dependent Variable GD (N = 1876)
(Asymptotic t-ratios in parentheses)

3.1

LOSS1
P ROB1

1887D—04

3.2

3.3

.8446D—05

3.4

8390D—05

(4.11)

(1.53)

(1.52)

.1296

• 8986D—O1
(2.44)

.8986D—01

(3.84)

(2.44)
.766 1D—05
(1.39)

PROBr

.1862
(4.25)

AVG1

.1527D—03

• 9750D—04

(4.24)

(2.37)

AVGr

9736D—04
(2.36)

.9723D—04
(1.46)

GDI

—. 2577D—04
(—1.91)

— . 3908D—04

• 6290D—02
(.45)

8568D—02

— . 7549D—02

—. 3773D—03

— . 9956D—03

— . 2807D—04

(—2.13)

EDUC

PUB

(—.33)

Yps

3619D—03
(1 .

STK

PCT

05)

• 3503D—04
(3.52)
—.

3084D—0l

(—.21)

PEC

c2

(.60)

(—2.94)

(—.52)

.7018D—02
(.47)

—. 1120D—02
(—.92)

3084D—03

.3548D—03

3247D—03

(.86)

(1.03)

(.90)

.86)

344 5D—04
(3.45)

.3416D—04

— . 2176D—01

— . 7476D—01

(—

.15)

(3.60)
C— .51)

3440D—04
(3.45)

—.2010D—01
(—.14)

.2343D—04

.2340D—04

(3.27)

(3.27)

—. 1247D—08
(—2.57)

(—2.57)

.3222D—01

GHT

(—1.91)

106].D—03
(.09)

(—

—. 1249D—08

URB

— . 2574D—04

2920D—O1

(2.34)

(1.78)

.1245D—01

• l204D—01
(.47)

(.49)

CRIME

.485 1D—05
(.34)

104.74

124.04

91.64

124.16

— 39 —

.

4

TABLE

Maximum Likelihood LOGIT Regressions
Dependent Variable PSER (N = 1896)
(Asymptotic t—ratios in parentheses)

LOSS1
PROB

1

4.1

4.2

• 1794D—04
(3.26)

.1080D—04
(1.67)

(1.65)

.2143

.1870

.1862

(5 .46)

(4.52)

(4.51)

LOS Sr

4.3

4.4

1068D—04

• 7108D—05
(1.19)

.2527
(5.03)

AVG1

.203 7D—03

.1580D—03

.1542D—03

(5.14)

(3.51)

(3.38)

AVGr

.1109D—03
(1.50)

GDI

—. 1711D—04
(—1.13)

• 2286D—01
(1.46)

272 9D—02
(.17)

.1103D—01

—. 1705D—03
(—.14)

— . 7650D—03

.7l78D—03

— . 1778D—02

— . 7671D—03

— . 8117D—03

(—.93)

EDUC

2176D—01
(1.41)

PUB
YRS

(—1.58)

STK

6617D—04
(5.31)

PCT

— . 1559D—04

—. 2643D—04
(—1.74)

— . 1396D—04

—. 1228D—0l
(—

.07)

REC

(—1.02)

(—.61)

(—1.63)

6399D—04
(5.27)

—. 1298D—01
(—.08)

(.58)

GHT

(—1.32)

— . 7262D—03

— . 6944D—03

(—1.50)

(—1.39)

• 6464D—04
(5.24)

— . 8258D—01
.49)

6431D—04
(5.45)

—. 2957D—02
(—.02)

2129D—04

• 2097D—04
(2.36)

URB

(.67)

(2.40)

—. 1405D—08
(—2.27)

—. 1431D—08
(—2.31)

2568D—0].
(1.65)

3943D—02
(.22)

5021D—01

5220D—01

(2.14)

(2.22)

CRIME

3570D—04
(2.29)

177.58

190.52

150.32

195.76

.

— 40 —

endowed loss variable. From regressions 3.2 and 4.2, a $1,000 increase in
the endowed loss results in the firm being 14 per cent more likely to hire
a guard and 16 per cent more likely to subscribe to a protective service.
When the endowed loss is estimated via the regional method in regressions
3.3 and 4.3 its effect is, as predicted, much smaller than that of the

industry loss and, moreover, the effect is not significant. An increase
of $1,000 in the regional endowed loss, not holding size and location
constant, makes the firm only 13 per cent more likely to hire a guard and
10 per cent more likely to subscribe to a protective service; these effects are about two—fifths the size of the industry loss effects.

2. Endowment probability
In Tables 3 and 4 the firm's endowment probability is estimated by

PROB, the incidence of crime among "similar" firms. As shown in (19) the
coefficients on PROB overestimate the true effects of the endowment prob-

ability. Choosing values for y within the acceptable range
0 < 1 + y AVG < 1

enables one to compute the true effects. The largest

acceptable value for y under the industry grouping method is

-

.0011

while for the regional method it is f—.0022. For comparative purposes,
the value - .001 is used to compute all the estimated effects of the
endowment probability.

When size and location are not held constant an increase of ten

percentage points in the industry e (PROB') makes the firm 20 per cent
more likely to hire a guard and 29 per cent more likely to subscribe to

— 41 —

a protective service. Holding size and location constant the effects are
reduced to 14 per cent and 25 per cent, respectively. All of these co-

efficients are significant. Using the regional method to measure the
endowment probability, with size and location not held constant, we find
that an increase of ten percentage points in

makes the firm 29 per

cent more likely to hire a guard and 34 per cent more likely to sub-

scribe to a protective service. As predicted in Part II the regional

probability is a better measure of e than the industry probability but
both still have

significant effects on the firm's protection decisions.

Unlike the results for the endowed loss, both industry and region are
important determinants of the firm's endowment probability.

3. Effect of protective devices on reducing
the probability of a loss
As predicted by equation (18) in Part II, the coefficients on AVG
have positive and significant effects on the probability that the firm
hires a guard and on the probability that it subscribes to a protective

service. The ratio of the coefficient on AVG to the coefficient on PROB
is an estimate of A which is that portion of the effect of protection
expenditures on the probability of a loss,measured across cells, that is

independent of e (see equation (15) in Part II]. Table 5 shows the
estimates of A from Tables 3 and 4, the estimates of , and the full ef-

fect of protection on the probability of a loss when I = — .001 and
is computed as in equation (16). It should be emphasized that B reflects
the reduction in p due to expenditures on protective devices.

S

— 42 —

From Table 5 we find, using the industry method,that if a

firm that

has already made outlays of $79 on protective devices (the mean AVG1)
spends one more dollar on a device it can reduce its probability of a

loss by approximately .0015. Ignoring diminishing marginal productivity,
an expenditure of $100 would reduce the probability by fifteen percentage

points. With the regional method, however, an expenditure of $100 is
estimated to reduce the probability of a loss by only ten percentage

points. The regional effects are smaller because of the strong positive
correlation (p =

.61) between PROB' and AVG1. While the theory predicts

that an increase in protection expenditures reduces the probability of
a loss, i.e. A is negative, I have measured A across regional groups,
and across groups the higher the probability the higher will be protec-

tion expenditures in that group. This is similar to the problem of
estimating the effect of public protection expenditures on crime rates

in a cross-section of states. While protection expenditures reduce
crime, if crime is high expenditures will be high, thus resulting in a

positive correlation. A positive bias therefore exists in the estimation
of A with

AVG'

the regional method. Since the

is only .28 larger absolute values

correlation between PROB' and

for A are

estimated with the

industry method.
4.

Elasticity

Table

of Le vs. elasticity of

6 summarizes the elasticities of GD and PSER with respect to

the endowed loss and the endowment probability which are measured by the

loss experience of other firms. The probability elasticity is computed

— 43 —

TABLE 5

Estimated Effects of Protective Devices on Reducing
the Probability of a Loss

A

Regression

— •oo

=

Industry Method
10.1

—

.0012

—

.0017

10.2

—

.0011

—

.0016

11.1

—

.0010

—

.0015

11.2

—

.0008

—

.0013

10.3

—

.0005

—

.0010

11.3

—

.0004

—

.0009

Regional Method

.

— 44 —

TABLE

Loss

6

and Probability Elasticities

t—value

on
Regression

Le

6e

10.1

.23

1.07

2.75

10.2

.10

.73

1.98

10.3

.09

1.38

3.91

11.1

.19

1.48

4.77

11.2

.11

1.27

4.07

11.3

.08

1.60

4.75

(EPe_CLe)

— 45 —

at

the mean e36 In all the regressions

is significantly larger than

CLe. As indicated in Part I (see footnote 19) this result can be consistent with our original assumption that firms act as if they are risk
neutral or risk averse.

5. The firm's own loss experience
In Table 7 the estimates of the endowed loss and the endowment probability are modified to consider the influence of the firm's own loss

experience in the previous twelve months. While RELDEV is statistically
significant in both regressions 7.1 and 7.3 its economic significance is

minimal. If a firm had a loss that was 50 per cent above the mean loss
of the group then it is only about 5 per cent more likely to hire a guard

and 6 per cent more likely to subscribe to a protective service. These
(1) Simul-

small effects could be due to one or both of the following:

taneity exists since a firm that currently has a guard (protective service)
may also have had him last year and this firm would therefore be very
likely to have reported zero or very low losses for the year.

(2) The

firm does not consider the value of its own loss a good estimate of the

value of future losses. By averaging the losses incurred by similar firms

36

e

CGD, p =

—p
b1

=

b1
—

GD

on PROB is —
1 +

quantity - AAVG

—
y AVG

GD
SO

—.
l+yAVG

PROB -

AVG

A

The observed coefficient

in order not to understate the elasticity the

must be added to PROB.

.

— 46 —

TABLE 7
LOGIT Regressions Analyzing the Effects of the Firm's Own
(Asymptotic t-ratios in parentheses)

PSER

GD

LOSS1

PROB'
RELDEV

Loss History

7.1

7.2

7.3

7.4

.8314D—05

.7957D—05

.1047D—04

.1030D—04

(1.50)

(1.50)

(1.61)

(1.57)

.8269D-0].
(2.22)

.3677D—0l

.1752

.1283

(1.00)

(4.19)

(2.92)

.6368D—02

.].887D—02
(.48)

.8097D—02

.4062D—02

(2.39)

(1.11)

(1.85)

POSLOS

.4943D—01

.5295D—01

(3.55)

(3.43)

.

AVG1

GDI
EDUC

.9851D—04

.1035D—03

.1575D—03

.1574D—03

(2.40)

(2.52)

(3.50)

(3.47)

—. 2588D—04
(—1.91)

— . 2923D—04

.7869D—02

.4722D—02

(.55)

PUB
YRS

PCT
REC

R5C2
URB

GHT

N

(.33)

— . 1545D—04
(—1.01)

— . 1944D—04

.2355D—01

.1829D—01

(1.50)

(1.15)

(—1.26)

— . 9472D—03
(—.82)

— . 8663D—03

(—.74)

— . 8081D—03
(—.64)

—. 5305D—03
(—.42)

.3363D—03

.2366D—03

—.7495D—03

—.8901D—03

(—1.51)

(—1.77)

(.94)

STK

(—2.14)

(.66)

.3294D—04

.3200D—04

.6271D—04

.6227D—04

(3.28)

(3.22)

(5.18)

(5.21)

—. 2348D—01

—. 2645D—01
(—.18)

—. 3402D—01
(—.23)

—. 5092D—02
(— .03)

(— .14)

.2341D—04

.2465D—04

.2123D—04

.2298D—04

(3.26)

(3.33)

(2.37)

(2.49)

—. 1237D—08

— . 1308D—08

(—2.54)

(—2.62)

.3303D—01

.3479D—01

(2.40)

(2.51)

.8467D—02

—.7178D—03

—. 1395D—08
(—2.25)

—. 1490D—08

.2732D—0].
(1.75)

.2902D—01

.4902D—01

.3851D—01
(1.61)

(—2.33)

(1.85)

(.33)

(—.03)

(2.39)

126.95

139.86

195.49

207.62

1876

1876

1896

1896

— 47 —

this

particular firm obtains a less stochastic estimate of its endowed

S

loss.

One way to test these alternative hypotheses is to include the
dummy variable POSLOS in the estimate of the endowment probability as

is done in regressions 7.2 and 7.4. These regressions indicate that if
a firm had a loss last year it is 88 per cent more likely to hire a
guard now and 84 per cent more likely to currently subscribe to a pro-

tective service.37 Obviously even if simultaneity is present it does
not affect the strong positive influence of the firm's having been

victimized. But the dollar loss that the firm incurred has no effect
in regressions 7.2 and 7.4 since RELDEV is not significant there.
This indicates that the absolute value of the loss incurred last year
is not a good estimate of the firm's future loss but the mere occurrence
of the crime is an important determinant of the firm's endowment prob38

ability.

Since

we have GD = a + b 1 POSLOS + b2

(POSLOS* L — LOSS1)
+
LOSS'

where L is the dollar loss for those firms with a loss, the full effect
b
2 L
of POSLOS is b +

LOSS1

381n regression 7.2, PROB1 is no lonqer significant. This could be due
to its correlation with POSLOS which is .4. However in regression 7.4,

PROB' is still quite significant. Since RELDEV is not 4gnificant in
reqressions 7.2 and 7.4 and RELDEV is a funrtion of LOSS', the effects of
LOSS'

in

these regressions are not significant. Because RELDEV adds

nothing to the regressions, however, the true effects of LOSS1 should not
be reduced by addinq an insignificant coefficient.

.

— 48 —

B.

Public Expenditures and Crime Rates

1. Public expenditures
The true effect of public protection expenditures on the demand for
private guards and protective services can only be measured if the crime

rate is held constant as is done in regressions 3.4 and 4.4. These
regressions indicate a public expenditure elasticity of -.32 for GD and
— .43 for PSER. The relatively larger and more significant effect for
PSER can be explained by the different nature of the tasks that the two

types of security personnel perform. A quard can work as a night watchman and thereby reduce the probability of burglary and vandalism. Or he
may be assigned to work inside the store or plant in order to protect

against shoplifting and employee theft. In the latter role his substitutability with public policemen is almost nil since he performs a task that

could not possibly be performed by the policeman on the beat. A protective service, however, acts in a very similar capacity to that of
public policemen since it patrols outside the store, and therefore its
primary responsibility is to reduce the occurrence of burglary and/or
vandalism.

However, even though CRIME is held constant, PUB is not really

significant in either regression 3.4 or 4439 A possible explanation
of these coefficients could be that the level of per capita public

have also used the number of policemen per capita to measure public protection and its effects were insignificant. See Bartel (1974).

— 49 —

expenditures

or the number of policemen per capita does not correctly

measure the amount of public protection the firm receives. This problem was documented in a recent study of the police forces in several
large cities.

40

For example, the study found that although the New

York City police force increased by 20,000 men over the last two
decades, or from 1.39 policemen per 1,000 inhabitants to 3.92 policemen per 1,000 inhabitants, the number of police officers actually out

on patrol remained constant over the same period. Similar disparities
were reported in other large cities. To the extent that time series
coefficients and cross—sectional coefficients are comparable, this
phenomenon can explain why a firm will not necessarily reduce its
level of private protection when public expenditures increase.

2. Crime rates
The coefficients on CRIME are noticeably different in regressions

3.4 and 4.4. CRIME has no effect on the probability that the firm will
hire a guard but it has a positive and significant effect on the prob-

ability that it will subscribe to a protective service. There are two

reasons for these diverse coefficients. First, since only a fraction
of the total property crime rate (about 43 per cent of burglary,

40See David Burnham, "1,000 of the City's 31,000 Policemen Are Out
in Radio Cars at Any One Time," The New York Times, February 18, 1974
for a description of the survey's findings.

.

— 50

—

25 per cent of robbery, 10 per cent of larceny)41 refers to crimes against
business, firms would not use CRIME as a very reliable measure of their

own endowment probabi].ity.42 A firm would not be willing to commit itself
to the employment of a full-time guard based on imperfect information but
it may be more

to

willing to make a small outlay in the

form of a subscription

a protective service. Second, since CRIME primarily measures crimes

against non—businesses, household demand for protection will rise when

CRIME rises. One type of protection households could seek is that provided by a protective service and a substantial household demand for this

service could facilitate a firm's subscription to it. If a private patrol
car will be dispatched to police a neighborhood only if there are a certain number of subscribers in that neighborhood then an increase in crime
against both residences and businesses would enable them to agree on the
hiring of a protective service for their neighborhood.

C. Size of Firm
Evaluating the effect of REC at its mean value, we find from regressions 3.2 and 4.2 that a firm with gross sales of approximately $1.5

41These percentages are based on information contained in Table 18 of
the 1967 Uniform Crime Reports. This residence/business breakdown was
only done for 673 cities with a population of at least 25,000 but the
figures can serve as general guidelines for the U.S. as a whole.

421n fact, the elasticity of PSER withrespect to CRIME is only .66
while the elasticity with respect to PROB' (evaluated at e) in regression 4.4 is 1.26.

— 51 —

million

would be 38 per cent more likely to hire a guard than one with

gross sales of $1/2 million but it would only be 28 per cent more likely

to subscribe to a protective service. Even though LOSS and PROB are held
constant in the regression and REC is used to construct these variables,
REC still has a positive effect because REC is only stratified into three

groups to compute LOSS and PROB. The coefficient on REC reflects the
complete size variation and thus the influence of size on dollar losses.
The theoretical model predicted, however, that small firms would be more
likely to subscribe to protective services since they expect a smaller
loss (everything else held constant) and would not require their own

guard. Although REC has a positive and significant effect on PSER, the
effect is 35 per cent smaller than the effect of REC on the demand for
guards; this would be consistent with the theoretical prediction.

D. Location of Firm
The effect of being in an urban area and/or in a ghetto can be

analyzed as follows: Since ghetto firms must be in urban areas, the
ghetto dummy is actually an interaction term, i.e.

P. =a+b 1URB+b URB*GHT+
....
2

(22)

Then the effect of being in an urban area is

=

+ b2

GIlT

(23)

.

— 52 —

and the effect of being in a ghetto is

::

= b2

(24)

Therefore, b1 measures the effect of being in an urban nonghetto area
versus a nonurban area; b2 measures the effect of being in a ghetto
versus an urban nonghetto area; and (b1 + b2) is the effect of being in

a ghetto versus a nonurban area. From regressions 3.4 and 4.4 where
CRIME is held constant we find that (1) ghetto firms are more likely to
hire both guards and protective services than are nonurban firms; (2)
ghetto firms are more likely to subscribe to protective services than
are urban nonghetto firms but they are not more likely to hire guards;
and (3) urban nonqhetto firms are more likely to hire guards than are
nonurban firms but they are not more likely to subscribe to protective
services.

Ghetto firms are more likely to hire both guards and protective
services than are nonurban firms because they face higher endowment

probabilities and higher endowed losses from crime. This effect is
i
i
i
not picked up in the LOSS and PROB coefficients because LOSS and

PROB' only distinguish between urban and nonurban firms without any
special provision for ghetto firms; and ghetto firms have significantly

higher endowment probabilities than urban nonghetto firms.43 The

43From Table 10, regression 10.3, we see that ghetto firms are 73
per cent more likely to incur a loss than urban nonghetto firms.
However when the sante equation is run just on those firms with a loss
and the dollar value of the loss is used as the dependent variable,
GilT is not significant.

— 53 —

magnitude of (b1 + b2) is about the same in both equations; ghetto firms
are 70 per cent more likely to hire guards and 78 per cent more likely
to subscribe to protective services than are nonurban firms.
The fact that ghetto firms are more likely to subscribe to protective services but not more likely to hire guards than are urban nonghetto

firms is due to the size distribution of surroundina firms. Ghetto
firms are more homogenous in size than urban nonghetto firms.44 A small
ghetto firm has many other small firms in its neighborhood that also need
protection but whose size precludes them from hiring their own guard;
these firms would be anxious to subscribe to a protective service that

could patrol the entire area. The small urban nonghetto firm, on the
other hand, does not necessarily have many other small firms nearby with
whom it could hire a protective service; it is not unusual, for example,
for a small retailer to be located on the same block with many large
department stores that hire their own full-time guards.
The reason that urban nonghetto firms are more likely to hire guards
but not more likely to hire protective services than are nonurban firms
relates to the urban nonghetto firm's higher probability of employee

44The standard deviation of REC for ghetto firms is 339,380 and the
coefficient of variation is 2.1. The standard deviation for urban non—
ghetto firms is 2,753,558 and the coefficient of variation is 3.

.

— 54 —

theft.45
URB

is

When CRIME

is

not held constant (see regressions 3.2 and 4.2),

significant for both forms of protection; obviously LOSS' and

PROB! do not completely capture the urban firm's vulnerability to crime.
The addition of CRIME provides more information on the urban firm's
probability of external theft (i.e. burglary, vandalism, robbery) and

thereby weakens the urban dummy in both regressions 3.4 and 4.4. However, CRIME does not measure employee theft and PROB measures the probability of

crime, not specifically employee theft. URB therefore

captures the higher incidence of employee theft among urban nonghetto
firms than nonurban firms and the demand for guards among urban non—
ghetto firms will rise; since protective services do not affect employee theft URB is insignificant in regression 4.4.

E. Other Independent Variables in Tables 3 and 4
GDI is negative and significant in all the regressions in Table 3

because of the own price effect. While it is negative in all the
regressions in Table 4 it is not significant there and this is probably due to the Census category, "guards and watchmen," which was

used. Protective services are more properly classified as private
patrolmen but in the Census the wage rates of private patrolmen are

45The observed probability of employee theft among urban nonghetto
firms is .081 while for nonurban firms it is .056. These numbers are
significantly different from one another at the 10 per cent level of
significance.

— 55 —

indistinguishable

from those of public patrolmen.46 The inappropriate-

ness of GDI for protective services would therefore account for the
insignificant coefficients.

EDUC is never significant in any of the regressions in Tables 3

and 4. This implies that education does not increase the productivity
of guards and protective services. An alternative explanation of the
insignificant coefficient is that since EDUC is highly correlated with
the deflator used for GDI (P =

.7)

the deflator could in part be pick-

ing up the positive effect of EDUC.47 The problem arises from the fact
that the deflator is a wage, not a price index, and it therefore picks

up productivity effects due to educationacross states the education
of manufacturing workers would be highly correlated with the education
of guards.

STK is positive and significant in all regressions. This cannot
be interpreted as evidence of complimentarity between protective
devices and security personnel since the output of these factors of
production (they produce l-p) is not being held constant; PROB only

46While the guards and watchmen category also contains public guards,
68 per cent of the category are private guards, and, in fact, many
"public" guards can really be treated as private security workers since
they do not have public peace officer powers. In the policemen category,
however, 96 per cent of the workers are public policemen.
47When the wage rate of guards is not deflated by the index, EDUC is
significant. See Appendix D in Bartel (1974). However, this is not the
correct way to measure the price of guards and one can therefore not
rely on the EDUC coefficient from this regression. A state price index
is required for the proper estimation of these coefficients.

.

— 56 —

holds the endowment probability constant. The positive sign may merely
reflect a scale effect, i.e. a movement from isoquant to isoquant rather
than a movement

along a given isoquant.

Holding CRIME, URB, and GHT constant in regressions 3.4 and 4.4,
YRS has a positive but insignificant effect on the demand for guards
and a negative and almost significant effect on the demand for protec-

tive services. This indicates that an increase in the experience of
the entrepreneur raises his "output" productivity more than his "protection" productivity, and he reduces his time spent in protection.
He is then somewhat more likely to hire a guard but less likely to hire
a protective service because guards and entrepreneurial policing time
are, on balance, substitutes, while protective services and entrepreneurial time, are, on balance, complements (see

substitutability

foothote 17). The

between guards and the entrepreneur occurs because

they both operate inside the store (e.g. policing customers and employees)
or on the immediate grounds (e.g. checking gates to thwart burglars or

vandals). A protective service acts as a complement to the entrepreneur's policing time because (1) by patrolling outside during the day it
frees the entrepreneur to more effectively police his employees and customers inside and (2) since private patrol cars also respond to alarms
(triggered by burglars) that ring either inside the car or at the dispatch center the entrepreneur's time is required to maintain the effi—
ciency of the alarm system (i.e. he must periodically check to see if it
is working).

— 57 —

F.

The Relationship Between Protection and Insurance
Table 8 contains coefficients for the two insurance variables,

ANYINS and AMTBINS, each of which was added to the GD and PSER regres-

sions. Both coefficients on the dummy variable ANYINS are positive
and significant. Firms with insurance are 60 per cent more likely to
hire guards and 53 per cent more likely to subscribe to protective
services.

TABLE 8
Insurance Coefficients
(t—ratios in parentheses)

ANYINS

GD

PSER

.3569D—Ol

.3625D—0l

(2.37)

AMTBINS

.3217D—04
(.71)

(2.19)

—.1016D—04
(—.38)

This is a clear rebuttal of the moral hazard argument; of course the
causality could be in the opposite direction since a firm may have hired
a guard (protective service) in order to be able to purchase insurance.
When the continuous variable, ANTBINS, is used, insurance has no

effect on GD and PSER. The relationship between protection and the price
of insurance that was the basis for the positive signs on ANYINS no longer

exists because ANTBINS refers to last year's insurance. The more the

.

— 58 —

firm

was reimbursed last year the lower its expected net loss this year48

and hence the smaller its demand for guards and protective services. The
absence of significantly negative coefficients on AMTBINS is probably due
to serial correlation in the dependent variable (see discussion on paqe
35).

Table 9 contains coefficients for ANYINS which were obtained from

separate regressions run on urban and nonurban firms. For both dependent
variables, the positive effect of insurance is much larger for nonurban
firms

more

than for

likely

urban firms. Nonurban firms with insurance

are 82

per cent

to hire guards than nonurban firms without insurance while

urban firms with insurance are only 33 per cent more likely to hire guards

than urban firms without insurance. Similarly, nonurban firms with insurance are 69 per cent more likely to subscribe to protective services
than nonurban firms without insurance while urban firms with insurance are
only 28 per cent more likely to subscribe to protective services than
urban firms without insurance.

48Note that a dummy variable for the presence of burglary insurance is
in these two regressions so that AMTBINS is a proxy for the firm's
burglary insurance reimbursement this year.

included

— 59 —

.

TABLE 9

Effects of Insurance for Urban and Nonurban Firms

Urban

Coefficient Relative
Effect
(t—ratio)
GD

.3536D—0l

33%

.3622D—0l
(.94)

.2951D—0l

82%

(2.04)

(1.00)

PSER

Nonurban
Coefficient Relative
Effect
(t—ratio)

28%

.2779D—Ol

69%

(1.82)

These differential effects for urban and nonurban firms can be explained by the fact that urban insurance would tend to be less fair than

insurance in nonurban areas. This is because the higher incidence of
crime in urban areas would make the provision of insurance more costly,
i.e. processing and administrative costs would increase as the probability

of crime increased. The more fair the insurance is, the stronger the
complementary relationship between insurance and protection because the
firm is able to qet a larger benefit (in terms of a premium reduction)

from the reduction in the probability of a loss. When insurance is
actuarially fair, the firm gets the full benefit from protection.

IV. AN ANALYSIS OF THE INCIDENCE OF CRIME AGAINST BUSINESS
This article has been concerned with analyzing the determinants of

the demand for private protection manpower. The Small Business Administration data also make it possible, however, to analyze the factors that

.

— 60

—

determine which firms will incur a loss from crime in a twelve—month period.
In order to conduct such an analysis several new variables are defined as
follows:

SOUTH:

Dummy variable which equals one if the firm
is located in the South; zero otherwise.

NW:

Dummy variable which equals one if the firm
is owned or managed by a black; zero otherwise.

49

YRSGHT:

Interaction term

YRSURB:

Interaction

= YRS * GHT.

term = YRS

* URB.

A. Determinants of the Incidence of Crime
Table 10 contains LOGIT regressions

on the dummy dependent variable

POSLOS. The firm's total expenditures on protective devices, STK, are
held constant so that the regression can measure the partial effects of

the exogenous variables on the probability of victimization. It is
possible, however, that STK may contain some recent expenditures for
devices that were not present on the date that the crime occurred and
the firm may, in fact, have purchased the devices in response to this

89

per cent of the respondents to the SBA questionnaire were black.
and only 11 per
were managers. Therefore NW basically measures black ownership.

per cent of this group were the owners of the firms

cent

— 61 —

TABLE 10

LOGIT Regressions on the Probability of Victimization
Dependent Variable is POSLOS
(Asymptotic t-ratios in parentheses) N = 1941

REC

10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

• 8388D—04

• 7770D—04
(3.60)

.8323D—04

• 8346D—01
(3.85)

— . 4944D—08

—. 5206D—08

— . 5189D—08

(—3.38)

(—3.38)

(3.87)
REC2

—. 5252D—08

(—3.42)
URB

GHT

SOUTH

NW

• 8698D—01
(3.36)

.1173
(4.72)

.2937

.2904

.1917

(4.24)

(4.20)

(1.92)

— . 5853D—01
(—2.27)

•4393D—0l

— . 6168D—01

— . 6019D—01

(—2.40)

(—2.33)

.1114
(1.47)

2667D—04

1344D—04

(.02)

(.01)

•4497D—01
(.56)
— . 1407D—02
(—

.68)

• 3300D—04
(1.40)

• 9154D—04

(2.40)
YRS

• 8885D—01

(2.30)

CRIME

STK

6608D—01
(2.20)

(.54)

PUB

(—3.22)

(3.83)

2947D—02

(3.75)

1023D—03

(2.66)
.3032D—02

(3.87)

.8980D—04

(2.37)
3092D—02

(3.90)

— . 6136D—01
(—2.37)

5301D—01
(.66)

—. 1308D—02

(—.63)
3232D—04
(1.33)
• 9013D—04
(2.36)

.3420D—02
(3.57)

—. 1617D—02

YRSURB

(— .94)

7193D—02

YRSGHT

(1.27)

x2

110.92

90.74

112.77

115.01

.

— 62 —

crime; this would result in a simultaneous relationship. Since STK does
include past expenditures it is a better control for the level of protection in the previous twelve—month period than is GD or PSER since
we cannot be sure that a firm which had a quard on the interview date
also had him twelve months ago; simultaneity would be a more severe
problem with the latter variables.

1. Size of firm
Even when protection expenditures and location are held constant,

large firms are more likely to incur losses than are small firms. The
elasticity, however, is only .10; a firm with qross sales of $1 million
is 10 per cent more likely to incur a loss than a firm with gross sales

of $1/2 million. This sales effect could be due to one or more of the
following:

(1) the entrepreneur's efficiency in policing his firm de-

clines as firm size increases; (2) small firms may be less likely to
report a loss for fear of being branded a poor credit risk; large firms
often have internal sources of funds and they would therefore have less
to lose from the reporting of a crime; (3) criminals find larger firms
to be more attractive targets.

2. Location and region
Urban nonghetto firms are 21 per cent more likely to be victimized
than are nonurban firms while ghetto firms are 94 per cent more likely

to incur a loss than are nonurban firms. Moreover, ghetto firms are
73 per cent more likely to incur a loss than are urban nonghetto firms.

— 63 —

The regional dummy, SOUTH, has a negative and significant effect;
Southern firms are 14 per cent less likely to be victimized than firms

in other regions. This is because the South has a smaller supply of
property criminals than the other regions since illegal opportunities
are lower in the South.5° Even though CRIME is held constant the

significance of SOUTH indicates that CRIME is an underestimate of the
true rate of criminal offenses51 or at least of the true rate of
offenses aqairist firms.

3. Race of owner
The racial characteristics of the firm may affect its probability

of property crime victimization. Since blacks have lower legal opportunities than whites the proportion of property offenders among the black
population should be greater than the proportion among whites. Also
firms owned by blacks tend to be located in areas that are predominantly

50Median family income in the South is $8,079 while in the non—South it
(Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census,
is $10,200.
General Social and Economic CharacteristicS, 1970 Census of Population,
Table 135). I. Ehrlich (1973) has used this variable as a measure of
illegal payoffs in order to predict the rate of crime across states.
51The fact that the Uniform Crime Reports data understate the true
crime rate has been documented by surveys currently being carried out
by the Law Enforcement Assistance Administration. See David Burnhaxfl,
"Federal Surveys to Gauge Crime Levels in Big Cities," The New York
Times,January 27, 1974, p. 1 for a description of these surveys.
Preliminary results from the surveys indicate that the true crime rate
is at least twice that of the rate reported in the Uniform Crime Reports.

.

— 64 —

black.

Therefore, these firms would be close to a greater Supply of crim-

inal offenders than firms owned by whites. The dummy variable for ownership by a black, NW, is not significant, however, when GHT is held constant.
This is because GHT measures the firm's proximity to a greater supply of

criminal offenders. When GHT is dropped from the equation, as in regression 10.2, nonwhite firms are 27 per cent more likely to be victimized
than are white firms.

4. Public expenditures and crime rates
Even when CRIME is held constant PUB has no effect on whether or not

the firm is victimized. In Part III, although the coefficients were not
significant, PUB had a negative effect on the demand for guards and pro-

tective services with an elasticity ranging from -.32 to —.43. This
effect was said to be due to either a reduction in the firm's probability
of victimization and/or a reduction in the marginal product of private

security manpower. Since PUB has no effect on POSLOS in Table 10 this
implies that the negative coefficients in Part III were due to the
marginal product effect.
CRIME has a positive effect (significance level is 17 per cent) on

the firm's probability of victimization. In areas where the overall
crime rate is high a firm is more likely to be victimized because it
faces a greater supply of criminal offenders.

— 65 —

5.

Protection expenditures
STK was used in the regression as a control for the amount of pro-

tection the firm had when the loss took place. STK should have a negative sign since, everything else constant, an increase in protection

results in a decrease in the probability of victimization. In all the
regressions in Table 10, however, STK has a positive coefficient. This
is due to simultaneity; after the firm incurred a loss it added to its

stock of protection. Part of the simultaneity, however, is indirect.52

6. Years at present location
In regressions 10.1, 10.2, and 10.3, YRS has a positive and signifi-

cant effect. One possible explanation is that firms that have been at
their present location for a long time tend to be located in high—crime

areas. The true effect of YRS would be dependent upon the firm's being
located in an urban area or a ghetto and the regresssion requires interaction terms between YRS and UPS and between YRS and GHT, i.e.

521fl Part III we saw that STK had a positive and significant effect on
both GD and PSER. Moreover, POSLOS also had a positive and significant
effect, i.e. firms that incurred a loss during the previous twelve
months were more likely to have guards and/or protective services at the
time of the interview. To show that the positive and significant coefficients on STK in Table 10 are due to the above relationships, I
added a dummy variable, GDSER, which equals one if the firm has a guard
or protective service,to the regression. The result was that the coefficient on STK was reduced by 42 per cent and was no longer significant. See Bartel (1974), Table 25.

.

— 66 —

POSLOS =

a

+ b1 YRS +

b2

URB + b3 GHT
(25)

+ b4 YRSURB + b5 YRSGHT +

The true effect of YES can be written as:

a POSLOS

=

b1

+ b4 URB +

GHT

(26)

According to this hypothesis, b1 should be insignificant and b4 and b5
should be positive and significant; YES would be a proxy for the Undesirableness of a neighborhood given that the firm is in an urban (and

ghetto) area. This hypothesis is tested in regression 10.4. The coefficient on YES is still significant while the coefficients on YRSURB

and YRSGHT are not significant. Even if a firm is in a nonurban area
the longer it has been at its present location the more likely it is to

have been victimized. The fact that "old" firms are more likely to be
victimized than "young" firms is unrelated to the location of the firm.53
The most reasonable explanation of the YES coefficient is one or both

of the following. One, firms that have been at their present location for
longer periods of time are in old buildings that are most vulnerable to

53Moreover, even if we look just at the set of nonurban firms, i.e. let
GUT = URB = YRSGHT = YRSURB = 0, the positive effect of YES cannot be
attributed to crime in the area, because the youngest of the nonurban firms,
i.e. those in the suburbs (mean values for YES is 10.6 years for suburban
firms and 15.1 years for other nonurban firms), would have the highest
crime rates since they are closest to the urban areas and a large supply
of criminals.

— 67 —

crime.

In other words, YRS measures the private protection level inherent

in the physical plant, e.g. special lighting and display cases, more dur-

able doors and windows, etc. These forms of protection would not show
up in the expenditure variable, STK, since that variable only includes

alarms, locks, and gates. Young firms, would, on average, be in newer
buildings which would have been built with more of a concern for crime

deterrence than older buildings. Two, YRS proxies the experience of
the entrepreneur both in producing his output and protecting his firm.
The regression results indicate that even if the entrepreneur becomes
more efficient over time in self-protection, he becomes relatively more
efficient in output production arid therefore reduces his time spent in

self-protection. This reduction is so large that it outweighs the
original absolute increase in protection productivity.

B. Comparison of Incidence Results to an
Analysis of Household Victimization
My analysis of the determinants of the incidence of crime among firms
can be readily compared to Neil Komesar's study (1973) on the factors

affecting the incidence of household burglary. Komesar's important findings were that family income has a positive but insignificant effect on
victimization; nonwhite families are more likely to be victimized;
distance from the center city has a negative and significant effect; a
dummy for the Southern region is also negative and significant; and
families whose head is older are less likely to be victimized.

.

— 68 —

These results are generally consistent with my analysis of the
victimization of firms. Although aross sales had a statistically
significant effect in Table 10, the elasticity was only .10 which is

a relatively minor effect. NW was not significant when I held GHT
constant and Komesar's significant coefficient is probably due to his

inability to control for location in a ghetto. Nonurban firms, like
nonurban households, are less likely to be victimized. Also, firms
located in the South are less likely to be victimized as are house-

holds located in the South. Komesar's negative coefficient on age
was explained by his argument that older heads are more efficient in
self—protecting and that they spend more time at home (a taste effect)

which is a form of self-protection. The time at home argument is of
course not relevant for firms. My results for YRS are consistent with
the entrepreneur, like the family head, becoming more productive in

self-protection, but another factor is at work. The entrepreneur becomes relatively more productive in output production and he then reduces his time in self—protection so much that this outweighs the
original increase in his protection efficiency.

CONCLUSION
Before answering the three questions posed in the introduction to
this article it should be reiterated here that the analysis was able to
document the fact that protection expenditures reduce the incidence of

crime against firms. It was shown that if the average firm spent one

— 69 —

more dollar on protective devices its probability of a loss would fall by
.0015; a $100 expenditure would result in a drop of 15 percentage points.

The answers to our three main questions regarding the private sector's
demand for protection can be stated as follows:
One, firms respond rationally to real economic forces in making their
protection decisions in that they are strongly influenced by increases in
both the probability of a crime and the loss incurred from that crime.
Firms place relatively more weight on the probability of a loss occurring

rather than on the size of the anticipated loss. This implies that if
criminals were to become more efficient, i.e. more able to steal larger
amounts, firms would not react as strongly to this as they would to a
general increase in the number of criminal incidents.
Two, an increase in per capita public protection expenditures (or
in the number of policemen per capita) will reduce the demand for private security manpower, but this negative effect is not significant.
A strong negative effect is dependent upon the proper allocation of the

increased public expenditures and public manpower. In the last decade
much of the increased public spending has been used to hire some policemen to expand office staffs and to reduce working hours rather than to

increase police patrols. To the extent that a coefficient from a cross—
sectional analysis is a good predictor of a time—series coefficient, it
is therefore not surprising that a strong negative impact of public
spending on private guards and protective services is not estimated here.

.

— 70 —

Three, insurance is not being used as a substitute for private protection. Rather, firms are hiring guards or protective services in
order to be able to purchase insurance at lower prices. Giving a firm
the option to purchase insurance actually makes protection expenditures

a more attractive investment. The federal crime insurance programs that
are designed to supply insurance to firms in high—crime areas also reinforce this complementary relationship since they have established
stringent protective device requirements for the applicants.

References

Aichian,

.

Armen and DeinsetZ, Harold, "Production, Information Costs, and
Economic Organization," 2\merican Economic Review, Volume 62,
December 1972.

Burnham, David, "Federal Surveys to Gauge Crime Levels in Biq Cities,"
The New York Times, January 27, 1974.

_______

"1,000 of the City's 31,000 Policemen Are Out in Radio Cars at
Any One Time," The New York Times, February 18, 1974.

Ehrlich, Issac, "Participation in Illegitimate Activities," Journal of
Political Econo1, Volume 81, May/June 1973.
and Becker, Gary S., "Market Insurance, Self—Insurance and
Self—Protection," Journal of Political Econoy, Volume 80,
July 1972.
Kakalik, James and Wildhorn, Sorrel, Private Police in the United States,
Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation, 1971.
Komesar, Neil, "A Theoretical and Empirical Study of Victims of Crime,"

Journal of a1 Studies, Volume 2, June 1973.
Ozenne, Tim, "The Economics of Bank Robbery," Journal of Legal Studies,
Volume 3, January 1974.
Silver, Morris and Auster, Richard, "Entrepreneurship, Profit and Limits
on Firm Size," Journal of Business, Volume 42, July 1969.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Detailed
tics, 1970 Census of Population, Final Report PC(l)-D,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1972.
General Social and Economic Characteristics, 1970 Census of
Population, Final Report PC(i)-Cl, Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1972.

______ "Governmental Finances in 1967-68," GF68, No. 5, Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1969.

Historical Statistics on Governmental Finances and Employment,
1967 Census of Governments, Volume 6, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printinq Office, 1969.

S

References (concluded)

U.S. Department of Commerce, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1970,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1970.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, "Federal Crime Insurance Manual," Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971.
U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Crime in the
United States, Uniform Crime Reports for the United States,
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967, 1970.
U.S. Law Enforcement Assistance Administration and U.S. Bureau of the Census,
Expenditure and Employment Data for the Criminal Justice System:
1970-71, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1973.
U.S. Small Business Administration, Crime Against Small Business, A Report
Transmitted to the United States Senate, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1969.

