                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE VARIANCES OF REGRESSION COEFFICIENT ESTIMATES
                   USING AGGREGATE DATA


                      Roy E. Welsch*
                      Edwin Kuh*




                    Working Paper No.     60




COMPUTER RESEARCH CENTER FOR ECONOMICS AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
          National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                    575 Technology Square
                Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

                         October 1974




                Preliminary: not for quotation

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
numbers for comments only. They should not be quoted without
written permission.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for
approval by the Board of Directors.

*NBER Computer Research Center and Massachusetts Institute of
 Technology. Research supported in part by National Science
 Foundation Grant GJ-1154X3 to the National Bureau of Economic
 Research, Inc.
                                                                        S
                          Abstract

This paper considers the effect of aggregation on the variance of
parameter estimates for a linear regression model with random
coefficients and an additive error term. Aggregate and micro
variances are compared and measures of relative efficiency are
introduced. Necessary conditions for efficient aggregation procedures
are obtained from the Theil aggregation weights and from measures
of synchronization related to the work of Grunfeld and Griliches.




                                                                        .




                                                                        .
                            Contents


1.   Introduction                                      1


2.   The Regression Model                              3


3.   Variance Properties of the Aggregate Estimator    7


4. The Structure of ()1                               11


5. Limiting Properties of Macrovariances              12

6. Comparisons of Micro and Macro Data                17

References                                            20
1. Introduction

     In economics and other social sciences we are often confronted by

aggregate (macro) data with little hope of recovering all of the micro

data used to obtain the aggregate. In other cases we can obtain some of

the micro data, for instance individual company data for firms listed on

the stock exchanges, and then we must consider whether to use the limited

micro data or the aggregate data.

     It is also possible to obtain representative bodies of micro data in

order to analyse their aggregation properties with techniques to be

developed here. In this way, it should be possible to canvass a broad

range of situations and (empirically) arrive at a general understanding

of how aggregation influences estimates from aggregative data, since

econometricians are frequently obliged to use aggregates (e.g., in macro

model building) when micro data are unavailable.

     In an earlier paper (Kuh (1974)) it was shown under certain assump-

tions that the variances of the estimated macro coefficients of a parti-

cular regression model decrease as the number of individuals in the aggre-

gate increases. This suggests that in some cases it is plausible that the

aggregate data rather than the limited micro data should be used for

estimation.

     In this paper we expand the class of regression models considered

and sharpen the results obtained in Kuh (1974). We also propose a measure

of the relative efficiency of aggregation and examine in more detail what

conditions should hold in order to make aggregate estimates useful competi-

tors to estimates obtained from limited micro data.

     The results presented are related to those of Theil (1968 and 1971)

and by Swamy (1971, pp. 15—16) in somewhat more general form, who indicated
                                  2


                                            of a certain macro equation with
that the population coefficient variances

random micro coefficients could tend to zero as the aggregate grows, whereas
                                                                                   S
we treat a more complete model as well as its
                                              estimation properties. At

                                                    inequalities relating to
the end of this paper, we derive some interesting

the aggregation weights of Theil (1954).

     Grunfeld and Griliches (1960) have compared the power and degree of

'explanation'1 obtained from micro data with that obtained from aggregate

                                                       variances rather
data. Our approach emphasizes estimated coefficient

than explanatory power, but we are able to show that the grouping or

"synchronization" effect first noticed by Grunfeld and Griliches continues

to play an important role.

     Feige and Watts (1972) have studied the problems of a data collecting

organization which is trying to protect privacy by partial cross-sectional

aggregation of data for individuals to the state level, and trying to mini-

mize the information loss at the same time. While the problems we attack are

related to the use of aggregate data, rather than creating the aggregates,
                                          recommend have proven useful to us.
 some of the procedures Feige and Watts

      Aigner and Goldfeld (1974) consider the problems of estimation and

 prediction when the independent variables can be measured more accurately

 with aggregate data than with micro data. In the beginning of their paper
                                                  the case of no error in the
 Aigner and Goldfeld derive several results for

 independent variables. The results in our paper are generalizations to
                                                        than two micro units,
 the case of more than one independent variable, more

 and to a model with stochastic parameter variation.
                                                         where substantially all
      It is important to emphasize that in a situation

 of the micro data is available, aggregation is not particularly appealing

 when the performance criterion is the variance of the estimated coefficient.
                                                            applied to the micro
 In such cases maximum likelihood and related procedures

 data use information that is ignored when estimates are based in the aggregate.
                                                3
 2.     The Regression Model

         The micro data is assumed to be centered in order to avoid purely

 technical details in later sections. We have, for i=l,... ,N:

                                       T
                   a T x 1 vector with E
                                               t=l
                                                     y.
                                                      1
                                                                0, and

                                                T
                    a T x K matrix with              x.        = 0 for £=1,... ,K.
                                                      it2
                                               t=l

 For the micro equations, we assume the existence of the regression
 structures




(2.1)       it =    •-it--it   +
                                   Ejt                         i=l,2,...,N
                                                               t=l,2,... ,T

where
                    is the dependent variable,

             it is a 1 x K vector of nonstochastic "explanatory" variables,

             it is a K x 1 vector of regression parameters,


             Ejt
                    is   the additive "error' component,

and

             a.             = 0


             b.                    =         where   s    is   the Kronecker delta. For each i we

                   allow               0 only for a set of subscripts of j having no more

                   than L1 elements where for N sufficiently large, L1 < N, and where

                   L1 is functionally independent of N. When only j =                i   is included

                   in each set of subscripts we have the special case of un-

                   correlated errors, i.e. E(ltEJ5) =

             c.          is the realization of a multivariate wide—sense
                   stationary      stochastic process with E(1t) =             and

(2.2)              E(i31t-i3)(t+5-)' =         r1(s).          For each i we allow the

                   elements of r1(s) to be non-zero only for a set of
                                  4



              subscripts j having no more than L2 elements where for

              N sufficiently large, L1 c N, and L1 is functionally

              independent of N. Of course j =         i   is always included in

              this set and when only j =     i    is included we have the

              special case of jt and             uncorrelated for i     j.


          d. jt and       are uncorrelated for all s and t and i and j.

               For each i this model is related to that proposed by

               Burnett and Guthrie (1970).


     The above assumptions require comment. (2.2a) is a standard assump-

tion in regression analysis that we retain here. (2.2b) permits some

contemporaneous correlation in the additive error variance among indivi-

duals and allows these variances to differ across micro units.

      (2.2c) allows for what, in principle, could be a complex autocor-

related random process in the micro coefficients. Relaxation of the

assumption that the population micro parameters are fixed for all time

represents a substantial increase in realism. Individual firms or persons

may often react according to a stable underlying set of parameters, but

that behavior often departs from its basic (i.e. average) modus operandi in

more complicated ways than can be represented by additive errors. Some cor-

relation among the micro random coefficient processes is permitted. This

should be sufficient to allow e.g., for geographic interactions, or taste

dependence among individuals. However, where strong oligopolistic depen-

dence exists among firms the condition governing correlation among para-

meter vectors could easily be violated. In general, however, there does
                                            5




not appear to be a greater departure from reality in this instance than

in other assumptions made in the estimation of economic or social behavior

relationships.

     Finally (2.2d) asserts that the two sources of randomness are Un-

correlated, a proposition that is convenient and does not appear to be a

particular cause for concern.

     In summary, the random coefficient model allows for much richer

behavioral variations that should be considered in an aggregation context.

Since the"-e are two sources of random variation which are assumed to be

independent, results from the following analysis hold for either alone,

or both. Thus the reader can choose which aspects are most appealing for

his immediate estimation concerns.

     The above model overlaps with the one considered by Aigner and GoldS-

feld (1974) when K =   1,       N = 2   and r(s) 0 for all s, i and j. Our

assumption that             =      then implies that it =    for all i and t.       Hence

in the non-stochastic parameter case we do not allow           to vary among the

micro units. Aigner and Goldfeld relax this assumption and consider the

implication of              in their special non-stochastic parameter model.
                                                        N                N
                                                              and   =
     The macro data will be represented by Y =                                X1.
                                                       i=l              i=l

Throughout what follows we shall assume that X is of full rank. We

 propose to estimate    by


 (2.3)     b= (X1X)lX1V

Using an argument flaltj10ULl1ne:)flI1.&9.l io ha\'L
                                            6




                        N               N               N
(2.4)        E(Yt) =
                       il    E(yt) =
                                       il   it E(t) +   il   E(ct)



                        N
                  =    E x.
                         —it—
                              =   X
                                  —t—
                       i—i



which implies that E(Y) =

        Given the complicated regression structure, the estimator in (2.3)

is certainly open to improvement. Under simplifying assumptions there are

operational methods for an improved estimate of the micro parameters.

Details are available in Rosenberg [1973a,b].

        We chose to look at a simple estimator, ordinary least squares, for

two reasons. First, we are primarily interested in studying aggregation

and second, we feel that given the present state of the theory, a lot of

data will still be analyzed using ordinary least squares.
                                        7




3. Variance      Properties of the Aggregate Estimator
       For each N we can compute the covariance matrix of b, denoted by !N(b).

We are interested in finding conditions so that the elements of (b) will

remain bounded (or go to zero) as N increases. Let        be the T x KT matrix




           .il

                       i2
 z.=                            23  1




                                                     iT
and set



                       il                      Lii


                                                          *=    :

                       iT                      EIT



              = (Xlx)x

Then
                   N
(3.1)       y = E (z.13.    +
                i=l     1       1




and

            (-) = G
(3.2)
                        (1ii*)          +
                                                 8




        It   is now convenient to define the KT x KT matrix




                              r(O)                   r(T-l)
                                                                  i,j,=l,2,... ,N
                              r(T-l)         r(T-2) O)
which represents the covariance structure of the stochastic process described
in (2.2c). If we use assumptions b, c,i d of (2.2) then



                                             =
(3.3)
                          =
                                                 [LV..z'.G'   +




Since (b) is a covariance matrix, the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality implies
that in order to obtain bounds on the magnitude of the elements of (b)

we need only examine the diagonal elements.



Theorem 1.       If




               (a) sup x1 <M1
                      all     1

(3.4)                 l<9<K
                      l<t<T

                                         <
               (b)    sup
                      all
                                   V..
                                         —M2
                      1 <p<TK
                      1   <q<T K


               (c)    sup
                      all     ij
then
                                                   9




(3.5)     [(b)] <           [BT + E +


where B and E are constants independent of N, the subscript 2 designates
                                                                                N
a typical explanatory variable or its coefficient and a2(N) =                    E a./N.
                                                                                i=1


Proof. Let             denote the vector whose components are the absolute value

of the components of             the th row of (x'xYX' , and ] denote the T                T

matrix with each component equal to 1. Conditions (a) and (b) of (3.4)

imply that


(3.6)                       uijj)pqI <B'

             1p<T
             l<q<T




                                i' +
where B' is a function of M1 and M2. Now


                        =                                                  +E

and

 (3.8)
                                         =             tr

                     <NB tr 1la'ii9!

 with B   B4L),.




 But by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality



 (3.9)       tr lii'   )I
                       (\
                             L9''l
                                     =   [
                                              T
                                              E
                                             t=l
                                                   l'l],        <T
                                                                      T

                                                                     t=l

 and


 (3.10)            ()2 =                                    =
                                                                ('
                                      10




Returning to the second term of (3.7) we have


              N              N
            ( a
             •i=1
                      ÷ 2
                            1<3
                                  a)(X'X) <   (No2(N) +



                      = N(a2(N) +


where E =           The inequality (3.5) follows immediately and the proof
            M3L1.
of Theorem 1 is complete.

     Thus we have shown that under rather plausible conditions we can

examine (b) by looking at N(X'XY. Condition (3.4a) merely states

that all elements of the explanatory variables should be bounded, (3.4b)

imposes the same mild restriction on the covariance structure of the

stochastic processes generating the it and (3.4c) places an upper

bound on the micro equation additive error variance.
                                        11




4. The Structure of

        From the above discussion it is clear that N(X'X) plays a crucial

role in determining the reduction in the estimated parameter variances

that might be obtained from aggregation. We can always compute N(X'XY

but it is useful to see what conditions imposed on                    imply about

the structure of the micro data. Let            =    l,...,K   denote the columns

of X.    (Recall that all the data are centered.) We shall use S to denote
 T
 E           (it is assumed that S > 0 for all 2),        to denote the error
t=l
      Xt/T                                            S
variance for the regression of X2 on the remaining K-l explanatory macro-

variables and R the corresponding multiple correlation. From page 166

of Theil (1971) we have that



(4.1)        (xxr1 =
                         1          1
                                                               =   i,...   ,K.
                                             12




5.   Limiting Properties of Macrovariances

        The previous analysis has provided bounds for (b), the macro para-
meter variance in terms of (x'x) and conditions on the microvariables

and microparameter variances, when the macroparameters are defined simply

as least squares estimates based on the macro data. We now discuss under

what conditions (b) tends to zero as the number of elements in the aggre-

gate increases. We shall always make the plausible assumption that

sup a (N) <
 N
               .
        It is then clear from Theorem 1 that


(5.1)        urn (b) = 0

if

(5.2)        urn N(X'X)' = 0


and conditions (3.4a) to (3.4c) are satisfied.

        The formulas in (4.1) imply that (5.2) will hold if


                         N
(5.3)        Urn
                     2
                                 =   o, 9 = 1,2,... ,K.
             N±oo
                    Ts(l-R   )




In order for (X'X) to be invertible we must have R <       1   for all .   In
most applications related to economic data it is reasonable to assume that




                                                                                .
                                                       13




a 6   >0   exists so that



(5.4)        sup R                  I —   6.
              11




If (5.4) holds then havinq




(5.5)         im            =
             Ii- TS
is enough to imply (5.3).

        In the spirit of Grunfeld and Griflches (1960), we define the average

variance among microvariables as
                            N
              2 =      1           1
(5.6)        S                                    )2




and the average simple correlation amona                      microvariables   as



                   —       2              1      (x.t) (xt)
(5.7)        r2- 4—1)                     'r




Then it follows that



 r            U                     I
(.8)                           2
             TS            Ts11+(N—1 )r]


In any     cases of        conceivable         terest,      we would
                                                                               2
                                                                       expect s to be bounded away
from zero. In          many        bi.rt not all econanic applications, r, can be expected
to be positive and bounded away from zero. If, however, the aggregate is
constrained, we can have r9<O, and other such instances could arise.
(Since S > 0 we must at least have r> -1/(N-l).) Thus, for given T,
positive s and                     condition (5.5) will hold       so   that the
                                   14




macrovariances can be expected to shrink as the aggregate grows. A

meaningful industrial aggregate is normally composed of firms with common

production methods and similar customers. While in the short run, one

firm's gain may be another's loss, fluctuations in market demand will

ordinarily be shared in rough proportion to each firm's productive capa-

city. While some firms grow in periods of declining demand and others

fade when demand is growing, this "maverick" behavior is unlikely to

dominate. Clearly, however, effectiveness from the point of view of re-

duction of parameter variance depends on the strength of the average cor-

relation among entities comprising the aggregate as well as collinearity

among the explanatory variables reflected in R .     This   effect has also

been discussed by Aigner and Goldfeld (1974) for their model.

     We have examined conditions which imply that (b) - 0 with increasing

N. These conditions can be weakened if we only require that the elements

of       remain bounded as N becomes large. One might conjecture that

the larger most aggregates become, even in a well designed aggregation

procedure, the more dissimilar the components will be, thereby placing

definite limits on the amount of variance reduction that can in fact be

achieved. For example, because of the dissimilarities introduced as the

number of components increases it might be that (N-l)r in equation (5.8)

is bounded (i.e. r is not bounded away from zero).    In this case N/TS

would be bounded (if s is bounded away from zero) and of course (b)

would not necessarily approach zero.
                                                     15




        The   condition      (5.2) also implies that the aggregation weights intro-

duced by Theil (1954) must vanish. Theil used the aggregation weights to

discuss the aggregation bias that occurs when E(jt)                           rather than

          =       as we have assumed        (2.2c)       ; there is no bias   under our
assumptions.         However, the Theil weights play an interesting role when

estimated      parameter variances are considered, even in the case E(1t)
        The   Theil weights are defined by
(5.9)         w. = - -
              —i2.
                           ()       x.
                                  - —i9,

where—J_
      x. £1,..., K denote the columns of the matrix x.. Using a proof
similar to the one used for Theorem 1 (but not reproduced here) we have
the following result.
Theorem 2. If (3.4a) holds then

(5.10)
               i!l (w.1)2 <
                                     T     N [();].
Finally from         (5.10) it is possible to show           that if (5.2) holds
        lim   w1p          0 i=l,... ,K; p=l,... ,K.
        In the special       case where a            0        a..   a2   for all i, and
for all i and t we have from (3. 3) that
               VN(b) = No2(X1X)

and therefore
              N
(5.11)
              L=1
                       " )2-< M Tcy2 [VN (b)]pp
                     (w.
                                            16




If we view the diagonal weights w as resembling proportions [cf.Kuh 1974]

which represent the relative contribution of the micro components x. to

then (5.11) provides a necessary condition for a reduction in aggregate

parameter   variance   toward   zero:   no micro   explanatory   variable can be a

largeproportion of the aggregate of that variable. This is of interest
because size distritutions of ist extensive rrasures of firm or household
activity are reasonably stable and quite heavily skewed. Thus conditions
nost favorable to the swift attenuation of proportional shares as unibers
of an aggregate increase -               size equality - are notably absent.
                                 approximate
As a result, distinct limits to the shrinkage of the macroparaiieter variances
are likely to be imposed by the behavior of the underlying size distributions.



                                                                                     .
                                                  17



6.      Comparisons of Mi€ro and Macro Data.

        In section 5 we examined the macro parameter variances and attempted

to discover some conditions which would cause them to decrease as N in-

creased. If only the macro data is available we could check these condi-

tions to see how well we might be doing but we would probably use the macro

data anyway because nothing else would be available.

        If all of the micro data is available, we still have several problems.

The data could be completely pooled (that is, the i and t subscripts could

be treated as replications) or for each i we could compute a micro regression

and then average the resulting estimates to obtain an estimate of .      Other
approaches are clearly possible, including generalized least squares

[Swamy (1970), Swamy (1971) and Swamy and Arora (1972), Amemiya (1971)3.

        These same techniques are available if we have only a portion of the

micro data. We can, of course, try these and compare the results with

those obtained from the aggregate data. Resource constraints, however,

may render this infeasible.

     We prefer to adopt the view that only a relatively small percentage

of the micro data is actually obtainable. To keep the notation simple we

will assume that there is just one piece of micro data available. Thus

our theoretical measure of relative efficiency is defined as


(6 1)        E          =   variance of th individual
                 iJ?.            macro variance


                        -- ______

where (b) is defined in (3.3),
                                             18



(6.2)       v(b) =                   +


and                          1




Using (3.5) we have
                                            N7
                       a. .[l+(N-1)r ]        Sfl/N      (l-R2
               19      ((: Gkk/)+BT+E)
                         k
                                              s2
                                               Iz
                                                         '
                                                             is..

        Therefore the right-hand side of (6.3) is a conservative estimate of

         It has many interesting qualitative properties. If                is small or

negative (i.e. there is not much correlation among the exogenous micro-

variables or negative correlation) then the relative efficiency is reduced.

 A positive r coupled with a reasonable N indicates that aggregate estimates

 might be better when compared to estimates based on this particular portion

 of the micro data.

         In the special case where the jt are fixed independent of i and t,

 as in the standard regression case, B =            0.   Thus a positive B decreases

 the relative efficiency, giving us a warning that the relative efficiency

 of aggregation could be severely reduced by a time—varying or cross-

 sectionally varying parameter structure. This case is also discussed by

Aigner and      Goldfeld     [1974] from   a different point     of view. A similar result

holds when E0.

         The   remaining parts of (6. 3)     relate the particular micro data we

have    to the aggregate. If these ratios are greater than 1, then we may
want    to consider aggregation as a reasonable alternative to the use of
 the micro     data.
                                   19




    Note that we are comparing the efficiency of inference from one

sample of one micro unit with inference based on the aggregate data. This

is an approximation to the case of limited micro data and is designed to

point out the major factors that could make the aggregate estimate a use-

ful competitor to the limited data micro estimate. A detailed simulation

study is planned to more fully understand the measurement of relative

efficiency in this case.
                                    20

                                 References


 [1] Aigner, D. J. and Goldfeld (1974). Estimation and Prediction from
      Aggregate Data when Aggregates are Measured More Accurately than
      their Components. To appear in Econometrica.

 [2] Amemiya, T. (1971). The Estimation of the Variances in a Variance-
      Components Model. International Economic Review 12, pp. 1-13.

 [3] Burnett, T. and Guthrie, D. (1970). Estimation of Stationary
      Stochastic Regression Parameters. JASA 65, pp. 1517-1573.

 [4] Feige, E. L. and Watts, H. W. (1972). An Investigation of the
      Consequences of Partial Aggregation of Micro-Economic Data.
       Econornetrica 40, pp. 343-360.

 [5] Grunfeld, Y. and Griliches, Z. (1960). Is Aggregation Necessarily
      Bad? The Review of Economics and Statistics 42, pp. 1-13.

 [6] Klock, T. (1961). Note on a Convenient Notation in Multivariate
      Statistical Analysis and in the Theory of Linear Aggregation.
      International Economic Review 2, pp. 351-360.

 [7]   Kuh, E. (1974). An Essay on Aggregation Theory and Practice in
       Essays in Honor of Jan Tingergen (W. Sellekaerts, editor).
       New York: Macmillan, (forthcoming).

 [8] Rosenberg, B. (1973a). A Survey of Stochastic Parameter Regression.
      Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 2, pp. 381-398.

 [9] Rosenberg, B. (1973b). The Analysis of a Cross Section of Time
      Series by Stochastically Convergent Parameter Regression. Annals
      of Economic and Social Measurement 2, pp. 398-428.

[10] Swamy, P. A. V. B. (1970). Efficient Inference in a Random
      Coefficient Regression Model. Econometrica 38, pp. 3-23.

[11] Swamy, P.A.V.B. (1971). Statistical Inference in Random Coefficient
      Regression Models, New York: Springer-Verlag.

[12] Swamy, P.A.V.B. and Arora, S.S. (1972). The Exact Finite Sample
      Properties of the Estimators of Coefficients in the Error Components
      Regression Model .  Econometrica 40, pp. 261-75.

[13] Theil, H. (1954). Linear Aggregation of Economic Relations.
      Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing Company.

[14] Theil, H. (1968). Consistent Aggregation of Micromodels with
      Random Coefficients. Report 6816, Chicago, Center for Mathematical
      Studies in Business and Economy (April 1968). (A more accessible
      and somewhat more extensive treatment can be found in H. Theil [15].)


[15]   Theil, H. (1971). Principles of Econometrics. New York: Wiley.

116]   Zeilner, A. (1969). On the Aggregation Problem: A New Approach to
       a Troublesome Problem. Economic Models, Estimation and Risk
       grammin (Fox, K. A. et al., eds.), New York: Springer-Verlag.
