S
                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                        -     _____a



                        THE PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT OF LAW



                              William M. Landes*
                              •Richard A. Posner*




                        Working Paper No.      62




    CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                    National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                  204 Junipero Serra Blvd., Stanford, CA 94305



                                   November 1974




                      Preliminary; Not for Quotation

         NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
    number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
    permission.

         This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
    publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
    by the Board of Directors.

    *The University of Chicago and NBER

         Research on this paper was supported by a grant from the National
    Science Foundation to the NBER for its research in law and economics.
5
I                       The Private Enforcement of Law


                    William M. Landes* and Richard A. Posner**




            Economists have begun to turn their attention to the process by

    which law is enforced, as well as the substance of legal rules. 3_I An

    important question in the economic study of enforcement is the appropriate,

    and the actual, division of responsibilities between public and private

    enforcers. This question has been brought into sharp focus recently by

    an   article in which Gary Becker and George Stigler advocate the privatiza-.
    tion of law enforcement. f-" Under their proposal, private individuals
    and firms would investigate violations, apprehend violators (including
    criminal   offenders), and conduct legal proceedings to redress violations,

    including criminal prosecutions. A private enforcer would be entitled,

    if successful, to retain the entire proceeds of the suit--for example,

    the fine paid by the convicted offender. The unsuccessful enforcer would

    be required to reimburse the defendant's legal expenses.

           Although Becker and Stigler's proposal may seem at first glance

    revolutionary and wholly unrealistic, on reflection it is evident that

    private enforcement is a pervasive feature of the existing social and economic

    system. In the enforcement of contract, tort, and property law, for example,

    the role of the state is limited essentially to furnishing a court system;

    indeed most contracts, both formal and informal, are "enforced" simply by

    the latent threat of withdrawing future business from the violator.



p
                                                                     2.


 Employers discourage employee corruption and malfeasance by dismissing

 an employee if his hlviolationH is detected, Until recently, bounties
                                                                                 .
 for dangerous or destructive animals were common, and the bounty systems

 had the essential features of the private enforcement system that Becker

 and Stigler propose.      Many laws, notably the antitrust laws, are

enforced by private as well as public entities; as we shall see, the

contemporary antitrust class action has the essential features of the

Becker-Stigler proposal. The use of paid informers by police departments,

the Internal Revenue Service, and other public enforcement agencies is an

example of private enforcement, here supplementary to public. Blackmail

is another, if unconventiona', example of the private enforcement of law--

the blackmailer induces his victim, the violator of a legal or moral rule,

to pay him a sum up to the amount that the violator would be willing to

pay to avoid punishment. In effect punishment is imposed, but it is paid

to the private enforcer who has discovered the violation.    Bribery is very
similar.

      For many centuries, indeed, the enforcement of the criminal and

regulatory laws of England (and doubtless of other countries as well)

followed the pattern suggested by Becker and Stigler. Parliament and

municipal authorities (as well as private firms and individuals) paid

bounties   for the apprehension and conviction of offenders,, and in the
case of offenses punished by fines, the fine was divided between the Crown
and the enforcer. There were no public prosecutors, and the
                                                            police were
public in name only.      This system of private enforcement was progressively

abandoned during the nineteenth century, although traces of it persist to

this day. Similarly in modern America private enforcement is much less
                                                                       3.




    extensive than Becker and Stigler contend would be efficient. This

    alleged discrepancy between the optimal and the actual is at least

    puzzling, in the light of recent findings that considerations of efficiency

    have played an important role in shaping the structure of the legal system

    and the behavior of its participants.       The alternative possibility

    explored in the present article is that the area in which private enforce-

    ment is in fact clearly preferable to public enforcement on efficiency

    grounds is more restricted than Becker and Stigler believe; perhaps the

    existing division of enforcement between the public and private sectors

    approximates the optimal division.

          Part   I develops an economic model of competitive, profit-maximizing
    private enforcement. The model predicts the level of enforcement and the
    number of offenses that would occur in a world of exclusively private
    enforcement.W Part II refines the model to account for the presence of
    monopoly in the private enforcement industry, different assignments of
    property rights in legal claims, the effect of taxing private enforcers,
    nonmonetary penalties, and legal errors--elements ignored in the initial
    development of the model in Part I.     Part III contrasts our model with other

    economic approaches to the enforcement question. Part IV presents a nunter

    of positive implications of the model, relating to the choice between public

    and private enforcement of criminal versus civil laws, the assignment of

    exclusive rights to the victims of offenses, the budgets of public agencies,

    the discretionary nonenforcement of the law, and the legal treatment of

    blackmail and bribery. The positive implications of the model appear to be

    consistent with observations of the real world, although the findings in




p
                                                                    4.




 Part IV must be regarded as highly tentative. An
                                                    appendix discusses the
                                                                                .
 economics of rewards--an important method of comDensatinq private enforcers.

                       I. A MODEL OF ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITY

     A. The Equilibrium Conditions of the Private Enforcement Industry

       We define the output of the enforcement industry as the apprehension

 and Conviction of offenders. Offenders include not only criminal offenders

 but also persons who commit torts, break contracts, violate the antitrust

 laws, etc. but for simplicity we limit the formal presentation to a single

 type of criminal offense where a unit of output requires both the apprehen-

sion and conviction of the offender.     The output (A) is produced using

two inputs: an aggregate of hired resources (R) available at a constant

per-unit price of r, and an input of criminal offenses (0). The enforcement

production function is

            A =   A(R,O),                                          (1)

where increases in both R and 0 increase the industry's output (i.e.,

the marginal products of R and 0 are assumed to be positive). " A is

"sold" to the state for a price equal to the fine paid by the convicted

offender. (Later we consider situations in which the offender's penalty

differs from the enforcer's return, for example where the offender is

imprisoned and the enforcer receives a bounty from the state.) Since

offenders are a source of potential income, the question arises as to the

ownership of this asset. We assume initially the ownership scheme implied

by the Becker—Stigler analysis: the first enforcer to apprehend and convict

the offender is entitled to receive the fine.     In Part II we shall modify

this assumption and analyze the effects of enforcement on alternative

property—right assignments, such as victim rights or state ownership.

      To simplify the analysis still further, we assume an industry constant—
                                                                           5.




    returns—to—scale production function, so that (1) can be rewritten as
p
                 A = Op(R/O),                                              (2)

    where p = p(R/O) is the probability of apprehension and conviction, which

    in turn is a positive function of the resources-to-offenses ratio (RIO).

    Alternatively, p is simply the ratio of apprehensions and convictions to

    the number of offenses.

          The economic theory of deterrence predicts that the number of

    offenses will decline with an increase in the probability of apprehension

    and conviction and an increase in the penalty.         That is,

                 0 = O(p, f),                                             (3)

    where aOlap =       < 0   and O/f =   O<   0.   Since we are assuming that only
                    O
    offenders are apprehended and convicted, p in equations (2) and (3) is

    identical.

          A competitive enforcement industry, consisting of a large number of

    firms that acquire property rights to offenses on a first-come first-served

    basis, will act as if the number of offenses were unaffected by enforcement

    activity. Yet expansions in the output of each firm will reduce—-though

    by a negligible amount——the supply of offenses available to all other firms.

    The sum of these negligible external effects is not negligible and hence

    offenders will be deterred, and the supply of offenses will fall, as the

    industry attempts to expand its output. This in turn will lead the industry

    to readjust its level of enforcement activity. Moreover, as shown below,

    attempts by the industry to expand its output in response to changes in

    certain parameters may actually lead to a reduction in the industry's out-

    put after it fully adjusts to changes in the number of offenses.
                                                                     6.




       Since all firms are presumed to be equally efficient and (from the

 assumption of an aggregate constant-returns-to_scale production
                                                                   function)
 there are no entrepreneurial resources specialized to the industry, com-

petition among firms will eliminate all profits and other rents. Total

 receipts in equilibrium will therefore equal total costs, as in

             fA=r R,                                                 (4)
which can be rewritten

            f =   r/(0/R)p.                                          (5)

The denominator in (5) is simply the average product of the hired resource.1'

Equilibrium, moreover, requires that values of p and 0 that satisfy (5)

be consistent with the values of p and 0 implied by the offenders' supply

function specified in (3).

      The enforcement industry equilibrium together with the offender-supply

equilibrium is illustrated in Figures 1 and 2. At a fine equal to f0, both

the equilibrium output, A0 in Figure 1, and the number of offenses, 00 in

Figure 2, are simultaneously determined.   A0 and 00 must satisfy the conditions

                         [Insert Figures 1 and 2]

that the fine equal average cost for enforcers
                                                 (f0 =rI(00/R0)p0) and that
the resulting probability (p0) yield a level of offenders equal to 00 in

Figure 2. The industry average cost curve (Ac) is drawn on the assumption

that the supply of offenses is fixed at 00. Average cost is rising, there-

fore, since an increase in A (with 0 constant) comes about
                                                             by increasing
the industry's inputs of R, which lowers the average product of R (as RIO

rises) and raises average cost.      Any movement along the average-cost

curve in Figure 1, however, would alter the probability of apprehension,

inducing a change in 0 via the offense function in Figure 2, and lead to

a shift in the average—cost curve. Thus, there is only one possible
                                             6a.


I


    f                   p



    fi
                        p0

    fo                                       f0)
I                   A                              0
           0                 0     00

         Figure I                Figure II
                                                                    7.




equilibrium point along a given average-cost curve.

      The stability of the equilibrium in Figure 1 can be shown as follows.

Suppose offenders adjust immediately to changes in p and let A exceed

A0 in Figure 1. Since p is now greater than p0. the number of offenses

will fall below 00 and the average-cost curve will shift upward, so that

the industry will be operating at a point such as X in Figure 1. With

average cost exceeding the fine, however, firms will leave the industry

or reduce their output, reducing the ratio of R to 0 and lowering both

average cost and p. This in turn will increase the number of offenses,

which will shift the average—cost curve downward. Adjustments by both firms

and offenders will continue until industry output returns to
                                                               A0. Similarly,
if A were initially less than A0 and hence the volume of offenses exceeded

00 (as p fell below p0), increases in R and decreases in 0 would return the

industry to A.

      We now explore the implications of changes in several parameters of

the model.

      1. Change in the Crime Rate. Suppose there is an exogenous increase

in the crime rate with f constant. The offense function in Figure 2 will

shift to the right. Let us assume that if p remained fixed at p0, the

number of offenses would rise by 20 per cent. The number will initially
    by
rise/more than 20 per cent because with A unchanged, p will fall below
                                                                         p0.
In response to the increase in offenses, average cost will fall below f and

the industry will attempt to expand output. Since f is unchanged, the

competitive equilibrium will be restored when the average product of R,

and hence average cost, return to their original levels. This requires

a proportional increase in R equal to the 20 per cent increase in offenses
                                                                        8.




    in order to keep RIO   constant.   In terms of Figure 1, the average cost

    curve will have shifted to the right by 20 per cent and arrests and

    convictions will have risen by 20 per cent, while p will have remained

    constant.

          2. Change in the Costs of Conviction. Assume that the costs of

    convicting offenders rise as a result of a procedural change, for example

    requiring higher standards of proof or excluding most confessions.

    Initially, this would reduce p in Figure 1, lower the average product of

    R, and raise average cost. In response, firms would begin to cut back on

    their enforcement expenditures and the number of offenses would increase.

    At the new equilibrium (at the unchanged fine of f0) the ratio of 0 to R

    will have risen and p will have fallen in comparison to their original values.

          3. Change in the Fine. Suppose the legislature increases the fine

    for the particular offense from f0 to f1, as illustrated in Figures 1 and

    2. If we assume that offenders adjust immediately to changes in p and f,

    the number of offenses will fall below 0. 121 It is not obvious whether

    the enforcement industry at its original output of A0 is now operating

    where average cost is less or greater than the new price. The decline in

    offenses may be of sufficient magnitude to raise average cost (and reduce

    the average product of R) proportionately more than the increase in f.

     In that event firms will exit from the industry or reduce their levels of

    output, and R and A will decline. Alternatively, if the reduction in

    offenses still leaves average cost below f1, output will expand. In

    equilibrium-—where profits are competed away——average cost must rise by

     the same proportion as f rises. Since we have assumed that there are no

     scale effects in the enforcement industry (from the assumptions of constant

I    returns    to scale and a fixed price of R) average cost will rise (and the
                                                                      9.




  average product of R will fall) only if the ratio of R to 0 increases.

  Of particular importance is the fact that the increase in the equilibrium

  ratio of R to 0 also produces an increase in
                                                 p.     Thus, although there
  is no clear prediction as to the number of apprehensions and convictions

  when the fine increases (as indicated by the two possible supply curves,

  S0 and S1, in Figure 1), the model unambiguously predicts an increase in

  the probability of apprehension and conviction.

        The intuitive explanation Ofthi5
                                           relationship between p and f is as
cfiErease in the fine has two effects: it initially reduces the number of

 offenses by increasing the expected cost of an offense, and it increases the

  returns to enforcers from apprehending an offender.   The latter effect may

 well, though it need not, lead to an increase in the number of apprehensions.

 If so, it is clear that the result will be an increase in the probability

 of apprehension and conviction. The less intuitive case is where the increase

 in the penalty has so great a deterrent effect on offenders that it results

 in a reduction in the scale of the enforcement
                                                  industry, i.e., in fewer

 apprehensions. Still, the return per apprehension is higher, and therefore

 the industry will spend greater resources than before per apprehension. This

 in turn implies that the ratio of the industry's total expenditures to the

 number of offenders will be higher, since otherwise the average cost of

 catching an offender would not have risen. If more resources are being

 spent per offender, the probability of apprehenshion will rise.

       The positive relationship, under private enforcement, between the

 probability of apprehension and conviction and the penalty has, as we show

next, important implications for comparisons between private and optimal

 public enforcement.
                                                                                  10.




                   B. Optimal Public and Private Enforcement Compared

          We follow Becker in defining the social loss from crime as

                   L = D(O) +   C(O,p) + bpfO,                                    (6)

    where D is the net damages (harm to victims minus gain to offenders),

    C(O,p) is the costs of apprehension and conviction, and bpfO is the

                                     ---'
    social costs of punishment.              However, we make several simplifying

    assumptions:

          (1) All penalties are fines and the costs of collecting them are

    zero. Hence bpfO is zero.

          (2) The aggregate enforcement production function yields constant

    returns to scale.

          (3) The cost of apprehending and convicting offenders is identical

    under private and public enforcement--that is, technological conditions,

    enforcement incentives, and factor prices are independent of whether

    enforcement is public or private.

          (4) Fines greater than f* are uncollectable because they exceed the

    offenderts resources, and hence they would have no greater deterrent effect

    than f* ?P1

          (5) When f =    f*    and p is arbitrarily close to zero, net marginal

    damages are both positive (i.e., D' >            0)   and an increasing function of the

    number of offenses (i.e., D" >          0).   .?i" If the social loss is then minimized

    with respect to p and f, the fine will be set at the maximum amount collect-

    able (f*) and L will be minimized with respect to p.                    As p rises however,

    the decline in marginal damages due to the reduction in offenses must be

    balanced against the marginal costs (assumed to be positive) of increasing p.



I
                                                                                  •11.




47     ___The
     LI—            increasing costs of enforcement as the number of offenses falls

      is the source of our final assumption: (6) the optimal number of offenses

      derived from the social loss function is always positive.

              Assumptions (4), (5) and (6) merely formalize what one observes in

      the real world--a positive number of offenses, and an enforcement system

      that combines penalties with apprehensions and convictions.
                         will be
            Our first step / to determine the appropriate fine under private

     enforcement. We shall then compare the number of apprehensions, offenses,

     etc. at this fine under public and private enforcement.

              Minimizing the social loss function (6) with respect to p and f

     subject to the constraint of private enforcement
                                                                  that is, subject to
                     f -              =
                           r/(O/R)p           0,                                  (7)
     yields   the first-order equilibrium condition

                     —L/f ——              p        pt
                                r(p       -
                                              p'(R/O)                             (8)


     where L/f and L/p are the changes in the social loss resulting from

     infinitesimal increases in f and p.                The left-hand side of (8) denotes

     the rate at which a change in p is traded off for a unit change in f to

     maintain a constant social loss, while the right-hand side denotes the

     rate at which enforcers change p in response to a unit change in f.

     Observe that —(L/f)/(L/p) isposjtfvewhen (8) holds since the right—hand
     side of (8) is always positive.

            To provide     a more intuitive understanding of the equilibrium conditions
     and   their   implications for private versus public enforcement, we introduce

  the concept of social loss indifference curves (SLIC). A given SLIC
 shows
       various combinations of p and f that yield  a constant social loss,

     and its slope is
                                                                                          12.



                                                          +
                          =    -L/af           =   D'Of       r(R/O)Of
                                                                                          9
                      dL=O                         D'O    + — O(l-       )




    where     =
                  p'(R/O)/p,   and         =
                                                   _O(P/O).
                                                               --' The location and shape of

    SLIC's are determined as follows. At the maximum collectable fine (f* in

    Figure 3), find the p that (locally) minimizes the social loss function,

    and repeat for smaller and smaller fines. The curve labeled L/p = 0 in

    Figure 3 is a locus of points showing the value of p that minimizes the

    social loss for different values of f. This curve is (typically) negatively

    sloped, indicating that an exogenous increase in f leads to a reduction in

    p under a system of optimal public enforcement.                          This result is in

    sharp contrast to the positive impact of increases in f on p in a system

    of private enforcement, illustrated in Figure 3 by the positively sloped

    curve PR1.      When f <   f*,    the slope of each SLIC (see equation (9)) at the

    point where it intersects the curve labeled aL/op = 0 is vertical (infinite

    since L/p = 0 and L/f < 0.

                                [Insert Figure 3]

    At points above L/ap =       0,    the SLIC slope is positive because increases in

    p raise the social loss and this must be compensated for by an increase in

    f to maintain a constant social loss. Similarly, at points below L/p = 0

    the SLIC slope is negative because increases in both p and f lower the social

    loss

            Several indifference curves 1i, I2 and 13) are illustrated in Figure

    3.       Since the social loss falls as f increases with p constant (from

    the assumption that D' >         0),   Il represents a lower social loss than '2' etc.




I
                                    .
                             12a.




p1




p0
                        aL/ap:O

                                    .
                  fi   f*
     Figure ffl




                                    .
                                                                       13.




    More generally, the further to the right the indifference curve in Figure

    3, the lower the social loss. The optimal p and f in Figure 3 are found

    by equating the rate at which profit-maximizing enforcers increase p in

    response to a change in f to the rate at which p must increase as f increases

    to maintain an unchanged social loss.       This occurs at point X in Figure

    3 where the optimal fine and probability are f1 and p1 respectively. At

    this point, however, the indifference curve is positively sloped, which

    implies that a reduction in p would lead to a lower social loss (L/p >          0).
    The minimum social loss at f1 occurs along the curve labeled   L/p =     0 in

    Figure 3-—and along this curve the value of p (=p0) is less than the cor-

    responding p(=p1) generated by private enforcement. Put differently, the

    "best" one can do under private enforcement is to set a fine equal to f1,

    but at f1 one observes a greater probability of apprehension and conviction

    (p1 > p0) and a greater social loss under private than optimal public enforce-

    ment.

            The intuitive explanation for the   overenforcement theorem is

    straightforward, If the probability of apprehension and conviction were

    unity, the optimum fine would be set equal to the social costs of illegal

    activity-—i.e., to the value of crime prevention. If the value of crime pre-

    vention rose because the harm from crime was increasing, the optimum fine

    would rise by the same amount. This would be perceived by enforcers as an

    upward shift in the demand curve facing them, and would have the effect of

    increasing the resources devoted to crime prevention, as in the case of an

    ordinary product the demand for which increases. The difficulty arises

    because in the design of an optimum system of penalties where the probability

    of apprehension and conviction is less than unity, the fine is set higher

I
                                                                    14.




than the social costs of the illegal activity not as a signal that addi-

tional resources should be devoted to the activity because its value has

increased relative to other activities but rather as a device for attempting

to minimize those resources. A fine so set communicates the wrong signal,

from a social standpoint, to the private enforcer. In the case of public

enforcement, the high fine need not be taken as a signal to invest greater

resources in crime prevention, since the public enforcer is not constrained

to act as a private profit maximizer.

      In showing that private enforcement is less efficient than optimum

public enforcement, we have not established a case for preferring public to

private enforcement. That would require a comparison between private and

actual, not optimal, public enforcement, a comparison      very difficult to

make without a theory of the behavior of public enterprises. The excess—

enforcement theorem is nonetheless useful, as shown in Part IV, in explaining

policies designed to limit the scale of law-enforcement activities.

                       110 SOME EXTENSIONS OF THE MODEL

      The model of private enforcement developed in the previous part contains

a number of restrictive assumptions, such as that enforcement is competitive,

rights in legal claims are assigned on a first—come first—served basis,

enforcers are not taxed, penalties always take the form of monetary fines,

and errors in enforcement never occur. These assumptions will now be relaxed.

                            A. Monopoly Enforcement

      If the private-enforcement industry is monopolistic rather than com-

petitive, it will take account of the fact that increases in the level of

enforcement reduce the number of offenses. The result will be fewer con-

victions   and higher profits than under competition..!I
                                                                               15.




            The monopolist maximizes
p                 11= f0p= rR                                                  (10)

    with respect to R. This yields
                         r
                                                                                11

    where

                    = (1 —               —
                               c)/(l                                           (12)
    and 0 < j5,         w < 1.           In equation (11), r/p'w equals the marginal cost

    of apprehensions and convictions. Marginal cost is greater, the smaller p'

    and the larger           (since w   is   inversely related to er). As   approaches

    unity, marginal cost approaches infinity since additional expenditures on

    enforcement produce no additional apprehensions. Since p', the marginal

    product of R in producing apprehensions and convictions (assuming 0 constant),

    is a decreasing function of RIO, marginal cost will also be an increasing

    function of output (see Figure 4). .--"

                                  [Insert Figure 4]

            Figure 4 shows that competition yields a level of enforcement greater

    than the level produced by a monopolist (A0 > A0*) even though demand is

    infinitely elastic. At A0 marginal cost exceeds averageS cost, and a

    profit-maximizing monopolist would reduce enforcement until marginal cost
                  --'
    equaled f0.          Monopoly will thus be associated with fewer apprehensions

    and convictions, a greater number of offenses, and a lower probability of

    apprehension and conviction than competition.

            The optimal fine and level of enforcement under monopoly are deter-

    mined by minimizing the social loss function subject to the constraint

    specified in (11) that marginal revenue equal marginal cost. This yields

    the following first-order condition.

p
                                 .
                          15a.




f


fo




                 A0
                      A
                                 .
     Figure IV




                                 .
                                                                         16.




                   —DL/f ——w(p')3                                         (13
                            rp"
    The left-hand side of (13) is the slope of the social loss indifference

    curve (SLIC) while the right-hand side (which is always positive) is the

    rate at which the monopolistic enforcer increases p in response to a unit

    increase in f. Figure 5 illustrates the determination of the pptimal p

    and f under monopoly and competition. PR2 is the constraint under which

    the monopolistic enforcer operates and PR1 the constraint of the competi-

    tive enforcement industry. Since the profit—maximizing p at each f is

    lower under monopoly than under competition, and the rate at which the

    monopolistic enforcer increases p in order to maximize profits in response

    to an increase in f is lower than the rate under competition,        the

    monopolistic enforcer attains a higher social loss indifference curve

    (i.e., a lower social loss). We emphasize that excessive enforcement

    results even under monopoly, because the point of tangency between the PR

    curve and the social loss indifference curve still occurs in a region where

    the latter curve is positively sloped so

    one can find a lower p (holding f constant) that yields a lower social

    loss.

                                   [Insert Figure 5]

            In   sum, private competitive enforcement (with property rights
    obtainable only on a first-come first-served basis) yields a greater social
    loss from crime (considering all relevant costs) than private enforcement
    by a monopolist or cartel. Although the optimal fine is smaller under

    competitive than monopolistic enforcement, the equilibrium p may be greater

    or smaller. In Figure 5, p1 is greater than p2 but this need not be true


I
                                16a.


                                       .

p1

                          PR2
P2




                fi   12
                           f
                                       .
     Figure V




                                       .
                                                                             17.




    in general. This finding modifies our earlier result, where for a given

    f the value of p was always greater under competition than monopoly. When

    the fine is also endogenous, it will be higher under monopoly than under

    competition. This will induce an increase in p and it will no longer be

    possible to predict that p will be smaller under monopoly.

         B. State and Victim Ownership of Property Rights in Legal Claims

            In the well known analysis of a free-access resource, competition

    carries the level of production "too far" because social marginal cost

    exceeds price at the competitive output. The problem is the absence of

    property rights. If someone owned the resources, the price he would

    charge for its use in order to maximize his return would yield a level of

    output at which social marginal cost was equal to price; alternatively a

    cartel of firms using the free-access resource would maximize profits by

    internalizing the external technical diseconomies that firms impose on one

    another, reducing output until social marginal cost was equal to price.

    Similarly, the only reason why competitive private enforcement yields a

    larger output than monopolistic private enforcement at the same fine is

    that in the former case no one has a property right in offenses (save as

    acquired on a first-come first-served basis). If instead the state owned

    the initial rights to all offenses (analogous to ownership of the formerly

    free-access resource) and auctioned them off to private enforcers, it can

    be   shown that the profit-maximizing fee for each apprehension and conviction,
    given a fine equal to f0,   would equal the difference between marginal and

    average   cost at A0* in Figure 4. Thus, competitive enforcement, combined
    with   the initial ownership   of   offenses by the state   (or by a private firm),



I
                                                                         18.




would yield an output of A0*, the same output the monopolistic enforcer

would produce.        However, the fee charged by the state is equivalent

 to a tax on the enforcer's output, and since this "tax" creates a dis-

crepancy between the amount offenders pay and the amount enforcers receive,

it provides incentives for bribery and corruption (see next subpart).

        Another possible system of property rights in legal claims would be

to assign them to the victims of offenses.            The victim who had the

exclusive right to prosecute the offender could attempt to apprehend and

convict the offender himself, or hire private enforcers, or sell his right

to an enforcer, or refrain from enforcement. As a first approximation,

victim enforcement (assuming a large number of victims and profit-maximizing

behavior) would produce a level of apprehensions and convictions somewhere

between A0 and A0* in Figure 4. Victjm enforcement eliminates the external

diseconomjes   associated with the duplication of effort and costs when several
enforcers pursue a singleoffender; but no victim has a sufficiently large
share of the market to internalize the negative response of offenders to

his enforcement activity.         However, this is only a partial analysis.

We have seen that private monopolistic enforcement (or vesting all rights

initially in the state) results in a level of enforcement that maximizes

the private return to enforcement. It follows that a firm which acquired

all victims' rights would be able to offer each victim a higher price than

he   could expect to obtain from any other enforcement alternative--so all the
rights would be acquired    by a single firm.   It   need not do all, or any, of
the actual enforcing itself--it may resell the rights to enforcers or require

them to pay it a "royalty" for each offender convicted--but in any event the

price per offender will be set at a level at which some offenses are not
                                                                            19.



    prosecuted that would be prosecuted under a system of competitive enforce-
    ment of victim rights.

            This is not to say that the equilibrium condition of every market

    (absent an antitrust law) is monopolistic because the assets of the indus-

    try   would be more valuable in the hands of a single firm which could charge
    a monopoly price. In an ordinary market, the charging of a monopoly price
    induces new entry and this prospect reduces the expected profits of mono-

    polization, often to the point where they are lower than the expected

    profits of competitive operation when the costs of obtaining the monopoly

    are taken into account. There is no threat of entry into the enforcement
    market,since (abstracting from the problem of the fabricated offense, dis-

    cussed later) firms are not free to produce offenders. The right to operate

    in the enforcement market is limited to the victims of offenses, and the

    number of offenses prosecuted is controlled by the single enforcer who

    acquires   all of the victim rights.
            To summarize, if property rights to offenders are acquired by the
    state (or by a private monopoly) and then sold at profit-maximizing prices
    to   enforcers, competitive enforcement will lead to the identical solution

    as enforcement by a monopolist (see Figure 5). Thus, the economic function

    of this form of property rights is to produce a lower social loss from crime

                                  than   competitive enforcement without   these pro-

    perty rights. Victim property rights without the sale of those rights to
    a single (i.e., monopoly) enforcer would lead to a partial internalization
    of the external diseconomies produced in the absence of any property rights.
    The curve relating       p to f in Figure 5 would presumably lie between PR2

    and PR1, and hence the social loss with victim enforcement would be less

I   than the social loss in the absence of property rights but greater than the
                                                                     20.




 social loss when property rights are assigned to the state or are acquired

by a single enforcer. In all our examples of private enforcement,
                                                                      however,
excessive enforcement results. This occurs because at the equilibrium

position in Figure 5, whatever the private enforcement scheme, the social

loss indifference curve is positively sloped; so one can always find a

lower p. holding f constant, that yields a lower social loss.

         A different sort of problem that a system of awarding rights to

enforcers on a first-come first-served basis creates is allowing the offender

to nullify the deterrent effect of the law by turning himself in and

receiving the fine or bounty to which an enforcer is entitled. The payment

of the fine to himself washes out the penalty and allows him to retain the

proceeds of the unlawful act without bearing any punishment cost. This

abuse   of the private enforcement concept could in principle be prevented
either   by disentitling offenders to compensation as enforcers or by granting

exclusive rights to enforce the law to victims of offenses, but neither

solution would be free from practical difficulty. It would be hard to

prevent the offender from hiring an enforcer as his agent to turn him in

and receive the reward, or, in a system of victim rights, from using the

hired enforcer to purchase the enforcement right from the victim (without

disclosure, of course, that the enforcer was acting on behalf of the

offender).

        The simplest way of dealing with this problem would be to give the

victim of the offense the right to claim, either from the enforcer or from

the offender, the value of any property taken from him, or damaged, by the

offender. But this solution is not wholly adequate. The difficulty lies

in the fact that the offender is usually in a position to preempt any other
                                                                         21.



    enforcer:    if he gets wind that an enforcer is closing in on him, he

    can turn himself in first, and obtain the reward. This possibility may

    enable offenders to nullify the effects of enforcement, even when resti-

    tution to the victim is required and is effective. Consider the following

    example. The value of the property taken by the offender is $10, the

    probability of apprehension and conviction is .01, and the punishment is

    $1000. The offender knows that if he conunits 100 offenses, he is likely

    to be punished once; and assume that when apprehension is imminent, he

    can always turn himself in first and obtain the reward. Then the effective

    punishment for the offense is not $1000, but $10 (the required restitution),

    and the expected punishment cost per offense is not $10, but 10 cents.

                                 C. Taxation of Enforcers

             En principle, one could devise a system of taxes on enforcers, combined

    with a system of property rights, that would induce enforcers to reduce their

    activity to a level at which p would lie along the L/p = 0 curve.            The

    tax would shift the demand curve as perceived by the enforcers to the left

    without reducing f and thereby impairing the deterrent effect of the law.

    However, the tax would drive a wedge between what offenders paid and what

    enforcers   received and thereby create attractive opportunities for bribery
    and corruption, for both the apprehended offender and the enforcer would
    be better off privately negotiating a payment that was less than the statu-
    tory fine but greater than the fine minus the tax. A major criticism of
    public enforcement advanced by Becker and Stigler, that it creates incentives
    for   bribery   and corruption because the gain to the enforcer from enforcement
    is    generally less than the offender's potential penalty,      might no

    longer be a strong argument for private enforcement (depending on the size

I
                                                                   22.




 of the tax) if enforcers were taxed in order to reduce the level of

 enforcement to the optimum level. The distinction between private and

 public enforcement would become blurred in another sense—-the character

 and effectiveness of private enforcement would become dependent, in part

 at least, on a form of public intervention, albeit a milder form than

 regulation or public ownership.

      Two further points need to be made about the bribery problem created

by taxation of enforcers. First, that problem is less acute if rights are

assigned on a first—come first—served basis. An offender would be reluctant

to bribe an enforcer since the bribe would not buy him absolute immunity

from punishment--any other enforcer would be perfectly free to institute

proceedings against the offender. However, the first enforcer would sometimes

have a "corner" on the information incriminating the offender, in which case

the probability of a second enforcer's apprehending the offender would be

slight.

      Second, a tax on     transaction creates a potential for bribery--an

employee has an incentive to bribe his employer (by rebating a portion of

his wages) not to withhold a portion of his wages for payment of federal

income tax—-yet we do not ordinarily assume that the possibility of bribery

is a serious objection to using taxes to collect revenues. This is partly

because there appear to be no good alternatives, and partly because bribery

itself can presumably be deterred by appropriate penalties-—and is, indeed,

a criminal offense.      Assuming bribery of enforcers could be prevented

effectively and at moderate cost by being penalized,     we may not have to

worry very much about the incentives to commit bribery that a tax on enforce-

ment would create--but by the same token the problem of bribery would become

a less compelling criticism of public enforcement.
                                                                         23.



                     D.   Imprisonment and Other Nonmonetary Sanctions
p         The incentive to commit bribery is also present once we relax the

    unrealistic assumption that an optimal system of penalties would consist

    solely of fines. When imprisonment and other sanctions that are not a

    simple transfer payment from offender to enforcer are introduced, it

    becomes necessary for the state to offer bounties to enforcers if there

    is to be adequate incentive for private enforcement.       Assuming that the

    optimum system of penalties continues to involve a combination of severe

    penalties with low probabilities of apprehension and conviction--a realis-

    tic assumption even though increases in the penalty can no longer be assumed

    to be costless—-a bounty that is the precise monetary equivalent of the

    costs of the penalty to the offender will induce excessive enforcement, as

    enforcers   pour resources into apprehending and convicting offenders and
    raise p above its (low) optimal level. If, however, the bounties are set
    below f so as to reduce enforcement to the optimal level, there will be a
    gap between the cost of punishment   to the offender and the gain to the

    enforcer,   and opportunities for bribery and other corruption will be intro-
    duced. The    problem may, however, be less severe than it would be under a

    system of fines only. The bounties, even though smaller than the cost of

    punishment to the offender, may exceed his ability to pay since it is the

    limitations on offenders' resources that require reliance on nonpecuniary

    penalties in the first place.

                              E.   Errors in Enforcement

          In developing a model of private enforcement in Part I, we unrealistically

    assumed that enforcement operated without any mistakes. Once that assumption

    is abandoned it becomes apparent that an enforcement industry, whether public
                                                                     24.




 or private, has two outputs, the conviction of the guilty and of the

 innocent. The second has a negative social value.    Even when the penalty

 imposed upon the convicted defendant is a pure transfer payment, the

 resources consumed in the prosecution are wasted from a social standpoint;

 the deterrent effect of the law is also impaired.       Is the output of this

 social bad--convictions of innocent people--likely to be greater or smaller

 under private enforcement than under public enforcement?

        The private enforcer is paid per offender convicted, regardless of

the actual guilt or innocence of the accused. There are several ways in

which the enforcer can increase his "catch," and hence his income, by

augmenting the supply of "offenders." (1) He can fabricate an offense.

(2) He can prosecute an innocent person for an offense that in fact occurred.

(3) He can encourage an individual to commit an offense that he would not

have committed without encouragement, and then prosecute him for the offense;    S
this   is the practice known as "entrapment." (4) Knowing that an individual

is about to attempt the commission of a crime, the enforcer can wait until

the crime has been committed and then prosecute him rather than apprehend him

in the attempt stage and prosecute him for a criminal attempt. The incentive

for waiting to obtain greater compensation, since the penalty for the com-

pleted crime will presumably beheavierthan the penalty for the attempt.

       These abuses would doubtless occur under any system of private enforce-

ment4?ut how frequently? The first two involve the prosecution of an

innocent person, and in general we would expect expenditures by the party

whose claims are true to be more productive than the other
                                                             party's expendi-

tures; hence expenditures on trying to "frame" an innocent person would
                                                 a
normally be a poor investment. 55/ Entrapment is/well-recognized defense
                                                                         25.




    to a criminal charge, so a prosecution based on entrapment would rarely

    be a valuable use of the enforcer's resources. —       As for the enforcer

    who stood by and allowed the completed crime to occur, he would have to

    reckon with the possibility that someone else might apprehend and convict

    the criminal--especially under a system where the property right to a

    legal claim was vested in the victim of a crime.

            In any event, the same abuses can and do arise under public enforcement--

    indeed, the constitutional rules against entrapment, knowing suppression of

    evidence favorable to the accused, etc., were developed to prevent the

    commission of these practices by public enforcers——and there is no good

    theoretical or empirical basis for expecting them to be more widespread

    under   a system of private enforcement. True, the private enforcer is com-
    pensated on an explicitly piecework basis, and the public enforcer is not.
    This may make it more likely that the public enforcer would attempt to

    maximize deterrence rather than merely the number of convicted offenders

    weighted by the penalty (net of the costs of enforcement).         The other

    side of the coin, however, is that the private enforcer may be more sensitive

    to the costs of the unsuccessful prosecution, and we have indicated why

    the costs of successfully prosecuting innocent people will often be very

    high.

            Are   inadvertent errors likely to be more or less frequent under private
    as compared to optimum enforcement (or public enforcement, if we assume that

    the enforcement level is more nearly optimum under public enforcement)? Dis-

    regarding deliberate error, we may assume that a given fraction        of all

    enforcement proceedings, either public or private, terminates in the convic-

    tion of an innocent person, and ask whether there are likely to be more

I
                                                                           26.



 enforcement proceedings under private than under public enforcement and,

 if so, whether it follows that the aggregate error costs will be higher

 under the former system.

          Assuming the legislature has set the optimal fine--f1 in Figure 5--

 given the constraint of private enforcement. The
                                                        resulting probability
 of apprehension and conviction, p1. now includes the conviction of innocent

 as well as guilty persons.
                                      Since optimal public enforcement at f1 would
 occur at a lower p (along the L/p = 0 curve), the number of innocent

 persons convicted would be lower under public enforcement, provided that

 the elasticity of offenses with respect to a change in p was less than

 unity.           While the number of erroneous convictions will thus be higher under

private enforcement, the social cost of each error will be lower since the

optimal penalty is higher under public enforcement. (In Figure 5, social

cost is minimized under public enforcement by setting the fine equal to f*,

and f* >
            f1,   the optimal fine under private enforcement.) To be sure, the

optimal p is also lower at f* than f1, but if offenders are less sensitive

to changes in f than to changes in p (i.e., Cf <          < 1 where    =
                                                                           Of(f/0)),
the increase in f may be significantly greater than the reduction in p.

resulting in the imposition of greater aggregate costs on innocent persons

under public enforcement.

      In sum the social costs of legal error may be no greater (or smaller)

under private than under optimum public enforcement.       Therefore, a model

such as that developed in Pa,I which ignores legal error may still be

quite useful in differentiating private from optimum public enforcement.




                                                                                        .
                                                                               27.



    III.   CONTRASTING APPROACHES TO THE ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT

           Our conclusion that the market cannot be depended upon to optimize

    law enforcement will not come as a surprise. Economists have long assumed

    that a regime of private enforcement would founder either because of free-

    rider problems or because of economies of scale. But it is important to

    note that ours is not the conventional reasoning. We agree that, in a

    system of private enforcement where victims purchased the services of

    enforcers, there would be a free-rider problem: nonpurchasers would bene-

    fit from the reduction in illegal activities brought about by the hired

    enforcers. However, the free-rider problem does not arise under systems

    of   private enforcement in which enforcers purchase rights from victims, or
    from the state, or acquire rights by apprehending and convicting an offender.
    The reason is that in these systems the return to enforcement is a fine,
    whereas under a system in which enforcers are precluded from receiving fines

    the return to enforcement must come from those buying protection.

            There appear to be substantial economies of scale in some areas of law

    enforcement. If     the collection of federal taxes were privatized, it seems
    unlikely that the market    would have room for more than one Internal Revenue

    Service,     albeit other sorts of taxes could be (and historically sometimes
    have been) farmed out for collection      to private enforcers. Just as running

    two sets     of telephone lines down the same street   is   wasteful, so   having two

    enforcers audit the books of the same taxpayer would be wasteful. Two FBPs,
    or two police departments in the same city, would create similar problems

    of uneconomical duplication.

            It   might seem that if   enforcement would often be produced under con-

    ditions of natural monopoly, the case for public enforcement would be

I   strengthened because private monopolies are not clearly preferable to public
                                                                         28.


 ones.        However, one of the social costs of monopoly--the misallocation

 resulting from the monopolist's restriction of output--is a social bene-

 fit in the enforcement context since, as we have shown, monopoly enforce-

 ment reduces the net social loss from illegal activity. A second cost

 of monopoly--the expenditure of resources to acquire a monopoly--may or

 may not be substantial in the enforcement context. If the state
                                                                       grants
 an exclusive franchise under the usual "public convenience and necessity"

 criterion, the franchisee will receive a valuable asset; firms will compete

 for this asset, spending real resources such as lawyers' and lobbyists'

 time;           and the total costs of trying to obtain the franchise may

 (assuming there are no rents in the procuring of franchises) be as great

as the value of the franchise. If, however, monopoly came about as a result

of the    activity of a firm in buying up victim rights, rather than obtaining
a franchise,       the social costs would be lower. Monopoly rents that might

otherwise       be used to purchase inputs into the acquisition of a franchise
would be exhausted in payments to victims for their rights to offenses.
Some costs would result from duplication in soliciting victim rights, but
these costs might be no greater than the usual costs of competing for new
customers.
         We   conclude that neither free-rider problems nor economies of scale

provide a compelling basis for public law enforcement. But clearly there

is more work to be done on this question. It is at least suggestive that

the economies of scale in enforcement appear to be concentrated in the

investigative phase of enforcement (patrolling, auditing, etc.) and that

many of the traditionally "private law" areas of law, such as torts and

contracts, do not require much investigation. The victim of an accident

knows that he has been injured and,
                                         ordinarily, who did it. The same is
                                                                          29.




    true of breaches of contract. No permanent investigative apparatus

    corresponding to a public utility's plant is needed in these areas, and

    this may be part of the reason why they have been left to private enforce-

    ment.

                         IV. POSITIVE IMPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL

                      A. The Choice Between Public and Private Enforcement:
                           Criminal Compared to Contract and Tort Cases

            A major positive implication of our model relates to the different

    mixture   of public and private enforcement in criminal and other traditional
    "public law" areas, on the one hand, and tort, contract, and other tradi-
    tionally "private law" areas on the other. With few exceptions, there is
    a public monopoly--more precisely a series of   public monopolies--of
    criminal-law enforcement: a private individual may not prosecute for

    murder, or theft, or the possession of marijuana, or statutory rape.

    Often, to be sure, the same act is both a crime and a tort (the crime of

    theft, for example, is the tort of conversion), and then private enforcement

    is possible in principle. But if the offender is judgment-proof, as is so

    often   the case with criminal offenders, the tort remedy is ineffectual and
    the public enforcer has a de facto monopoly. In contrast, in areas of the law
    such as contracts and torts (excluding those torts that are also crimes)
    the main burden of enforcement falls on the private sector. Breaches of

    contract, and torts, are not investigated or prosecuted by the state. The

    state's role is limited to furnishing the court system.

            In terms of our model, the essential difference between crimes, on

    the one hand, and torts and breaches of contract, on the other, is that

    with very small resources devoted to apprehension, the probability of


I
                                                                       30.




   apprehension tends to be much less than one in the former case, and to

  approach one in the second. The victim of a breach of contract knows

  who breached it; the victim of an automobile accident usually knows the

identity    of the other driver;      but the victim of a burglary does not
  know the burglar's identity. Where the probability of apprehension and
  conviction    is unity, it can easily be shown that the penalty that minimizes

  the social loss from unlawful activity is equal to the sum of the costs of

  the harm inflicted by the activity and of the costs of enforcement.

  Thus, assuming that p is approximately unity in the average tort or con-

  tract case, the problem of overenforcement discussed in Part I cannot arise.

  It arose because, in a case where substantial resources are necessary to

  generate a substantial probability of apprehension, those resources can be

  saved by setting a very high f, but the high f induces private enforcers to

  expend resources on apprehension--the resources that the high f was intended

  to conserve. If p is already unity, private enforcers will not expend any

  resources on trying to increase p any further.

           A problem would remain if property rights were assigned to enforcers

  on a first-come first-served basis rather than to the victim of the tort

  or breach of contract. For example, if the marginal harm inflicted by the

  offender's conduct were $9 and the marginal costs of apprehension and con-

  viction were $1, and hence f = $10, the enforcer who was the first to stake

  his claim would receive a rent of $9. The opportunity to obtain such rents

  might lead enforcers to stake claims simultaneously, to duplicate enforce-

  ment costs, or to engage in other methods of spending (e.g., bribing the

  official in charge of recording claims) that consumed resources.           Thus,

 enforcement on a first-come first-served basis would induce expenditures
                                                                          31.




    on   enforcement in excess of $1. Victim rights eliminate this source of
    waste.
             Thus our model predicts--and we in fact observe——greater reliance

    on private enforcement in areas such as tort, contract, property, and

    commercial law, where p approaches unity and victim property rights are

    practicable    (i.e.,   the cost of enforcing an individual claim is low rela-

    tive to the value of the claim). The criminal area presents the opposite

    extreme, especially in 'Victimless" crimes such as tax evasion and prostitution

    or "inchoate" crimes (various types of attempt). Most criminal acts are

    concealable, which means that unless substantial resources were devoted

    to enforcement p would be much smaller than unity; and the cost of enforce-

    ment to the victim--if there is a victim--is high because the average

    criminal offender is judgment—proof. Private enforcement of the criminal

    law would require the institution of a comprehensive public bounty system,

    and any divergence between the bounty and the cost of punishment would

    create problems.

             To repeat an earlier point, we are not arguing that private criminal—

    law enforcement is in fact less efficient than public. However, the fact

    that society has left enforcement to the private sector in areas where

    private enforcement is clearly optimal is consistent with the view that

    the design of our legal institutions has been heavily influenced by economic

    considerations, and the fact that it has tended to reject private enforcement

     in those areas where private enforcement is not optimal, and might not be

    superior to public enforcement, may also be consistent with such a view of

     legal institutions.



I
                                                                     32.




           B. The Assignment of Property Rights in Legal Claims

       A system of law enforcement is implicitly a market in legal claims,

 and like other markets cannot function
                                          efficiently unless there are

 exclusive rights to the goods in the market, the claims. Although the

 legal system does not characterize the matter in these terms, there are

 in fact exclusive rights in claims. The victim of an alleged violation

 of law has the exclusive right to bring suit to redress the violation (we

 are abstracting now from public enforcement). He sells that right to the

 defendant when the case is settled out of court.   If the case is litigated,

and the defendant wins, the plaintiff's legal claim is extinguished under

the doctrine of res judicata; if the plaintiff wins, the doctrine is invoked

to prevent relitigation of the same issue between the same parties--i.e.,

to prevent the (coerced) purchase of the plaintiff's claim by the defendant

from being undone.                                                               S
      In   some cases the cost of enforcement is so high relative to the value

of the claim that the legal-claims "market" would not work if the principle

that the victim had the exclusive right to the claim were adhered to strictly.

A good example is a price-fixing conspiracy that imposes a small cost on

each member of a large class of buyers. The total social costs of the

violation may be high, so that enforcement would be socially efficient, but

none of the victims has a sufficiently large stake to be willing to bear the

expenses of suit. The consumer class action         is a device, although an

oblique and imperfect one, for overcoming this problem. In effect the

property rights normally possessed by the victims of an alleged violation

are reassigned to the lawyer for the class. Subject to certain controls

(probably rather weak) by the court, the lawyer can transfer the victims'
                                                                         33.




     property rights--without their consent in any meaningful sense--to the

     defendant. The proceeds of the transfer are divided between the lawyer

     and the state       with little or nothing being paid to the nominal

     sellers of the claim, the members of the class.

            While it makes sense to assign rights on a first-come first-served

     basis in cases where the costs of enforcement are very high relative to

     the   individual victim's stake, in other cases exclusive victim rights
     would appear tobe a more efficient assignment of property rights; and
     this, roughly is the pattern we observe in the real world. A first-come
     first-served   system would involve at least two problems besides that of

     external technical diseconomies which we discussed in Part II. The first

     is the problem of appropriability. Enforcer A begins an investigation of

     violator X, collects extensive information, and is prepared to file suit

     when enforcer B, having heard about A's investigation, files suit against

     X first. A and B are bilateral monopolists, and while A will get something

     from B for the information he has collected, his gains from the investiga-

     tion will be smaller than if he had had a secure property right. The prob—

     lem of appropriability here is very similar to that in the market for

    •inventions, and for the same reason: in both cases the commodity being

     produced is information.

            A could have solved his problem by filing suit before beginning to

     investigate. This, however, suggests another problem of a first-come

     first—served system: excessive rewards. It would be inefficient to confer

     exclusive enforcement rights, potentially of great value, on people who

     have merely conceived the possibility of suing somebody for something.



I
                                                                   34.




People would spend their time drafting and filing barebones complaints

charging large corporations with violations of various laws, and then

sit back and wait for the people with investigative skills and resources

to purchase their claims. The investment of resources in drafting and

filing would be socially excessive.

      There are techniques for getting around these problems, embodied

for example in the patent laws.       These laws could be adapted for use

in the market for legal claims, but the result might not be very satisfactory.

The patent analogy might prove useful, however, in sorting out claims among

enforcers in class-action situations, where the principle of victim rights

is and must be largely disregarded.

      Another reason for preferring the existing system of victim rights

is that efficiency sometimes requires that the victim of an unlawful act

be compensated therefor. For example, under a negligence system in which

the right to seek damages is owned by the victim of a negligently inflicted

injury, the traveler at a railroad crossing will take only those precautions

that are cost—justified, where the expected accident cost is calculated on

the assumption that the railroad is complying with its duties under the

negligence standard. The potential victim will not take precautions against

accidents that would occur only if the railroad violated its duties--behaved

negligently--because the victim of such an accident, being fully compensated

for any injury resulting from it, is indifferent to whether it occurs and

will incur no cost to prevent it. Suppose, however, that the victim has

no right to be compensated if he is injured in a negligently inflicted

accident-—anyone has the right to sue in respect of that accident and to

collect and retain damages from the railroad. The railroad may now have
                                                                         35.




an incentive to increase the number of accidents at railroad crossings

far above the optimal level. Its aim will be to make crossing a railroad

track an extremely hazardous activity. At first there will be many

accidents and the railroad will have to pay private enforcers--not victims-—

substantial judgments. Potential victims, however, not being compensated

when injured no matter how negligent the railroad's conduct, will soon begin

to take measures to protect themselves from crossing accidents. They may

cease to use railroad crossings altogether; they may induce the municipal

authorities to build an underpass. The number of accidents will fall and

the result will be a reduction in the railroad's costs of accident avoidance

that may exceed (even after discounting to present value) the costs of

answering to private enforcers in damages for the many injuries negligently

inflicted during the initial period of reckless behavior. The elimination

of accidents will have been achieved by a method that is socially suboptimal.

         There is another way to avoid this problem besides compensating victims,

and that is to divorce liability from the infliction of injury.         In our

example, this would mean imposing speed limits and other forms of direct

regulation on the railroad. But that implies additional public enforcement.

         As another example of the allocative effects of compensation, consider

the consequences if rights to press claims based on breach of contract were

obtained on a first-come first-served basis instead of being the property

of   the victim of the breach. A contract is fundamentally a device for
allocating risk. If A     promises B delivery on a specified date, this means

that   A insures B against   the risk of delayed delivery. The desire of the

parties    to place this risk on   A would be thwarted if,   in the event that A
failed    to make delivery on the specified date, C,   a stranger to the contract,
could sue A for the breach of contract. Z1
                                                                    36.




      We note in closing that the existing system of victim rights has

several drawbacks. For example, legal claims are not freely transferable.

A person injured in an accident cannot sell his legal claim against the

injurer to a lawyer or other enforcer. This means that he cannot shift

the risk created by the uncertainty of litigation (although he can share

it with his lawyer by means of a contigent fee agreement) and assuming that

risk aversion is prevalent the result may be underenforcement of legal

claims.        And current law forbids lawyers to use the corporate form

to obtain capital in the capital markets, so even if they were permitted

to buy claims they would find it difficult to finance their purchases.

                C. The Public Enforcer's Budget Constraint

      Another positive implication of our analysis of private enforcement

relates to the fact that the budgets of public enforcement agencies tend

to be small in relation to the potential gains from enforcement as they

would be appraised by a private, profit-maximizing enforcer.       For

example, the Internal Revenue Service has repeatedly (but unsuccessfully)

argued to its appropriations subcommittee that the Service is operating

at a budgetary level where the marginal cost of enforcement is far below

the marginal return, measured (as a private enforcer would measure it) by

the additional tax revenue that additional expenditures on enforcement would

generate. There is some evidence that its argument is correct.        The

assumption of a budget constraint would be unrealistic as applied to a

private enforcer, for assuming reasonably well functioning capital markets

he would be able to finance any enforcement activities where the expected

monetary   return exceeded the expected costs.
      The agency budget constraint is at first glance puzzling. Why isn't
the legislature interested in maximizing the expected value of enforcement?
                                                                         37.



    Why doesn't it, therefore, appropriate additional funds to any agency,

    such as the IRS, that could use the funds to increase the net yield of

    enforcement? The puzzle disappears when we reflect that a method of

    appropriation whereby the level of enforcement of the tax laws was allowed

    to rise to the level that would be reached under a system of private enforce-

    mentcould, according to the analysis in Part I, result in overenforcement.

    The effect of the budget constraint, in forcing the public enforcer to

    operate where marginal cost is less than marginal revenue and hence where

    the    probability of apprehension and conviction is less than if profits
    were maximized, is similar to that of a tax on private enforcement designed
    to    reduce the level of private enforcement to the socially optimal level.

            There is, to be sure, an element of private enforcement in the enforce-

    ment of the federal tax laws: the government pays informers a reward of up

    to 10 per cent of any additional taxes collected as a result of the informer's
        But,
    tip. /were it not for the problem of overenforcement, it would be difficult

    to understand why the maximum reward has been set at such a low percentage

    of the revenues produced. If the objective were to carry enforcement of the

    tax laws to the point where marginal revenue and marginal cost were equated,

    a reward greatly in excess of 100 per cent of the additional revenues col-

    lected might well be appropriate, since each apprehension resulting from an

    informer's activity would have some effect in deterring other taxpayers from

    underpaying   their tax.      Alternatively, the informer, rather than being
    given a reward in excess of the amount of tax collected, might be given a
    reward equal to the additional tax plus any penalties imposed (including

    the monetary equivalent of the costs to the taxpayer of being imprisoned,



I
                                                                     38.




where that was the penalty imposed). The effect of the 10 per cent               S
ceiling is to reduce drastically the scale that the tax informer industry

would attain under a system of pure private enforcement.

                  D. Discretionary Nonenforcement of the Law

      A public monopoly of enforcement enables the public enforcer in effect

to nullify particular laws, or particular applications of law, simply by

declining to prosecute violators. This power appears to be exercised fre-

quently     and we attempt here to explain why. Our analysis of private

enforcement is relevant to the question since it is clear that enforcer

nullification would not be a feature of private enforcement: all laws would

be enforced that yielded a positive expected net return.

      Both economic theory and simple observation suggest that rules of

law are almost always overinclusive: read literally, they forbid some

conduct that the legislature or court that formulated the rule did not in

fact want to forbid.      The costs of precisely tailoring a rule to the

conduct intended to be forbidden would be prohibitive given the limitations

of human foresight and the inherent ambiguities of human language.         The

more particularly the legislature tried to describe the forbidden conduct,

the more loopholes it would open up.   If enforced to the letter, an over-

inclusive rule could impose very heavy social costs. Analytically, the

effect would be like punishing an innocent person in order to reduce the

probability of acquitting a guilty one. To be sure, in an economic analysis

the danger of punishing the innocent is not decisive against the use of a

particular method of law enforcement; the danger must be traded off against




                                                                                 .
                                                                                     39.




the   costs of alternative methods that would reduce it. But just as the
costs both of convicting the innocent and of acquitting the guilty can
be reduced simultaneously (e.g., by increasing the amount of resources

devoted to the determination of guilt and innocence), so there is a

technique--discretionary nonenforcement--by which the costs of overinciusion

can be reduced without a corresponding increase in underinclusion (loopholes).

The police overlook minor infractions of the traffic code; building inspec-

tors ignore violations of building-code provisions that, if enforced, would

prevent the construction of new buildings in urban areas; air traffic con-

trollers permit the airlines to violate excessively strigent safety regula-

tions involving the spacing of aircraft landing and taking off from airports.

       This technique of reducing the costs of overinclusion would be

unavailable in a system of private enforcement. Suppose a rule prohibits

two activities, and f0 is the fine for a violation. The social loss function

would then be

             L =            +               +                +
                   D1(01)       C1(01,p1)         D2(02)         C2(02,p2),          (14)

and with f fixed, L would be minimized with respect to
                                                                          p1 and p2, yielding
             D'1 + C'1 +     (3C1/p1)
                                                        =   0;                       (15)
                                            1/Ui
                                                   p1

             D'2 + C'2 +     (C2/ap2)       1/0         =   0.                       (16)
                                                2 p2


Suppose the marginal damages from 01 are smaller than from 02 given an

equal number of offenses, and the enforcement costs are identical. Then

optimality clearly requires that p1 be set lower than p2 and that more

offenses of type 1 be permitted than of type 2. The marginal damages from

01 may be zero (the activity was prohibited inadvertently), in which case

the optimal value of p1 would be zero. Discretionary enforcement is a way

of adjusting to the fixed fine, and reduces the net social loss compared
                                                                     40.


 to   the alternative of aggregating the two offenses together and setting

 a uniform p.
                 In contrast, profit—maximizing enforcers would have no

 incentive to take account of the difference in
                                                  marginal damages between
 the two offenses because both the fine and costs of apprehension and con-

 viction are assumed to be identical for both.    If the costs of convicting
 of
     01 were higher than of 02, perhaps because judges and juries were less
 willing to convict persons accused of 01, then differential private enforce-
 ment would also emerge. But the difference in costs of conviction would

 also enter into (14), implying that the difference in enforcement between

01 and 02 would be even greater under optimal public enforcement and result
 in a still lower social cost.

        The existence of a public monopoly of enforcement in a particular

area of the law is a necessary rather than a sufficient condition of

discretionary nonenforcement. A public agency could in principle enforce

all of the laws entrusted to its administration.    But in practice it

cannot, given the budget constraint mentioned earlier.    Nothing so far said,

however, determines the principle by which the public agency will select

its cases. Conceivably it could concentrate its resources on precisely

those areas of conduct that had been brought inadvertently within the scope

of the statutory prohibition. But this seems unlikely. Capricious public

enforcement is not unknown (or even rare) but on what little evidence we

have does not appear to be the central tendency of public enforcement.

Among other reasons, the annual appropriations hearing affords the legislature

an opportunity to assure that the agency has not strayed too far from the

intended, as distinct from the enacted, legislative regulations that the

agency is enforcing. There is no corresponding check in private enforcement.
                                                                     41.




      An alternative to discretionary nonenforcement is to permit unlimited

private enforcement but rewrite the substantive rules of law to eliminate

overinclusion.        This alternative involves costs of two sorts: the

cost of drafting a more precise rule, and the cost of failing to prevent

the socially undesirable conduct that would be rendered legally permissible

by the loopholes that a more precise rule would inevitably create. These

costs are reciprocal: the loophole effect can be diminished by more care-

ful drafting, but the additional care is costly. The costs of rewriting

rules to make them more precise without creating serious loopholes might

exceed the costs of discretionary enforcement.

      The legislature may not have to rewrite the law. The courts may refuse

to enforce foolish or perverse applications of a statute. There are precedents

for judicial refusal to enforce the law, and jury nullification of unpopular

laws is an old story.         Alternatively, an administrative agency with

broad interpretive powers could be interposed between the legislature and

the private enforcer, and enforcement permitted only after the agency had

issued an interpretation of the relevant statute. However, to give judges,

juries, or administrative agencies the power to narrow the application of

law is simply to shift discretionary nonenforcement from public enforcement

agencies    to other official bodies. And if giving courts a discretionary
power to decline to enforce the law is tolerable, then the major cost of

discretionary nonenforcement by public enforcement agencies can be eliminated

without abrogating the public monopoly of enforcement.

      We anticipate the objection that our analysis ignores the effect of

requiring the private enforcer who fails to prove his case against the

alleged    violator to compensate the latter for the costs of his defense.
                                                                   42.




 But compensation is immaterial to our argument. If a statute inadvertently

 forbids practice X, requiring a losing enforcer to compensate the alleged

 violator may deter the enforcer from proceeding against someone who has

 committed a practice that is not clearly X, but it will not deter him from

 proceeding against someone who is clearly guilty of X, merely because X

was not really intended to be forbidden. Private enforcers of antitrust

laws bring some suits that would not be brought by public agencies because

the suits are unrelated or even contrary to the fundamental purpose of the

antitrust laws, although consistent with the vague language of the antitrust

statutes and the careless language in many judicial opinions in antitrust

cases;      and often these enforcers succeed in obtaining large judgments

or generous settlements. They would not be deterred by being forced to

reimburse winning defendants' legal and other expenses.

      A major cost of discretionary nonenforcement arises from its converse,

which is selective or discriminatory enforcement. Recent disclosures of the

inner workings of the federal government indicate that the tax laws are

sometimes enforced more harshly against opponents than supporters of the

political party in power, and these examples must be much more common than

we know. There are also cases where the law is enforced against all but one

competing firm, giving that firm an undeserved (and inefficient) advantage

over its competitors. This oppressive and inefficient feature of public

law enforcement would be eliminated under a regime of private enforcement.

The law would be enforced against everyone who violated it and enforcement

would not place a particular firm or individual at an unfair disadvantage.

      Although the danger of discriminatory enforcement is a serious one,

it is somewhat mitigated by judicial doctrines that limit discretionary
                                                                       43.




    enforcement,      and in the criminal area by the power of the jury to

    acquit a defendant for reasons sufficient unto itself. It has been

    urged that the doctrines limiting discriminatory enforcement be expanded,

    and this might be a good idea, although its implementation would not be

    costless.       The effectiveness of these doctrines would be enhanced by

    requiring the losing party in a lawsuit to reimburse the winner's legal

    expenses--this would at least eliminate that form of harrassment that con-

    sists of forcing someone to bear the costs of defending against a groundless

    lawsuit.

                         E. Blackmail and Bribery

           Blackmail may be defined as the sale of information to an individual

    who would be incriminated by its publication, and at first glance appears

    to be an efficient method of private enforcement of the law (the moral as

I   well   as the positive law). The value of the information to the blackmailed

    individual is equal to the cost of the punishment that the individual will

    incur if the information is communicated to the authorities and he is pun-

    ished as a result, and so he will be willing to pay up to that amount

    to the blackmailer for the information. The individual is thereby punished,

    and the punishment is the same as if he had been apprehended and convicted

    for the crime that the blackmailer has discovered, but the fine is paid to

    the blackmailer rather than to the state.

            Why then is blackmail a crime? A superficial answer is that it

    resultsin   underdeterrence of crimes punished by nonpecuniary sanctions
    because the criminals lack the resources to pay an optimal fine. The black-

    mailer will sell his information to the criminal for a price lower than

    the cost of punishment if the criminal cannot pay a higher price. This
                                                                    44.




problem, however, could be solved by a system of public bounties equal

to the cost of punishment (or lower, to induce the enforcement industry

to contract to optimal size). Then the blackmailer could always claim

a bounty from the state if the criminal was unable to pay a price equal

to the optimal fine.

      A more persuasive explanation of why blackmail is a crime is that

the decision to discourage blackmail follows directly from the decision

to rely on a public monopoly of law enforcement in some areas of enforce-

ment, notably criminal law. Were blackmail, a form of private enforcement,

lawful, the public monopoly of enforcement would be undermined. Overenforce-

ment of the law would result if the blackmailer were able to extract the full

fine from the offenders (say f* in Figure 5). Alternatively, the blackmailer

might sell his incriminating information to the offender for a price lower

than the statutory cost of punishment to the criminal, which would reduce

the effective cost of punishment to the criminal below the level set by the

legislature. --"

      Consistently   with this analysis, we observe that practices indistin-

guishable from blackmail, though not called by that name, are permitted in

areas where the law is enforced privately rather than publicly because the

overenforcement problem is not serious. No one seems to object to a person's

collecting information about his or her spouse's adulterous activities,

and threatening to disclose that information in a divorce proceeding or

other forum, in order to extract maximum compensation for the offending

spouse's breach of the marital obligations. A third party is not permitted

to "blackmail" the offending spouse (unless the third party is the victimized

spouse's agent) because permitting him to enforce the marital contract would

                                                                                .
                                                                  45.




undermine the assignment of the exclusive right to enforce such contracts

to the victim of the breach. It is also consistent with our anlaysis that

blackmail is forbidden in areas where there are no legal prohibitions at all--

where the information would humiliate, but not incriminate, the blackmailer's

victim. The social decision not to regulate a particular activity is a

judgment that the expenditure of resources on trying to discover and

punish it would be socially wasted. That judgment is undermined if black-

mailers are encouraged to expend substantial resources on attempting to

apprehend and punish people engaged in the activity.

      Blackmail and bribery appear to be virtually identical practices from

the standpoint of the analysis of private enforcement. The blackmailer

and the bribed official both receive payment in exchange for not enforcing

the law. We therefore predict that in areas where there is a public mono-

poly of enforcement, bribery, like blackmail, will be prohibited, while

in areas where there is no public monopoly it will be permitted. And so

we observe. The settlement out of court of a tort or contract or private

antitrust case is a form of perfectly lawful bribery, although the term

is not used in these situations (except by economists) because of its

pejorative connotation.

      An interesting example of "bribery" occurs in connection with the

class action. As mentioned earlier, concern is frequently expressed that

the lawyer for the class will be tempted to "sell out" the class by negotia-

ting with the defendant's lawyer a settlement that will involve a combination

of nominal relief in favor of the class with a large legal fee for its

lawyer; the individual class member's stake in the outcome of the action

is too small to warrant his exercising effective control over the lawyer
                                                                     46.



 for the class. This problem would
                                      not arise if the lawyer for the class

 were permitted to retain the entire proceeds of
                                                   the class action; then
 his interest would be identical with that of the class. Such a solution,

 which is advocated by Becker and Stigler, is simply a specific application

 of the principle of pure private enforcement, where the entire penalty

 imposed on the offender is received by the
                                              enforcer as compensation. Under
existing law, the lawyer for the class is not entitled to receive the entire

damages awarded to the class. He is entitled only to a reasonable attorney's

fee, which is fixed by the court,
                                    ordinarily as a small fraction of the
total damages. The difference between the total damages awarded and the

attorney's fee is the equivalent of the enforcement tax that we have dis-

cussed as a device for reducing the scale
                                            of private enforcement. Like the
tax, it drives a wedge between what the offender pays and what the enforcer

receives, and thereby creates opportunities for a form of bribery, very

difficult to prevent, that consists of the offender's agreeing to a settle-

ment that involves a higher attorney's fee
                                             for the enforcer, but a lower
damages bill, than the court would award. In this fashion both parties

to the class action can be made better
                                         off--viewing the lawyer for the
class as the real party in interest
                                      on the plaintiff's side of the action.




                                                                                .
                                          APPENDIX

                       Hiring Private EnfOrcers by Offering Rewards

       A comon method by which the victim of a crime or other unlawful
activity hires private enforcement is by offering a return for the loss
of stolen property.                  Rewards are an interesting counterpart to the
analysis of private enforcement in Part I. There the "reward"—— in effect,
the   fine—-was a coerced transfer set by the state whereas the typical

reward is a voluntary payment determined by a private individual or firm.

To simplify the analysis of rewards we provisionally assume that rewards

have no impact on the volume of stolen or lost property. --'' Rewards (B)

will, however, tend to increase the probability (p) that the property is

returned to the owner, as in

              p=p(B)                                                          (17)

where p' = Dp/aB >        0.       Let V denote the value of the property to the

original owner while kV (k < 1) denotes the value to the finder or thief.

In the case of (unmarked) currency, k will approach unity. In the case of

goods with high sentimental value or low marketability, for example pets

and kidnap victims, k will be close to zero. A reward will be ineffectual

when it is less than k • V.               Thus

              p'   =O;B<kV                                                    (18)
and

              p' >0; B>kV.                                                    (19)
        The offeror of the reward will seek to maximize
              ii   =
                        p(V-B)                                                (20)

with respect to B, which yields

              B =      V/(l    +
                                   h-),                                       (21)
                                                                           A- 2.




 providing p' > 0 and where c =      p'(B/p).   ---"
                                                       (Obviously when p' = 0,           S
 no reward is offered.) B will be a positive function of both V and the

 elasticity of response to changes in B. Further, the smaller k is, the

 more likely is it that B will exceed kV and that a reward will be offered.

         The legal rules governing rewards are given by the branch of the law

 of contracts dealing with so—called unilateral contracts. For example,

 suppose A posts a reward for information leading to the arrest of X and

 the recovery of A's property stolen by X.        If C, having learned of the

 reward, complies with the conditions set by A, he has a legal right to

 claim the reward-—to enforce, in other words, A's "unilateral contract".

But suppose C finds X and returns A's property to him without having

known of the reward. In this instance C has no legal claim to the reward.

 It is interesting to examine what effect this rule has on p and B compared

to   an alternative that compels the payment of the reward without inquiring
into   whether or not C had knowledge of its existence.        In the latter instance,

the incentives of some enforcers to invest time and effort in learning about

and following through on reward offers will be reduced if they know that

the casual finder is now more likely to return lost or stolen property

knowing that if there is a reward he is entitled to claim it though he was

unaware of its existence. Granting legal rights to the "casual" enforcer,

therefore, reduces E,     the elasticity of response of    p to a change in B, by
its discouraging effect on the more serious enforcers.

The result of the right will be to induce the posting of lower rewards (see

(21)).       It   does not follow, however, tat the level or amount of enforce-

ment will fall: the increased incentive of the casual enforcer may more

than offset the reduced incentive to the serious enforcer and hence p will rise.
    Footnotes

    *     Professor   of Economics, University of Chicago Law School; Senior
p
          Research Staff, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                    of
    **
          Professor/Law, University of Chicago Law School; Senior Research
         Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research.

            Our research has been supported by a grant from the National

          Science   Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research for
          the study of law and economics. This is not an official National
          Bureau publication, however, because it has not yet undergone the

          full critical review accorded National Bureau publications, including

         approval by the Bureau's Board of Directors. We are grateful to the

         participants at the Industrial Organization and Law and Economic

         Workshops of the University of Chicago, the Summer Workshop at the

         National Bureau of Economic Research—West, and the Law and Economics

         Workshop of Cornell Law School, for helpful comments on earlier

         drafts of this article.



    1.   See references in Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law,

         pt. VI (1973).



    2.   Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compensation of Enforcers, 3 J.

         Leg. Studies 1 (1974).



    3.   They would provide a perfect parallel to private enforcement if

         violators of law were assumed to be nondeterrable--a belief common

         in certain criminological circles.

I
                                                                      2.




 4.   See 2 Leon Radzinowicz, A History of English Criminal Law and

      Its Administration from 1750 (1957); Margaret Gay Davies, The

      Enforcement of English Apprenticeship, A Study in Applied Mercan—

      tilism, 1563-1642 (1956). Although there were some public police,

      they were paid only nominal salaries by the state, and looked to

      bounties, fines, and the like as their principal compensation--in

      effect they were licensed private enforcers.

            The history of private criminal-law enforcement in the United

      States has not, to our knowledge, been studied extensively. Evidently,

      there was some borrowing from the English model. For example, the

      Refuse Act of 1899 provides that one-half of the fine for a violation

      of the Act is to be paid "to the person or persons giving information

      which shall lead to conviction." 33 U.S.C        411 (1970). However,
      the   statute has recently been construed as placing the exclusive
      authority to bring   enforcement actions in the Department of Justice.

      See   Bass Angler Sportsman Society v.   United States Steel Corp., 324

      F. Supp. 412   (D. Ala. 1971), aff'd subnom. Bass Angler Sportsman
      Society   v. Koppers Co., 447 F.2d 1304 (5th Cir. 1971).



5.    See Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law (1973), for a

      discussion of the positive economic theory of law and references

      to supporting studies. Cf. The Economics of Crime and Punishment

      (Gary S. Becker & William M. Landes eds. 1974).



6.    We ask the nonmathematical reader not to be deterred by the formal

      development   of the model in Part I,   and by the occasional references

      to the formal model thereafter. We provide a
                                                                     3.


    6 continued

          verbal explanation of the principal features of the model and the
          findings based on it.


    7.   A more complicated model would consider apprehensions and convictions

         separately, and thus allow, for example, for enforcement by harrass-

         ment (arresting and/or prosecuting but not convicting an offender).



    8.   The model does not distinguish between offenders and offenses:

         each offender is assumed to commit a single offense. The number

         of offenses is included in the industry's production function for

         the following reason. To produce an apprehension and conviction,

         a criminal offense will generally have to occur and hence an offender

         will have to exist (the special case of the fabricated offense is

         treated in Part II E infra). As the number of offenders increases,

         both the resources expended in searching out an offender and the

         waiting time between offenses will typically decline and hence the

         number of apprehensions and convictions will increase for a given

         input of hired resources. An appropriate analogy is to an industry

         consisting of firms fishing on a lake, where a given output of fishing

         resources will yield a greater catch, the greater the number of fish

         in the lake.



    9.   We make one assumption not explicit in the Becker—Stigler analysis:

         that the offender is not entitled to turn himself in and receive the

         fine. The importance of this assumption is discussed in Part II B

I        _____
                                                                      4.



10.   Defining A    1/0, (1) can be rewritten as A = OA(R/0,1) = Op, where RIO =
                                                                                   p.
      Since the marginal product of R, which equals O(p/(R/O))
                =
                    p/(R/O),   is assumed to be positive, p is a positive

      function of R/O.



11.   See Gary S. Becker, Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,

      76 J. Pol. Econ. 169 (1968); Isaac Ehrlich, Participation in

      Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation,

      81 J. Pol. Econ. 521 (1973), and The Deterrent Effect of Criminal Law

      Enforcement, 1 J. Leg. Studies 259 (1972).

12.   The similarity of this analysis to that of a free-access resource

      should be apparent. See F. H. Knight, Some Fallacies in the Inter-

      pretation of Social Cost, reprinted in Readings in Price Theory

      (George J. Stigler & Kenneth E. Boulding eds. 1952); see also

      Steven N. S. Cheung, The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of

      a Non—Exclusive Resource, 13 J. Law & Econ. 49 (1970); J. R. Gould,

      Externalities, Factor Proportions and the Level of Exploitation of

      Free Access Resources,      Economica        (1972). In Knight's example

      of the well-graded but narrow road, trucks entering the road ignore

      the added congestion costs imposed on other trucks.    In the enforce-

      ment case, firms entering the industry or expanding ignore the

      resulting reduction in the number of offenders available to other

      firms. Both cases are examples of external technical diseconomies

      and lead to upward shifts in the marginal cost curves of firms.




                                                                                        .
                                                                          5.


12. continued

            Competitive enforcement might also generate external economies.
      Suppose enforcer X apprehends an offender who has comitted addi-
      tional offenses not known to X       but   known to enforcers V and Z.
      X's activity will have lowered the costs to V and Z of apprehending

      and   convicting the offender. This source of external economies is
      eliminated in our analysis by the assumption that each offender
      commits a single offense. If this assumption were dropped, our

      analysis would have to assume that the external diseconomies were

      greater on balance than any external economies.



13.   Equilibrium also requires that each firm maximize profits. Thus

      marginal cost must equal f for the firm while average cost

      (r/(O/R)p) must equal f for the industry. These requirements can

      be reconciled as follows. Assume the firm's production function

      with respect to 0 and R is homogeneous of degree one at its equili-

      brium output. (This would be true even if the firm's cost function

      were rising or U-shaped, because competition would force the firm

      to operate in the constant part of its average cost curve.) Since

      the firm by assumption acts as if 0 were freely available at a zero

      price, it would utilize offenders until their marginal product, as

      calculated by the firm, were zero. That is, the ith firm would employ
                        =
      0 until
                            p—p(R/O)
                                       =   0,   which implies p(O/R) =
                                                                         p.    In

      other words, the firm acts as if the marginal product of R is equal

      to the average product of R. Hence each firm would view the industry's

      average product of R in equilibrium as identical to the firm's marginal

      product, or industry average cost as equal to the firm's marginal cost.
                                                                    6.




13 continued

      Of course, the industry's marginal product of R is below its
                                             (private)
      average product, and therefore the firm's/marginal product exceeds
                    (social)
      the industry's/marginal product.



14.   The average product of R equals (O/R)p and


                         P) = -(O/R)2(p-(R/O)p')        <   0

      where p' =   p/(R/O).    Since p-(R/O)p' is the marginal product of 0,

      which is assumed positive for the industry, ((O/R)p)/(R/O) is

      negative. Observe that p' > 0 since p' is the marginal product of

      R. Hence p is a positive function of the R/O ratio while the average

      product of R is a negative function of this ratio.



15.   Since p remains equal to p0, the equilibrium increase in offenses
                                                                               S
      is the original exogenous increase of 20 per cent.



16.   No social purpose would be served by these devices in our model

      since by assumption no innocent persons are convicted.



17.   This occurs because with A constant at A0, p will rise above
                                                                     p0.
      Hence there will be a movement up the offense function as well as

      a shift of the function to the left.




                                                                               .
                                                                                            7.




     18    The total differential of the equilibrium conditions in equation

           (5) with respect to p and f yields

                  0 =      df   +   (r(R/O)   -
                                                           ) dp                             (i)

          where p1 =       p/a(R/O)       =   A/R      >   0.     (i) can be rewritten as

                       —            pp1           >0
                  df       r(p-p'(R/O))                                                      11
                                                                                            (••)

          where (p—p'(R/O)) =             A/0     > 0 (from the assumption that the

          marginal product of 0 for the industry is positive).



    19.   See Gary S. Becker, supra note 11. Total enforcement costs have

          previously       been defined as r               R. Since R can be written as a
          function of 0 and p, total enforcement costs can be written as a
          function of p and 0. Thus rR = rR(0,p) = C(0,p).


    20.   For a formal analysis of this point see Michael K. Block & Robert

          C. Lind, Crime and Punishment Reconsidered, 4 J. Leg. Studies

          (1975). Block and Lind also discuss the conditions under which

          imprisonment beyond some point produces no marginal deterrence.



    21.   If D < 0 at this point, the optimum p would be arbitrarily close

          to   zero and the optimum number of apprehensions and convictions
          would also be approximately zero. The assumption that D > 0                        is

          taken from Gary S. Becker, supra note 11, at 173.




I
                                                                       8.



 22.    Suppose f were less than f* and p was finite. A reduction in

        p matched by an appropriate increase in f would then produce the

        same deterrent effect--the same number of offenses--at a lower

        social loss since C would be reduced.     Hence f would be raised
        until it reached f*



 23.    If the optimal level of offenses were zero, there would be no purpose

        in analyzing enforcement or comparing private and public enforce-

        ment because there would be no offenders to apprehend and no

        enforcement activity; there would only be some stand—by enforcement

        capacity to keep p from falling all the way to zero.



24.     In the case of competitive private
                                             enforcement, form the Lagrangian L*:
             L* = L ÷ X[f—r/(O/R)p].
                                                                      (i)

       Minimizing L* with respect to f, p, and A yields
                    =
                        L/f+A    = 0
                                                                      (ii)
                    =
                        L/ap+A[r(R/O)/p2_r/p'p]    =   0              (iii)
                    =
                        f-r/(0/R)p   = 0
                                                                      (iv)
       and

             —DL/af —
                    —    p2p'
                        r(p-p'(R/OJJ                                  (v)

       We assume that the second-order conditions are satisfired for a local

       minimum.



25.    See the derivation of dp/df in note 18, supra.




                                                                                    .
                                                                                  9.


    26.   We have

                 DL =   (L/f)       df + (L/p)dp =         0                      (1)

          which yields

                        —L/f                                                       ii)
                df       L/p
          since dL =    0.   The explicit derivation of L/f and L/p must

          take account of the assumption that the enforcement production

          function involves constant returns to scale. Since C(0,p) = rR,

                         =
                             D'Of   + r -g-
                                              0                                   (iii)
                         =
                             D'0    + r -                                         (iv)
          where O =     O/f and         O =   O/3p.     With p constant, R/O = RIO and

          hence (iii) becomes

                         =          + r
                             D'Of                                                 (ui—a)

          R/p in (iv) is more complicated to evaluate where


                 R      pi(1R
                          0           0 pP)=
                                         R P'
                                 o2                 O(l.c)
          It can be shown that 0 <            (=p'(R/O),Ip < 1 since

                         = p -                     =
                                 p'(R/O)               p(l—)   > 0.

          (iv) can now be written as

                                        rO(l-c )
                                    +          p
                         = D'O                                                    (iv-a)

          We assume that enforcement costs rise as p increases (i.e., CIp =

          rRIp   > 0 in (iv)). This requires that the product                  be less

          than unity. Since 0 < < 1,                    will necessarily be less than

          unity if       < 1.




I
                                                                                                    10.



 27.    As the point where 3L/p = 0 (given f), we assume that the second—

        order conditions for a local minimum
                                                                  are satisfied, i.e.,
        2L/p2 > 0.            We can write

                  =
                          -D's
                                   +
                                               (l-)     =   0.                                      (1)



        _D'c <    0                                  0 since 0 <            < 1 and 0 <
                          and J- (l_e) >                                                       < 1.
        We take as an approximation that                         and       are constant. (For example,
        in the Cobb-Douglas function A = kRaO
                                                                           p equals k(R/0)c and
          (=log p/alog (RIO) equals the constant ct.) Hence

                      =   rr'oc        +
                                                   (l-)[l-2]           >   0                    (ii)

       whenever Dt >          0.    Note p" < 0 follows from the earlier assumption

       of diminishing marginal product of R where D2A/02                             p"(l/O) <        0.
       The effect of a change in f on p, assuming that L/p =
                                                                                          0,   is given by

                  -
                  —   D"Oc                 <   0
             df       (ZLIp_ZT                                                                  (   111

       provided that D" > 0 and L/p2 > 0.


28.    When 3LIp = 0, we have at each f

                          =         +                   =   0.
                              D'O          .0(1-ic)                                            (i)
       Since O < 0 and (r/Pl)O(l_E) > 0
                                        (from the assumption that the

       marginal cost of increasing p is positive), D' must be positive for

       (i) to equal zero. An increase in f will reduce 0 which in turn will

       reduce both the amount of damages (since D' > 0) and the costs of
                             to maintain a constant p)
       enforcement (since r is reduced,pecjfjed in the social loss function.

       Hence L/f < 0.

                                                                                                             S
                                                                           11.




    29.   As p continues to increase along a given SLIC, the number of

          offenses may be reduced to the point where marginal net damages

          are negative (i.e., where the net gain to the offenders after

          deducting the direct costs of committing the offense exceeds the

          added harm from the offense). Hence, increases in f at this point--

          working through reducing 0--may raise the social loss, and the SLIC

          will then fall forward, having a negative slope. This part of the

          indifference curve, however, is irrelevant (as will become more

          apparent below) when the social loss is minimized under either private

          or public enforcement.



    30.   In Figure 3 we assume not only that an optimum point exists but that

          it is unique. There are other possibilities. For example, it is

          likely that PR1 will increase at a decreasing rate and asymptotically
                                        within some
          approach a limit (< 1). Thus, I     range, the slope of PR1 (=dp/df)

          may decrease at the same rate as -(L/f)/(L/p) so that a range of

          values for p and f will satisfy the optimality condition. Second,

          dp/df may always be less than -(aL/Df)/(L/p) when the latter is

          positive and the optimal p will then be at a "corner"--i.e., at a

          point where the fine equals f*



    31.   If the fine were set at f*__the value of f that minimizes the un-

          constrained social loss function-—instead of f1, both the difference

          in social loss and the amount of excess enforcement would be even

          greater under private    than     public enforcement. Since the



I
          minimum social loss with private enforcement is where p =        and
                                                                      p1
                                                                       12.



31 continued

        -
             f1,   the Social loss must be greater at f* along the PR1 curve.

      In contrast, the social loss at f* is less than at f1 along the
               =   0 curve. Hence the difference in social loss between private

      and public enforcement must be greater at f* than at f1. The

      difference in probabilities is obviously greater at f* than f1 since

      PR1 is positively sloped and aL/ap = 0 is negatively sloped.



32.   This     overenforcement theorem may not hold if the optimal fine under

      private enforcement is the corner solution f* It is conceivable that

      f* may be sufficiently small relative to enforcement costs so that the

      positively sloped PR1 curve is below the L/p = 0 curve at f*• Of

      course, if f* were sufficiently large relative to enforcement costs,

      the      overenforcement theorem would still hold at the corner. We

      disregard these possibilities in the subsequent analysis.



33.   This explanation should make clear that the overenforcement theorem

      does not depend on our assumptions that the enforcement industry is

      competitive and that rights to offenders are acquired strictly on

      a first-come first-served basis. That is, it does not depend on the

      analogy between enforcement and the exploitation of a free-access

      resources. This is shown rigorously in Part II B infra.



34.   This result does not require a single monopoly of all enforcement

      activity in the society. Monopolies of particular types of offenses

      or in particular areas, are all that is necessary in order to inter-

      nalize the responses of offenders to enforcement activity, assuming

      separate markets within the law-enforcement industry.
                                                                                        13.




  35. We assume that                 the elasticity of the supply of offenses with
                            c1,
       respect to a change in p, is less than unity. Otherwise, reductions

       in R (and hence p) would always raise profits since A (=Op) would

       rise        >   1) or remain constant (e., = 1) and costs would fall (as
       R fell ).       Profits       would then be maximized by setting R (and p)

       at infinitesimally small values. Moreover, if                      >    1   this would

       result in an arbitrarily large number of both offenders and appre-

       hensions.

         The   first-order condition for profit maximization is

                        =fO-+fO--r=O                                                   (i)
       and

                 dR
                        =
                            p       (1_R o
                                       U2 pdR                                          (ii
                        = p'/O(l + 2 'O)                                               (iii)
                        = p'/O(l —                                                     (iv)

  Substituting   (iv) into (i)              and rearranging terms yields
                 dli    - -
                        —                       r               -0
                                                                —

                                     p'(l   -       -
                        =   f   —                                                      (vi)
     has been assumed <             1,   and it has previously been shown that           is

   also less than unity (see note                   _____




(.. Therefore, w is less                 than unity since 0 <         <   1.
                                                                c.,
       If we assume as a first approximation that                     and are constant, then

  the second—order condition for a maximum is simply that Bp'/R <                        0,/that   mar-

  ginal cost be rising. p'/R must be negative by the assumption that the

   marginal product of R is diminishing.
                                                                                                     14.



 36
        Although r/p'w internalizes the response of offenders to an

        increase in A via the inclusion of                              in w, there is still

        only one possible equilibrium point along this curve. An

        increase in f will reduce the number of
                                                                         offenses, lowering p'
        and shifting the marginal cost curve to the left.



 37.    At A0 the difference between marginal cost and average cost equals
               d —   r   r1   -         1              —
                                                       —   r       - (R/O)P'w]
                                   (O/RJ                            PIP



        Since p —        (R/O)p'   =
                                            3R/O   >   0,      and 0 < w <   1,   d is positive.



38,.    The proof that             <
                                         c at f0 (where the subscripts m and c denote
       monopoly and competition respectively) is as follows.                              The equili-

       brium conditions (5) and (11) in the text imply that

           P'mW =
                         Pc(huI1)c                                                             (i)

       Multiplying the right—hand side of (i) by
                                                                          'c''c yields
           PmU3 =
                         'c"c                                                                  (ii)
       where 0 < w,           <    1.       Therefore, (ii) holds only if                  >
       And since p' is a negative function of RIO
                                                  (from the assumption
       that p" < 0 or that both R and 0 have diminishing
                                                                                     marginal products),
           >
                      only if the RIO ratio is smaller under monopoly than

       competition, which in turn implies that                          m <


39.    Form the Lagrangian

           L* =      D(0) + C(0,p) +           A[f     —
                                                               r/p'w]                          (i)
                                                                                           l5


    39.continued
p
          Minimizing L* with respect to f and p, and assuming as an

          approximation that w is a constant, yields

                         =   L/f            +   A   = 0                                    (ii)

                         = aL/np +              A[r     pU/(pI)3] = 0                      (iii)

                DL*/f =       f    —
                                        r/p'w           = 0
                                                                                           (iv)

          and

                _____ —
                      — —w(p')3
                               r       p"
          We assume that the second—order conditions are satisfied for a

          local minimum.



    40.   Using the subscripts m and c to denote monopoly and competition

          respectively, we have

p               dPm/df
                         =
                             —w(p')3/rp"                                                  (i)

                dPc/df = pp'/r(l —                  )                                     (ii)
          Assuming as an approximation that $,                          and w are all constants yields

                A/aO = p(l        —    )>0                                                (iii)

                              -p'(R/O2Xl -                  )<0                           (iv)

          Since B2A/O2 also equals p"(R2/03), we have

                —p'(O/R)(l —          ) p"                                                (v)

          Substituting (11) and (v) into (i) (and ignoring the approximation

          sign) and multiplying by m'm yields
                dp/df =                         —
                                                    )                                     (i-a)
          Substituting (5) into (ii) and multiplying by c'c yields

                dPc/df =     p/f(l              -
                                                    )                                     (li-a)
          Since at the same fine                        <

                dP/df    <   dp/df.                                                       (vi)
                                                                                          16.



                                                                                                 .
41.   This assumes that the price of the output of the free-access
      resource         is independent of the level of output in the relevant

      range.



42.   Total fees (T) for the state would equal

            T =                 -   rR                                                   (1)
                  f0Op
      and the fee per apprehension (t) would equal

            t =
                  f0
                        —
                                r/(O/R)p.                                                (ii)


      Thus t is equal to the difference between f and the average cost

      of a unit of A. Maximizing T with respect to apprehensions and

      convictions and assuming a fixed f yields


                                                                                         (iii)

      Now

            dR =                         1
                                                                                         (iv)
                   p'       +                       -
                                         %(p
      Noting that p -                p'         = p(1 -   ) and   making use of the derivation

      of dp/dR in note 35 supra we derive

            dT_-            -       r
                                             = 0.
                   f0
      That is, total fees are maximized at a given fine by charging a

      price per apprehension equal to the difference between marginal

      and average cost. Note that the average cost curve in Figure 4 is

      not the relevant average cost curve at A0* because the number of

      offenders at A0* will be larger than at A0.
                                                                        17.




    43.   A system of de facto victim rights might emerge from a first-come

          first-served system if enforcers could not prosecute offenders

          successfully without the victim's cooperation (in signing a complaint,

          testifying, etc.).



    44.   If     were equal to zero (i.e., offenses were unresponsive to changes

          in p), then victim enforcement would be identical to enforcement under

                                                                              =
          a system of state-assigned property rights. Note that when              0,
          the latter assignment still yields a lower level of apprehensions than

          the   first-come first-served system because marginal cost exceeds
          average cost (rip'   > r/p(0/R)) at a given output in Figure 4.


    45.   Gary S. Becker & George J. Stigler, supra note 2, at 16, recognize
                       excessive private
          the problem of /      enforcement and suggest a tax as a way of

          overcoming it.



    46.   See id. at 14.



    47.   Even the fact that contracts of bribery are not legally enforceable

          presumably discourages bribery to some extent. The offender has no

          legal protection against the enforcer's trying to extract a second

          bribe from him or selling the incriminating information to a second

          enforcer,




I
                                                                 18.

47 continued

    However, an enforcer who acquired a reputation for double dealing

    would have difficulty extracting bribes in the future from other people.



48. But it is not clear that it can be. See B. Peter Pashigian, On the

    Control of Crime and Bribery (U. Chi. Grad. Sch. Bus., Sept. 1974).

    The size of the tax necessary to bring about the optimum level of

    enforcement would presumably be an important variable determining the

    costs of preventing bribery.



49. Lacking as we do the imagination of the Tudors:

          Under it [the statute 1 Edw. 6, c. 3 (1547)], a city, town
          or village which tolerated vagrants and vagabonds might be
          sued by anybody for a part of the penalty the rest of which
          went to the Crown. A pauper convicted of 'SO living idle and
          loiteringly' was to be branded with hot irons and given to
          the informer [i.e., enforcer] as his slave for two years, to
          be fed on bread and water and caused to do all such work, 'how
          vile soever it bee, as hee shall put him unto', by 'beating,
          cheining, or otherwise.'

    2 Leon Radzinowicz, supra note 4, at 140. The statute was repealed

    after two years. Ibid.



50. Expenditures the only purpose and effect of which are to transfer

   wealth have no social product where, as here, there is no ethical

    or other socially approved reason for the transfer.



51. See Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to Legal Procedure and

   Judicial Administration, 2 J. Leg. Studies 399, 412 (1973).




                                                                               S
                                                                            19.




    52.   This is a familiar problem in an activity analogous to private

          law enforcement: animal bounty—hunting. There have been cases

          where, when bounties were offered for coyotes, or other pests,

          some people would raise these animals for the bounty, or turn

          in the ear of a dog for the bounty claiming that it was a coyote's

          ear. See T. S. Palmer, Extermination of Noxious Animals by Bounties

          in Yearbook of the U.S. Dep't of Agriculture, 1896, at 55, 62-64

          (1897).



    53.   This example raises the interesting question why preparatory

          activities (attempts) are punished at all—-what is the social

          harm of trying but failing to commit a crime? The conventional

          explanation in the criminal law literature is that the attempt

I         identifies the individual who commits it    as    a dangerous person
          likely    to commit the completed crime in the future, and we punish

          him to discourage or prevent him from doing so. This is not a

          satisfactory economic explanation for the law of attempts. Under

          a system of optimal penalties, the expected punishment cost to the

          criminal--i.e., the price that he must pay to commit the crime--will

          be exactly equal to its social cost, so if       he chooses to commit the
          crime it will mean that the value of the criminal act exceeds its

          cost. The commission of a crime when optimal penalties are in effect

          is no more reprehensible than the purchase of an apple when the price

          of an apple is equal to the social cost of producing and selling

          apples. The difference, which suggests an economic rationale for



I
                                                                      20.



53 continued

       punishing (some) attempts, is that the social cost and hence

      appropriate price of many criminal activities (murders, cartels, etc.)

      are so difficult to determine that we try to prevent such activities

      from occurring by intervening at the preparatory stages, rather than

      allowing the legal system's "market" in cimres to determine their

      extent.



54.   They are much stressed in the literature on the history of private

      enforcement of the criminal laws in England. See 2 Leon Radzinowicz,

      supra note 4. But no systematic evidence of the frequency of such

      abuses appears to be available. One abuse that is mentioned in the

      literature (see id. at 308) but omitted from our enumeration is

      collusion between enforcer and offender: the enforcer pays someone

      to commit a crime, apprehends and convicts him, and then divides

      the bounty with the offender. This practice will occur only when

      the penalty is smaller than the reward, and normally (but not invariably;

      see p.      infra) efficiency will require that it equal or exceed it.

      We have already discussed, in Part II B supra, the special problem

      of collusion between offender and enforcer that comes about because

      the offender, if he can turn himself in for the reward, may thereby

      escape the costs of punishment for his unlawful activity.




                                                                                  .
                                                                         21.



    55.   This need not be true if the defendant has limited resources

          to finance his defense (see Richard A. Posner, supra note 51, at

          417), but such an assumption seems out of place in the present

          discussion, where complete reliance on a system on monetary penalties

          is assumed.    In any event, the problem can be eliminated, though not

          costlessly, by the provision of counsel at the expense of the state

          to the indigent accused.



    56.   The present rule against entrapment applies only to public enforce-

          ment, but if criminal enforcement were privatized the rule could

          readily be extended to cover private enforcers. Again, the question

          arises why, under an optimum system of penalties, solicitations or

          inducements to commit crimes should be treated differently from

          ordinary selling efforts. The answer may be that entrapment normally

          involves misrepresentation--the individual who is encouraged to commit

          the crime does not know that he will not be permitted to retain its

          fruits.



    57.   Victim rights appear not to be feasible in the case of uncompleted

          crimes-—the victim will often be unaware that the attempt to commit

          a crime against him has been made. This implies that the private

          prosecution of attempts would remain an area where rights to legal

          claims were acquired on a first-come first-served basis, even if     the

          general   rule was that such rights were owned by the victims of crime.




I
                                                                   22.



58.    However, the empirical findings of a study in which public prosecutors

      were assumed to seek merely to maximize weighted convictions
                                                                     suggest
       that this assumption has considerable explanatory power. See William

       M. Landes, An Economic Analysis of the Courts, 14 J. Law & Econ. 61

       (1971).




59.   Probably a small fraction. See Richard A. Posner, supra note 51,

      at 410-15.



60.   When legal error is introduced, the p and f derived from minimizing

      the social loss function (with or without constraints) would differ

      from their corresponding values in an errorless system, but we

      ignore these differences in our anál.ysis.



61.   As p falls, the number of offenses rises. Hence if c were greater

      than unity, 0 would rise proportionately more than p would fall and

      the number of convictions of both innocent and guilty persons would

      rise. However, we have assumed throughout that     is less than unity

      (see note 35 supra).



62.   This analysis obviously has implications, not explored in this article,

      for the appropriate role of the state in areas besides law enforcement.

      It does not, however, impair the traditional argument for public

      provision of national defense, a type of law enforcement. Fines

      paid to enforcers are not practicable in that context because there

      is no institution to compel an aggressor to pay the victims of aggression

      a fine.
                                                                      23.




    63.   See Richard A Posner, The Social Costs of Monopoly and Regulation

          (Nat'l Bur. Econ. Res., Working Paper No. 55, Sept. 1974). The

          costs of monopolizing could be reduced, even under the franchise

          approach, if an auction system were substituted for the usual

          methods of granting public franchises.



    64.   This is not universally true. In England and Western Europe, the

          victim of a crime is frequently permitted to prosecute if the public

          prosecutor declines to do so. See Bernard M. Dickens, Control of

          Prosecutions in the United Kingdom, 22 Int'l & Comp. L. Q. 1 (1973);

          John H. Langbein, Controlling Prosecutional Discretion in Germany,

          41 U. Chi. L. Rev. 439 (1974); Joachim Hermann, The Rule of Complusory

          Prosecution   and the Scope of Prosecutional Discretion in Germany,

          id. at 468.   In several states in this country, private prosecution

          of crimes is permitted if the public prosecutor consents. See Note,

          Private Prosecution--The Entrenched Anomaly, 50 N.C.L. Rev. 1171 (1972).

          The practical significance of these islands of private prosecution may

          be small, however. Since most criminals are judgment-proof, the

          incentive of private individuals to prosecute for crime would ordinarily

          require that a bounty be offered for successful prosecution, and it is

          not. In the absence of a bounty or            a solvent defendant,

          private enforcement encounters serious free-rider problems. However, some

          criminal actions are still brought privately in England, for example

          by department stores against shoplifters, where the benefits to the

          individual store of establishing a reputation for vigorous enforcement

          are presumably great.
I
                                                                  24.




65.   Sometimes the parties to contracts opt out of the public court

      system by agreeing to arbitrate any issue arising under the con-

      tract. Even there, the state is in the background: the party to

      an arbitration proceeding can obtain a court order compelling com-

      pliance with the award of the arbitrator.



66.   Partly, to be sure, as a result of criminal and other regulatory

      statutes involving licensing of drivers, registration of vehicles,

      and punishment for leaving the scene of an accident.



67.   See Gary S. Becker, supra note 11, at 192, for a proof of this result.



68.   Although a bribe        is a transfer payment rather than a cost,

      the opportunity to obtain bribes will attract resources into efforts

      to obtain the opportunity until, at the margin, cost and gain are

      equated.



69.   Bribery of enforcers, if the bounty is set below the cost of punish-

      ment to prevent overenforcement; collusion between enforcers and

      offenders if it is set above cost.



70.   A possible counterexample should be noted here. Price fixing is a

      concealable activity, and consistently with our analysis is punished

      as a crime. But private prosecution, in the form of treble-damage

      suits by the victims of price fixing, is also permitted, and it is


                                                                               .
                                                                        25.



1   70 continued

          widely assumed that the threat of these actions is the most

          effective deterrent to price fixing; the reason seems to be that

          the maximum criminal penalty for price fixing (one year in prison

          and a $50,000 fine) is far below both the optimal level and the

          penalty meted out in private actions (thrice the overcharge), which

          is also, in all probability, suboptirnal. If f in both public and

          private   actions were, say 100 times the overcharge, the appropriate-
          ness of allowing private actions would have to be reexamined.



    71.   See generally Kenneth W. Dam, Class Actions: Efficiency, Compensation,

          Deterrence, and Conflict of Interest, 4 J. Leg. Studies     (1975).



    72.   We have in mind the provision in the tetracycline class-action

          settlement whereby proceeds unclaimed by the victims of the conspiracy

          were allowed to escheat to the states in which those victims resided.

          See State of West Virginia v. Chas. Pfizer & Co., 440 F.2d 1079

          (2d Cir. 1971).



    73.   Cf. Arnold Plant, The Economic Theory concerning Patents for

          Invention, 1 Economica (n.s.) 30 (1934).



    74.   The requirements of novelty, utility, and nonobviousness, administered

          by the Patent Office, and by the courts in patent-infringement actions,

          are the means by which the patent laws deal with the second problem



p
                                                                   26.



74 continued

      discussed above. The first is dealt with by, for example, the

      rule that disclosure of an invention is protected if the inventor

      files for a patent within a year following disclosure. For an

      analogy from the history of private enforcement in England see

      2 Leon Radzinowicz, yp-a   note   4, at 138-39, n.2.



75.   Commonly today after a class action is filed other lawyers attempt

      to jump on the bandwagon by appearing as representatives of other

      members of the class, subclasses, related classes, etc.   When it

      comes time to award attorneys' fees the judge has to evaluate the

      various attorneys' contributions. The presence of multiple attorneys

      is not entirely a bad thing since the competition among them may

      reduce the problem of the class attorney who "sells out" the class

      by agreeing with the defendant on a settlement that involves a small

      award of damages and a large award of attorney's fees.



76.   This assumes that once C had sued and collected from A, B could not

      also obtain damages from A and thereby subject A to double liability.



77.   There would be, to be sure, a "moral hazard" problem if claims were

      freely transferable. After the victim had sold his claim to the

      enforcer, the latter might have difficulty enlisting the victim's

      cooperation in testifying against the defendant, etc. This would not

      appear, however, to be a more serious problem than similar problems

      often encountered in contractual situations when payment precedes

      performance.
                                                                      27.



77 continued

           Free transferability of claims might be an efficient alternative

      to the class action, but this would depend on the transaction costs

      of          using the market to aggregate a large number of very small

      c 1 aims.




78.   Cf. the statistics on agency budgets in George J. Stigler, The Process

      of Economic Regulation, 17 Antitrust Bull. 207 (1972); Richard A.

      Posner, The Behavior of Administrative Agencies, 1 J. Leg. Studies

      305, 320 (1972).



79.   In fiscal year 1973, the IRS audited fewer than two per cent of the

      total federal tax returns filed, and found additional tax due, amounting

      in the aggregate to more than $4 billion, in more than two-thirds of

      the returns audited. 1973 Internal Revenue Service Ann. Rep. v, 25,

      33. The total cost of its audits, however, was less than $450

      million (id. at 145), which means that, on average, one dollar spent

      on auditing yielded nine dollars in additional tax revenues. It is

      possible that although average revenue for the Service was nine times

      average cost, marginal revenue and marginal cost were equal. However,

      given the small percentage of returns audited, the high percentage

      of those audited that result in the assessment of additional tax due,

      and the extremely low ratio of cost to revenue for those returns that

      are audited, it seem highly unlikely that no further expansion of

      audit activity could be cost justified.
                                                                  28.



80.   This would, however, give enforcers an incentive to bribe tax-

      payers to violate the law. See note 54 ypra.



81.   See., e.g., Abraham D. Sofaer, The Change-of-Status Adjudication:

      A Case Study of the Informal Agency Process, 1 J. Leg. Studies

      349 (1972).



82.   This observation is not limited to public rules. "Working to rule"

      is a familiar method by which employees disrupt their employers'

      operations in order to obtain higher wages or better working condi-

      tions without striking.



83.   This analysis is developed in Isaac Ehrlich & Richard A. Posner,

      The Economics of Legal Rulemaking, 3 J. Leg. Studies 257 (1974).



84.   Cf. Richard A. Posner, supra note 78, at 305-23.



85.   Becker and Stigler suggest that the efforts of private enforcers to

      enforce the laws as they are written would lead to irresistible pres-

      sure to redraft the laws so as to eliminate those prohibitions that

      are not enforced by public agencies today because the forbidden conduct

      is innocuous or beneficial (supra note 2, at 15).   But this might

      happen only because the cost of reformulating the law to eliminate

      overinclusion was less than the cost of enforcing the law in its

      existing form to the hilt, and the lesser of these two costs might

      still be greater than the cost of discretionary nonenforcement,
                                                                   29.



85 continued

       especially since the costs of legislative enactment are probably

       quite high. See Isaac Ehrlich & Richard A. Posner, supra note

      83, at 267-68. Incidentally, the lcw repute in which informers

      have long been held appears to be related to their role in the

      enforcement of unpopular laws which a politically responsive enforcer

      might ignore. See 2 Leon Radzinowicz, supra note 4, at 147-48.



86.   See Alan W. Scheflin, Jury Nullification: The Right to Say No,

      45 So. Calif. L. Rev. 162 (1972).



87.   See Kenneth W. Dam, Fortner Enterprises v. United States: "Neither

      a Borrower, Nor a Lender Be", 1969 Sup. Ct. Rev. 1 (Philip B. Kurland

      ed.).



88.   A notable though rather neglected precedent is International Business

      Machines Corp. v. United States, 343 F.2d 914 (Ct. Cl. 1965).



89.   See, e.g., Kenneth Cuip Davis, Discretionary Justice--A Preliminary

      Inquiry (1969) and An Approach to Legal Control of the Police, 52

      Tex. L. Rev. 703, 714 (1974).



90.   It would interfere with the executive function of establishing and

      implementing enforcement priorities designed to maximize the agency's

      effectiveness within its budget constraint.
                                                                        30.




91.   Actually less, for reasons stated earlier (at p.        )   but
      immaterial to the present analysis.



92.   Overenforcement would still result if the blackmail price exceeded

      the fine that would induce the same p with private enforcement

      as would be obtained with public enforcement at f* in Figure 5.



93.   Of course, rewards are also offered for lost property, and our

      analysis is applicable to those cases although they are not

      examples of law enforcement as it is usually defined.



94.   The impact is unclear. Rewards may induce an increase in offenses

      since the reward provides a ready market. Witness, for example,

      the return of stolen art to insurance companies and ultimately the

      owner. Ransom in kidnapping provides another example. On the other

      hand, the prospects of rewards to persons other than the thief may

      reduce the gains from and hence deter theft.



95.   k may also incorporate factors such as the nonpecuniary benefits

      of honesty. Presumably, the greater the degree of honesty, the lower k.



96.   The second-order condition for a maximum is that p" (=92p/2B2) <        0.



97,   The social function of rewards is to transfer goods from lower-valued

      (the thief or finder) to higher valued uses (the original owner). An


                                                                                   .
                                                                             31.




97 continued

      interesting and difficult question is whether rewards provide a

      net social benefit.              In the case of a casual finder of lost goods,

      rewards would appear to enhance values. The costs of finding the

      good to the casual finder are approximately zero, and hence the net

      expected gain to both parties is positive, as in

               Z =   p[(V-B)   +   (B-ky)] >0.                                (i)

      On the other hand, if the finder is an enforcer who spends real

      resources in the process, there is no presumption that rewards will

      produce a social benefit, since now

               z - C     0                                                    (ii)

      where C is the enforcer'scosts. Observe that if the enforcer's
                                victims
      cost equal pB, the maximum   I would be willing to spend, then

      (ii) becomes

               p[V(l—k)—B]         0                                          (iii)

      which is more likely to be positive the smaller k. The problem

      is more difficult when we deal with theft because

      whether rewards increase value depends critically on the response

      of thieves to the prospects of rewards. For example, even if k were

      zero-—the case of kidnapping--the elimination of rewards might reduce

      the value of these offenses to zero.



98.   See, e.g., Reynolds v. Eagle Pencil Co., 285 N.Y. 448, 35 N.E.2d 35

      (1941); Fitch v. Snedaker, 38 N.Y. 248 (1868); G. C. Cheshire &

      C.H.S. Fifoot, The Law of Contract 45-46 (7th ed. 1969). A minority
                                                                  32.



98 continued

      of courts hold the contrary view. See, e.g., Sullivan v. Phillips,

      178 md. 164, 98 N.E. 868 (1912).



99.   An offeror of a reward has no incentive to take account of the

      increase in incentives of casual enforcers because, by assumption,

      the casual enforcer is unaware of whether a particular owner has

      offered a reward. Hence, the effect of expanding the legal rights

      to rewards would be to reduce the owner's estimate of c.




                                                                           S




                                                                           .
