NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON

THE THEORY OF PRODUCTIVE SAVING

Isaac Ehrlich*

Un Ben_Zion**

Working

Paper No.

71

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Blvd., Stanford, CA 94305

January 1975

Preliminary; Not for Quotation
NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.
This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in Darticular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.
The University of Chicago and NBER
Technion, Israel Institute of Technology
The research reported herein was supported by a grant (No. RF 72087)
from the Rockefeller Foundation to the NBER's Center for Economic Analysis
of HunianBehavior and Social Institutions. We are indebted to Joel Gibbons
and Randall Mark for assistance and helpful suggestions.

Considerable attention has been devoted in the economic literature to

capital accumulation and savings. Little systematic attention, however, has
been given to the actual process of saving, by which is meant the generation
of nonwage income through the productive management of accumulated stocks of

nonhuman assets. Such activity generally has been thought of as a "neutral"
process which does not claim the use of scarce resources. At least, the returns from saving activity have been considered independent of the amount of

resources foregone in its pursuit. The central thesis of this paper is that
the management of portfolios incorporating a variety of investment assets does
require the use of time and other scarce resources in searching for, collecting,

interpreting, and applying relevant information. Accordingly, the returns on
these assets would depend, in part, on managerial efforts and abilities and
other related inputs.

The view that the generation of nonwage returns by individuals is a
neutral process may be rooted in Irving Fisher's theory of interest which largely abstracted from differences in rates of interest at a point in time in order

to focus attention on the determinants of an overall, unique market rate of

interest. It has been indirectly defended in the contemporary economic litera-

ture as an implication of so-called "efficient" capital markets. In an ideal
or efficient market, is is argued, all the relevant information concerning
the productivity of assets is fully impounded in the market prices of these

assets at any given point in time.1 No gains are to be had by individual investors from search or from other management efforts in such a market. Specifically, expected nonage income may vary across assets as a function of the
"risk" indigenous to these assets but otherwise is expected to be strictly

proportional to the amount

of

capital invested.

2

The condition that prices of all capital assets fully reflect all

available

information at every point in time could be

fulfilled only if

information were freely available or perfectly forecast by all investors

and if all capital markets were free of transaction costs. Since none of
these conditions literally are fulfilled in practice, search and management
of portfolios could be considered unproductive to individual investors
only if all had equally ready access to relevant information and

the

same

opportunities to implement it. Because relevant information concerning
the productivity of assets is costly to obtain and transaction costs slow
the process of price adjustment, investors who can collect and apply new
information at relatively low cost or stand to gain more through such

activity would be willing to sacrifice sufficient resources to secure

added returns. This hypothesis, though inconsistent with the notion that
capital markets are "perfect," is not inconsistent with the notion that they

are "efficient" in the sense of providing competitive rewards for superior
ability and resource expenditures in the management of assets.

Although, in principle, the productive saving hypothesis applies to all
capital markets, practically, its importance may vary widely across different

markets. In the centralized markets for common stocks and other highly substitutable securities, the speed of price adjustments to newly available infor-

mation may be much faster than in markets for real estate assets and unincorporated businesses, although even in the stock market adjustments are not in-

stantaneous.2 Furthermore, investors who secure superior information concerning
the prospects of specific securities would have an incentive to appropriate its

full value by selling it to others. The opportunities for selling superior
information presumably are constra±ned, however, by added search and transaction costs to both seller and buyers. In addition, selling the information

3

to

all investors simultaneously ou1d preclude differential returns to any one

investor. Thus, one cannot rule out a priori differential returns to betterinformed investors--especially those specializing in the collection of inforinst

ion--even in the markets for securities. Moreover, returns for superior

management of capital assets may

be

more sizable in connection with the

management of equity in unincorporated businesses

estate

(including farms),

real

operations, mortgage assets, and other loans. Markets for such assets

are more segmented as the assets themselves are more differentiated, less

divisible, and relatively costly to trade. Conceivably, then, the speed of
adjustment of stock and rental values to changes in market conditions is relatively slow for these ty-pes of assets, and, consequently, the opportunities

for gains from search and management efforts may be more abundant.3 In contrast, in the markets for short—term government notes and other "safe" assets,
where yields are relatively fixed or highly predictable, returns to management
efforts may be low.

saving activity pays or is important in explaining saving behavior ultimately is an empirical issue. Tests of the efficient markets hypoWhether

in its strong form, namely that no distinct investor or groups of investors have superior information and achieve differential returns, to our
thesis

knowledge,

have been conducted exclusively in connection

securities.

that

with the markets for

Even there a number of tests yielded results clearly at odds with

hy-pothesis. It may also be argued that the development and rapid growth

of such occupations as portfolio managers and investment specialists is not
inconsistent with the notion that opportunities for gains from productive
management of assets do exist in practice.

hypothesis has potential implicatjos

of returns fr search i,n

While the productive saving

concerning the relative magnitude

specific capital markets, our main interest is

to derive a more general set of

testable implications relating to the

productive management of assets. These implications concern a.U.ocations
of consumptive and productive resources throughout the life cycle and
saving behavior in general.

The productive saving hypothesis extends a line of thought offered by
Alfred Marshall in connection with his distinction between "gross" and. "net"

interest on capital. Whilerecognizing that gross interest typically includes
some

insurance against

risk, Marshall also stressed that it includes "earnings

of management of a troublesome business" and. that in some cases it may consist
almost entirely of "earnings of a kind of work for which few capitalists have

a taste."7 But

whereas

Marshall ascribed the willingness to engage in the kind

of work underlying the management of certain assets basically to peculiar individual preferences, we propose that an investor's willingness to devote resources to the management of capital assets is negatively related to his manageinent costs and. positively related to his expected gains determined, in part,

by his

specific training and.

experience. Details of these assumptions, alDng

with some conventional assumptions concerning the utility of lifetime consumption and. bequest, form the basis for the development of a life cycle model of
consumption, work, and. saving

activity.

To simplify matters, the life cycle model developed abstracts from an
explicit analysis of the joint accumulation of human
treating
from

the

human capital

and

physical capital by

endowments as exogenously determined. It also abstracts

any analysis of nonneutral attitudes toward risk and from variations in

demand for leisure in the

basic

context of

intertemporal

decision-making. The

implications of the model, however, are expected to hold under more gen-

eral conditions. These implications cicern the interdeperidencies between
consumption and saving activities, on the one hand, and the allocation of ind.ividual working time between conventional work and productive saving on the
other.

5

The plan

sumption

of

the paper is as follows. A life cycle

model of con-

and productive saving without borrowing is developed in Section 1.

Borrowing is introduced into the model and

its

relationship to productive

saving is explored in Section II. In Section III we attempt to elucidate the
model's implications concerning capital accumulation paths and life cycle varia-

tions in resource allocations to productive activities. Implications regarding
the determinants of the propensity to save are

derived

in Section IV and then

briefly examined in light of some earlier theoretical and empirical findings.

I. A Life Cycle Model of Consumption,
Work, and Productive Savin&
To introduce systematically the novel implications of the productivesaving hypothesis, we consider a simple model of the allocation of time and

goods over the life cycle in which time can be used in only two income generat-

ing activities: conventional work and capital management, or saving. We assume that the consumption unit's horizon consists of n equal t!periodsl? over

which it wishes to allocate its productive and consumptive resources so as to
maximize the utility of the overall consumption plan:

U = u(x,1, x2, ...,

X,

(1.1)

K1.) .

equation (1.1), X. represents the expected stock value of a nondtrable
composite market good. consumed in period t K is the terminal stock of
In

physically nond.epreciable

nonhuman capital assets (measured in units of

x) that are bequeathed or carried over beyond

the

planning horizon, and U

is a function that converts stocks of dated goods and terminal wealth into

consumption flows and utility. The consumption unit is assumed to have a
neutral attitude toward risk. Consequently, it is assumed to behave as if
all the expected variables pertinent to the production and consumption plans are

6

known

with

certainty. For methodological simplicity, it is also assumed that

the price of X is constant at unity

throughout

the planning horizon and that

no direct costs are entailed in transforming X into K.
The basic constraints limiting the consumption unit's total consumption
and

bequest

ments

opportunities generally can

be

identified with its initial endow-

of human and nonhuman capital, H0 and K0, and the total amount of

time it can devote to the generation of wage and nonwage income in any period
during

the life cycle. We assume that productive pursuits are exhausted

by

work and saving. Therefore, abstracting from any effects of "aging" on productive capabilities (any depreciation of human resources), human capital is

fixed at its endowed level H0. Assuming that the rental value of one unit of
time spent at work is a single-valued function of the stock of human capital,
wage income in any period would depend only on working time,

Et
where w0

=

w°Xt

t =

1,

...,

n

.
(1.2)

,

w (H0) is a constant real wage rate defined in terms of the composite

denotes the amount of time expended in wage-generating
X, and
activities (work).
xpected nonwage income can be written as the product of the accumulated
good

stock of nonhuman capital in the beginning of a given period Kt_i and the ex-

pected one-period gross rate of return: the expected

interest, dividends,

royaltje other rental income, and capital gains or losses yielded per unit of
capital, net of the direct costs of purchased inputs including brokers? fees

and other transaction costs but inclusive of the value added through own

efforts. That is,

Rt(ht,

H0, Kt1)

=

Kt1 r(ht, H0) ,

(1.3)

7

where ht is time spent at saving in period t, with r?(h) >0 and
rt(110) > 0. Oui basic thesis is that the expected gross rate of return to

capital, rt, or the expected private lending rate of interest, is not a fixed
yield but rather a continuously increasing and twice differentiable function of

saving time, h,' and the consumption unitts stock of human capital--at least
that part of its human capital that is complementary to the management of
assets.

The production function of nonwage incnme specified in equation (1.3)

shows expected nonwage income to be strictly proportional to Kti at any
given level of ht. While this assumption may be largely valid with regard to
the markets for securities on the grounds that individual portfolios are not
large enough to affect the market prices of securities in their possessioti, it

may not always hold in connection with the management of, say, mortgage assets

and rentals of property. An increase in the amount of capital invested in
these latter assets may require more search and own-supplied management efforts

in order to maintain a given gross rate of return even though diminishing
returnb to managerial efforts may be suppressed to some extent through adjust-

ments in the amounts of hired factors of production. Moreover, retaining such
factors at relatively low levels of portfolio size may be uneconomical. More

generally, then, the expected rate of returns may be written as r(ht, H0, Kti)

with r'(Kti)

0. We assume, however, that capital and saving time are com-

plements in the production of nonwage income (see n. 9) and that the magnitude

of rt(Kti) at given levels of ht is negligible over a wide range of portfolio size (see n. 10).

The total amoune of resources available to a consumption unit for consumption and nonhuman capital holding in any given period is generally the sum

of its nonhuman net worth in the begnning of the period and the stock value
of the wage and nonwage income accruing to it during the period. Initially,
the analysis will proceed on the assumption that the consumption unit engages

8

in

no borrowing. The capital constraint for a given period then can

in terms of the requirement that total
capital

be

outlays on goods plus the amount

stated

of

accumulated at the end of the period just exhaust the amount of re-

sources available. That is,

(l.)

Et+Rt+Ktl=xt+Kt,
or, substituting equations

(1.2) and

(1.3) in equation (i.li),

÷ K1 Pt(ht) = X
where

+

pt(ht) = 1 +

The problem becomes that of

t=

Kt

i,

...,

n

,

(1.5)

r(h)

maximizing equation (1.1) subject to the n

one-

Deriod capital constraints given in equation (1.5), n time constraints,

T0=/t+ht
and

t=l, ...,

n,

(1.6)

the initial endowments of the individual's nonhuman and human capital,
K(0) =

K0

H(0) =

H0

(i.)

.

A

more illuminating formulation of the problem can be achieved through an iniuctive solution of the set of equations (1.5) in terms of the initial endownent

of nonhuman capital given in

equation

(1.7). This is permissible on the

ssumption that no borrowing for consumption purposes is desied by the con3umption unit

so that none of the single period constraints is
binding. Using

?quation (1.6), the resulting overall wealth constraint is1

n

E I

t=l
n
=

E

t=1

n+l

w0
i=t+l

n+l

p (T -

t) +t=l
Ut

n+l

(T0 -

t
(1.8)

P.(T0-t.)+K,
1

iT
i=t+l '

9

where

1

pn+1

Equation

(1.8) is just a variant of the Fisherian wealth constraint: it equates

the total expenditures on goods and bequest evaluated in terms of period n
"dollars" with the similarly evaluated future value of the consumption unit's

wage and nonwage receipts. Unlike the Fisherian model, which assumes identical
market discount rates for all individuals, this model allows the private lending
rates of interest to vary across different consumption units and over time according to the extent of individuals' participation in and productivity at saving activities.

Forming

the Lgrangian function:

L(,K,L) = U(Xi•••XnKn)
tw°

the

+

i:1

+

i

(1.9)
PtKo

ti X i+l

p. -

K)

set of first-order optimality conditions for internal solutions involving

positive values of all the control variables is given by8
n+l

MU(xt)_XU p.(hj=o t=l,...,n,

(1.lOa)

i=t+l

MIJ(K)
ni-i

t-i

E (w° i=t+1

k=1

)

-

t-l

x = o

(1.lob)

,

ni-i

p.
j=k+1

t-l

+KQUpk
k=i

p. [-r'(ht)]

i=t+1 1

(i.lOc)

ni-i

Up.[-r'(h)]=O t=l,...,n,
i=t+1

J

and

W-

(h.) - K

i=t+l'

= 0 .

(i.lod)

10

Given an optimal allocation of productive time between work and saving,

the optimal plan of consumption and terminal capital must satisfy the set of
n + 1

equations summarized above or, alternatively, the n independent

equations

MU(x) = ____
MUx
h

t-JY

t = 2, •..,

t

(i.n)

,

and

MU(X)

=

(l.lla)

•

The latter set of equations reproduces the familiar result that the ratios of
the marginal utilities of consumption goods in different time periods must be

the same as the ratios of their respective-marginal costs: the terms at hich
alternatively dated (otherwise identical) consumption claims can

be

traded be-

tween any two periods. If borrowing for consumption is undesired, these terms
of trade are determined by tllendingfl or productive saving opportunities.

Equation (1.lla) shows that the optimal level of terminal capital (measured in

terms of the composite good x)

must yield the same marginal utility as con-

sumption in the final period of the planning horizon since this capital can be
exchanged with similarly dated consumption claims at equal marginal costs.

In turn, given an optimal consumption-bequest plan, an optimal allocation of productive time between work and saving in any given period must satisfy

the set of equations summarized in (l.loc). Dividing this equation through by
n+l
the price of consumption in period t,
fl p., and noting that by definition
i=rt-i-l

(seen. 7), kl(tkw° - Xk)

+

K0

= Kt1, the necessary con-

dition for optimal participation in work and saving involving positive values
of

and ht can be rewritten as

= Kti rt(ht)

t = 1, ..., n

.

(1.12)

U
Equation (1.12) is the familiar factor employment equation of general price

theory. It states that an optimal allocation of time between work and saving
at any given period in which there is positive participation in each activity

can be achieved only if the marginal return to time is identical in both. The
sufficient condition that such an allocation of productive time will maximize

the total expected return from employment (given the level of initial capital
and the constancy of the wage rate) is that there be diminishing marginal pro-

ductivity of saving time, or r"(h) < 0. Figiire 1 illustrates these conditions
graphically. With the assumption that saving time and noiihuman capital are
complements in the generation of nonwage income and given a constant opportunity cost of time, an immediate implication is that the optimal extent of selfemployment in saving activities, except in cases of specialization in work or

saving activitie would be an increasing function of the initial amount of accumulated capital that summarizes the results of earlier productive and con-

sumptive resource allocations (see Figure 2). A fortiori, given w and K,
any decrease in the marginal productivity of management time due to exogenous
factors operating in capital markets would increase individuals' demand for

conventional market activities relative to time in productive saving.

These results may be modified to some degree if markets for capital
provided opportunities for substitution between own management of portfolios

and the services of hired specialists. However, we expect these opportunities
to be imperfect in practice. In the first place, inasmuch as specialists
differ in abilities and the information they possess regarding various assets
at different points in time, investors would have an incentive to search for

productive managers. In addition, transaction costs incurred in hiring specialists' services may make their retention uneconomical especially when the portfolio of capital and expected benefits to the owner are relatively small.

ha

.

t

w

A

K2 r (h3)

w0

K1r' (h2)

h

ht

T0

.

Figure 1

ht

w=

w0

T0

0

K.
mm

Kt -1

Figure 2

.

12

Moreover, a complete reliance on specialists generally would be optimal only
if specialists' services could be considered as perfect substitutes to own

productive saving in all relevant aspects of saving. But specialists need not

have the same incentive for prudence in the management of owners' assets as
have the owners themselves. Thus both factors of production may be used in
managing individual portfolios in accordance with cost minimizing principles.
As long as own entrepreneurial services and specialists' services were complementary in the production of nonwage returns, the employment of both may be

expected to rise as individual portfolio sizes rise. Formally, the analysis
of optimal employment of hired factors of production is similar to the analysis

of

borrowing for productive saving that is

Both

are

of own

so as to maximize wealth. Since services rendei'ed by hired

undertaken

factors are

expected

saving

considered in the following section.

to raise the lending rate of interest at any given level

activity, their optimal employment is expected to increase mono-

tonically with portfolio size even when the consumption unit

specializes

in

productive saving, i.e., when ht/To = 1.
The interaction between productive and consumptive allocations of resources and the stability conditions underlying these allocations can be il-

lustrated graphically by means of conventional, two-period analysis, Let the
consumption unit's horizon consist of two periods and let the desired bequest

be zero. The endowment position represented by point C in Figure 3 represents
the amounts of resources available for consumption in periods 1 and 2 in the

absence of any intertemporal capital transfers. These are I and 12 = w°T0,
respectively. Consumption of goods can be traded between the two periods via
the transformation curve:
X2 =

p2(h2)(11

where the difference I at

the end.

of period 1. The

K1

-

X1)

+

w0(T0

-

h2)

denotes the amount

,

(1.13)

of capital accumulated

slope of this curve is readily found to equal p2.

.

12a

x2

A

P

.
12

0

xl

Ii

xl

Figure 3

.

13
Formally:

dX

CIX

-

=

0
= [PT (h2)K1 - w ] — + p2(h2(K1))

But since by equation (1.12), p'(h2)K1 = w°,

-—a--—
CIX

1

then

(K)
1 '

(ijA

which duplicates the equilibrium condition for intertemporal allocation of

consumption given in equation (1.11). The important implication of this result is that the relevant rate of interest affecting intertemporal consumption

decisions is Marshall's gross interest. It is not the net yield. One plus
0
the net yield per unit of capital, p(ht) -

w ht
K

,

is

the slope,

in,

of

the

t -l

straight line connecting points P and C in Figure 3,

or

the average terms

of trtde between consumption in consecutive periods. What are relevant for
consumption and savings decisions, however, are the marginal terms of trade
that are determined by the (expected) gross rate of return inclusive of the

value added through the investor's own efforts. Since, in general, the gross
rate of return is expected to be positively related to the amount of capital
accumulated, the transformation curve AC in Figure 3 is expected to be convex

toward the origin (see n. 10). The sufficient condition for a stable equilibriuin involving productive saving therefore requires that the marginal rate of

substitution in consumption between X2 and X1 rise faster than the corresponding marginal rate of substitution in production as more of

X1 is ex-

changed for X2 through productive saving. The shape of the segment of the
consumption transformation curve that involves borrowing for consumption will
be discussed in Section II below.

The behavioral content of the model can be sharpened at the expense of

some simplifying assumptions oancerning the form of the utility function. Let

1Ii

U in equation (1.1) be a homothetic function. For illustration, we choose a
specific form of a hoinothetic function such that

/x

MIJ(x )

\

where

\1/0t
)

t/

= a+1 ..

MIT(v-

,

t = 2,

...,

n

(1.15)

,

denotes a constant elasticity of substitution between
and i-i,

which is to be defined by the identity T

1

-

a, is an

index of time preference for X1 relative to X.1' Similarly, it is assunied that

MtJ(K )

=

MU(xt1)
where

/Xn\'/kfl

nç)

(1.15a)

denotes the elasticity of substitution between
to be defined by the identity

T 1 - c,

and X, and

is an index of the con-

sumption unit's preference bias in period n toward own consumption relative
to its retirement fund or bequest. By introducing equations (1.15) and (1.15a)
into equations (1.11) and (1.lla), it now can be shown that the optimal rate

of growth of the composite good X over the life cycle and the corresponding
optimal level of bequest relative to consumption 111 the last period of the planning

horizon would be given by

x

t(r(1t) -

log
t -l

and by
log

r)

t 2, ...,

(-T) •/

11

(1.16)

(1.lGa)

The homotheticity of the utility function for lifetime consumption and
bequest generally implies that an increase in the gross rate of interest would
raise the optimal ratio of later to earlier consumption claims in consecutive

periods. More specifically, given the weakly separable C.E.S. utility function
considered in the preceding illustration, the direction as well as the extent

15

of the growth of consumption over time are shown by equations (1.16) and (i.i6a)
to be dependent essentially on the difference between the consumption unit's
gross lending rate of interest and its time preference for "present" or own

consumption relative to "future" consumption or bequest. Ihus, if the
consumption unit had neutral time preferences in all periods and the lending

rate of interest wee always positive, then consumption of goods would increase
continuously over the planning horizon and peak at the final period. Moreover,
since by assumption the lending rate of interest is positively related to the
level of saving activity, so would be the optimal rate of growth of consumption
over time, and thus, indirectly, the absolute size of bequest also would relate positively to saving activity.
The preceding analysis generally indicates the existence of interde-

pendencies between consumption-saving decisions and work-saving decisions.

Under given labor market opportunitie participation in saving activity is seen
to be inoriotonicafly related to the amount of accwnulated capital. In turn,

the extent of participation in saving activities and the resulting rates of

return

on

growth

of consumption over time and,

capital would, along with time preferences, determine the rate of
consequently,

the rate and direction of

capital accumulation that are necessary to effect the desired consumption plan.

The analysis indicates that then saving activity is viewed as a productive
process,

consumption decisions concerning the intertemporal allocations of goods

cannot be separated frctn production decisions concerning the maximization of

wealth and that the separation theorem of conventional models of intertemporal
consumption and production decisions, asserting the independence of the two,

cannot be considered valid.13 Another apparent implication of this analysis,
which is more fully developed in Section IV below, is that different consumption
units- - even

equally wealthy ones- -may have different consumption paths not

necessarily because of differences in subjective discount rates or because of

16

•systematic

association between time preferences for consumption and. wealth,

)ut because of differences in their gross rates of retuni to savings due to
Iif±'erences in their initial endowments of nonhuman

and human

capital and

bilities.

:i. Foductive Saving and Borrowing
For the sake of a simple yet general introduction of borrowing opportuiities into our

choice

oncerning the market

theoretic framework, we make the following assumptions

for

borrowing. We assume that borrowing, like consump-

'ion and the augmentation of capital assets, occurs at the end of a standard

eriod and that principal and

interest

payments mature and

are

planned to be

aid at the end of the succeeding period. The length of a standard borrowing
eriod is identified with the length of a single period of the consumption

nit's
•

•

.

planning horizon.

We further assume that the marginal borrowing cost

f capital is a function of the amount borrowed, D,
orth,

N. That is, in symbols, MbC =

ud Ct(Nti) <

0. The

and

MbC(Dti,Ntj),

the

borrower's net

with MbCI(Dti)

>0

logic behind the productive saving hTothesis

uggests that borrowing costs also should be influenced by resource expendi-

ures by the borrower in search for less expensive sources of funds. We shall
iscuss this possibility later in this section. Initially, borrowing is viewed
s an activity that does not ccnsume resources.

A consumption unit can borrow for two fundamentally distinct purposes.

ne is to finance current consumption of nondurable goods./ The other is to
ugnient the amount of income generating assets under its command. We call the

econd borrowing for productive saving. Clearly, borrowing for productive
aving is inconsistent with the simple Fisherian model of saving which assumes

aat the lending and borrowing interest rates are identical. It also is inDnsistent with differing, though constant, lending and borrowing rates since then

17

the latter must always exceed the former. Under the assumptions of rising
marginal borrowing costs, however, such borrowing is compatible with productive
saving activities since the expected gross rate of return on assets is assumed
to be an increasing function of saving activity.

Regardless of whether productive saving is own

borrowing,

financed

or funded

borrowing for consumption is not expected to be undertaken

by

simul-

taneously with productive saving activity. It would not pay the consumption
unit to borrow funds to finance consumption purchases prior to tapping its own
capital assets because the cost of borrowing funds at the margin necessarily
exceeds the return from lending foregone if own, rather than (additionally)

borrowed, capital is used. This is readily seen when

borrowing for productive

saving is optimal. Then the marginal gross return on own capital must fall
short of the minimum cost of borrowing funds. Moreover, if the consumption
unit has already undertaken positive borrowings for productive saving, then
borrowing additional funds for consumption cannot be optimal since, as will be
shown later, optimal borrowing for productive saving requires equality in
equilibrium between the marginal borrowing cost of capital and the gross rate

of return on that capital." Thus, we derive the important implication that
any borrowing can be considered borrowing for productive saving as long as
the consumption unit has positive holdings of nonwage income generating capital
assets
tures).

(excluding emergency funds that may
The foflowing

axalysis

be

subsumed under

consumption expendi-

indicates that the relevant rate of interest

or interteniporal consumption decisions then would be identified with the 'oss

(lending) rate of interest on own capital.
The preceding discussion suggests that when borrowing opportunities

are

available

to the consumption unit,

the

resource constraint limiting cal-

sumption and capital holding in each period can

be

specified in either of two

18

forms depending upon whether borrowing is done for the purpose of consumption

or for productive saving. In the first case, the one-period resource caistraint
is given by

w°t+DtXt+tDti,
where
=

indicates

1 +

T,

(2.1)

the average return to the lending institution,

and Dt may be positive, negative, or nhl The terms of trade between

pairs of consumption goods in different periods would be determined by the
marginal borrowing cost of capital, which is expected to rise with the scale

of borrowings. Thus, the relevant transformation curve between future

present

and

consumption would be concave toward the origin, as depicted by the arc

CB in Figure 3. In the case of borrowing for productive saving, the oneperiod resource constraint is given by

+
ihere Dt_i .

(p.c

-

ö)

Nt_i t ÷ Dt_i ( Dt_i

bt)

(rt -

=

+N

(2.2)

,

represents the net income generated

bhrough productive borrowing. By utilizing the equilibrium conditions for optimal
orrowing and saving activity, it can easily be shown that the slope of the
ransformatjon curve between future
Lictated by the lending

rate

and

present consumption then woi.ld be

of interest as is the arc AC in Figure 3.

In

rincipie, one cannot rule out the possibility that the consumption unit would

e

a net borrower in some periods and d.

net 1ender in other periods. By

'urther restriction of the utility function of lifetime consumption and. be-

uest considered in Section I, however, one can show that erratic switching
rorn a position of i. net borrower to one of a net lender is not likely to

ccui from one period to another. Let
a constant throughout
guation

the

parameter

the relevant planning horizon and

in equation (1.15)
let the parameters

of

(l.15a) dictate any positive ratio of terminai capital to consumption

different periods. Clearly, then, as long as there were no
exogenous in-

19

creases in wage income over time, borrowings for consumption purposes would be
inconsistent with a positive difference between objective (lending or borrowing)
interest rates and

subjective

rates of time preference. The reason

is that equation (i.i6) then would imply a strictly ising
over

consumption

path

time, whereas the borrowing of capital for current. consumption decreases

the amount of resources that can be expended on bequest

or the purchase of goods

in at least one future period by the amount of debt service payments. This
assertion must be modified, of course, if wage income grew over time at a rate
exceeding the optimal rate of growth of planned consumption expenditures.

In

our deterministic model of intertemporal consumption and production decisions,
however, the growth of wage income must be explained primarily as the result

of human capital accumulation. Intensive investment in human capital is expected to take place early in the investor's life, during which time he might
also resort to net borrowing of capital if his initial net worth is negligible.

But with rt > Tt, and with accumulation of human capital rapidly leveling off,
as models of human capital accumulation invariably predict (see, in particular,
Becker (l96i.) and Mincer (i971.)), the only way to effect a plan of persistently

rising consumption expenditures is by gradually building up, and then maintain-

ing, a positive stock of own physical capital. Since the main interest in this
paper is in explaining the behavior of consumption units with positive levels
of capital assets, we henceforth focus on the implications of borrowing for

productive purposes, assuming that r(ht) > Tt and that asset holdings are
nonnegative throughout the relevant planning horizon, starting at t =

1.

With this restriction in mind, it is easily shown that the overall
wealth constraint for consumption units that are net lenders throughout their
planning horizon would be

20

.
0
n

+

-

5t+i

Dt

+ N0 l

=t+2

(2.3)

= E

n+l

x i=t+]
TI

t=1

where N0 and Nn
tial and terminal

P+N

K1. denote, respectively, the consumption unit's own ini-

physical

capital. bptimai consumption and production deci-

sions now can be derived by differentiating the utility function of lifetime

bequest

consumption and

with respect to the relevant choice variables, subject

to the wealth constraint given in equation (2.3). The optimality conditions
for consumption decisions .are formally the same as those derived u-i Section I.

Production decisions, however, involve the simultaneous determination of optimal

values of f

(or ht) and Dti. Given the value of Dti, the optimal

allocation of time between work and saving must satisfy the set of optimality
conditions

w° =

(Nt_i

(2.)

+ Dt1) r'(ht)

(2,a)

(Nt_i + Dti) r"(ht) < 0 ,

provided that ht and

are positive; t = 1,

...,

n.

These conditions are

formally identical to the conditions for optimal work and saving decisions derived in Seclion I except that here

Kt is comprised of both own and borrowed

assets. In turn, the optimal scale of borrowing in any period where D > 0
must satisfy the set of equations

r(ht) =

vrbCt/Dti

b(Dt i,Nt )(1 +

_bt(Dti)(l +

-

MbC

b(Dt i,Nt1)

(2.5)

__

>0 ,

(2.5a)

.

21

D

•
where bD = D
t-1
(2.5) is the marginal

t

.

The

expression on the left-hand side of equation

rate of return on lending and

the

expression on the right

the marginal borrowing cost of capital. In equilibrium, of course, they
must be the same. The sufficient conditions for optimal values of
is

Dti

to maximize

(2.5a),

the

consumption unit's wealth, in addition to (2.li-a) and

require that

+

Diagrammatically,

Nti) rt1(ht) Ct/Dtj - [rt(ht)]2 >

0 .

(2.6)

equation (2.6) is satisfied if the marginal borrowing cost

of

capital

of

return on nonhuman capital, as he expands the scale of his borrowing.19

becomes increasingly adverse to the borrower, relative to his rate

These optimality conditions are portrayed in Figure II.
The central behavioral implications of the foregoing analysis involve
potential interdependencies between N and D. At low levels of net worth,
saving activity may be negligible, and so r(h) is expected to be lower than
the marginal borrowing cost of capital. Little borrowing for the purpose of

acquiring additional income generating assets is expected. But as N grows
and participation in saving activity is enhanced, r(h) also is expected to
rise sufficiently to make borrowing for productive saving optimal. Moreover,
an increase in own assets is expected to promote a greater absolute amount of
borrowing as well as greater participation in productive saving activity.20
This is demonstrated graphically in Figure II., where an increase in N from

N0 to N1 is associated with a greater absolute increase in K from K0 to
K1. This analysis does not rule out borrowing for productive saving at low
levels of asset holdings. It implies, however, that such borrowing is more
likely to be undertaken by those who specialize in the management of their as-

21a

S

Marginal
borrowing

cost,

marginal

rate of
return

MbC0

)

Mbci(Dt1, N1)

r (h (K1))
I

I

I

I

I

I

P

.

I

I

I

I

I

I

Noithunian
N0

capital

N1 K0

K1

accumulated

Figure 11.

(The linear curves are only illustrative.)

S

22

sets since their lending rates of interest are expected to be relatively large

at given levels of asset holdings. Thus we expect that borrowing for productive
saving will be more prevalent among unincorporated business families than among

families of wage earners. Indeed, at low levels of asset holdings entrepreneurial savings consequently may be more negative than those of wage earners.
The analysis generally implies that saving activity and productive borrowing
can be considered "complements" in the sense that an increase in one activity
due to exogenous factors will promote both.
The analysis so far has ignored the possible role of ti!ne and

other resources in borrowing costs. In the generally segmented market for borrowing, careful search among lenders may reduce the borrowing costs of capital

to the consumption unit at any level of borrowing and net worth. Optimal borrowing activity would then be achieved when the marginal return from time de-

voted to shopping for funds, a, is equa] to the opportunity cost of time in
other pursuits. The necessary condition for an optimal allocation of time between work, borrowing, and saving activities, if all are positive, is given by

w0 =

(Nt_i

+

Dt_i)

r'(ht) =

_Dt1

b'(at) ,

(2.7)

where b(at) is a continuously decreasing, twice differentiable, and convex

function of at.
Productive borrowing and saving activities generally are expected to

be complementary in affecting nonwage returns. Indeed, these may be joint
activities from the investor's point of view. In general, active borrowing
for productive saving is likely to take place at a relatively high level of
borrowing which, in turn, is expected to increase with net worth. Moreover,

the higher is N at any given level of opportunities for work, the greater
will be the amount of time devoted to both saving and borrowing. Thus, the

23

formal incorporation of productive borrowing activity in the model strengthens
the

implications of the preceding analysis of productiire saving. The main significance is in pointing to the potential existence of an additional source of
productivity in the process of generating nonwage income.

III.

Capital Accumulation Paths and Life
Cycle Variations in Productive
Resource Allocations
While

the

work and saving,
are the

allocation of goods over time, the allocation of time between

and

the optimal level of productive borrowing in each period

"control variables" of our model, the accumulation of nonhuman capital

over the planning horizon is the "state variable" that summarizes all previous

production and consumption decisions. Since changes in the level of accumulated
capital, in turn, indicate the magnitude of savings in each period, optimal
savings paths can be derived through analysis of capital accumulation paths.

As in Section II, the analysis here will focus on consumption units with posi-

tive capital assets. For methodological convenience, we assume that on the
average life cycle expectations are fulfilled so that the planned resource allocations of a representative consumption unit are realized in practice.

The one-period resource constraint given by equation (1.5) can alternatively be defined by
=

w° + K1 r

- (Nt

-

N1)

t =

1,

...,

n

>0. (3.1)

tithout loss of generality, we now ignore the separate role of productive
)orrowing

Ef

and

human capital and

onsumption
=

Kt with Nt. We

identify
the

''-l

=

wage rate from work are constant, the change in the

of goods over time can be

X1 - X

also assume that r(ht

= [w0

-

Nt1

approximated by

rt(htl)]tt +

t = 1,

...,

n

-

1

r(ht+1)kt1
.

-

•

+ -1
(3.2)

211

The term Nt =

Nt÷i

-

Nt

represents the magnitude of savings in period t.

Since an optimal allocation of time between work and saving insures the equal-

ity of the marginal returns on all productive uses of time, the first term on
the right-hand side of equation (3.2) in equilibrium is equal to zero (provided
is constant), and

that specialization in saving activities implies that ht
equation (3.2) reduces to

=

r(ht+i)Nti

-

t

-

Nt1)

t = 1, ...,

n

- 1

(3.3)

.

Equation (3.3) defines a direct relation between the rate of change in the
allocation of goods and the rate of capital formation over time.

For example,

if the gross lending rate of interest exceeds the subjective rate of time pref-

erence in all the relevant periods, as was assumed in the preceding section,
then the optimal path of the allocation of goods will be rising throughout the

planning horizon, or X. > 0 in all t.

If, in addition, relative prefer-

ences between om consumption and bequest in the final period of the planning

x(N* l
horizon are such that the optimal ratio

N*

implies N > N1, then

and hence the algebraic value of savings in period t,

must have been

positive in all preceding periods. Alternatively, if the consumption unit is
initially a net borrower, then its debt must be reduced in part or in full following the initial period(s) of borrowing when net worth is either zero or

negative. To prove this, note that if Nt1 were negative, then Nt necessarily has the same algebraic sign to insure that X. > 0, since by rearranging
terms, equation (3.3) can be written as

=

[l + r(ht+i)] --

t=

1,

•..,

n -l .

(3.)

25

The path of capital accumulation would be falling continuously over time once

the consumption unit starts dissaving. But such a path would be inconsistent

with N1 =

Nn

-

> 0. The optimal path of capital accumulation must

then be continuously rising over time. Possibly, however, relative preferences
between on consumption and bequest in the typical case are such that the ratio

N

implies .1V* < N1 (see the discussion in n. 12). If Nn > N in

this case, the optimal path of capital accumulation must rise initially over
some range of the planning horizon, attain a peak, and then continuously decline over the final range (see Figure 5).
of course, may be consistent with

This path of capital accumulation,

< N0 also. The main implications of

this analysis can be summarized by the following theorem.

Theorem: Given a homothetic utility function of lifetime consumption as considered in Section I, with the gross rate of interest always exceeding the rate

of time preference, and with a constant wage rate, the capital accumulation path
is either continuously rising (with a possible net indebtedness being first
settled) or is initially rising and then falling, provided that initial capital
ioes not exceed terminal capital.

The preceding analysis depends crucially on the assumption that the wage

rate w° =

w(H0)

is constant throughout the planning horizon. If it were sub-

ject to uncontrollable variations over the life cycle, equation (3.Ii) would
reflect such variations as follows:

-

learly,

= [1

+

r(ht)]

k1 -

(3.5)

then, any systematic exogenous decreases in the wage rate would

trengthen the above theorem, whereas systematic exogenous increases in the
rage rate may render it invalid, unless the difference

ositive. Under the deterministic model of productive

-

were always

saving, however, changes

25a

N

t

t

0

n

N0

Figure 7

Capital Accumulation with X > 0,

NQ<N<N1,

26

in

the wage rate over time are

expected

to occur mainly

as

a result of positive

investments in human capital, so far assumed to be endowed at a constant level.
Investment in human capital is clearly an alternative means of accumulating

capital assets or engaging in productive saving. AM, as has already been
pointed out in our analysis in Section II, the accumulation of human capital,
due to its embodiment in the investor and. its nonmarketability in general, is

expected

to take

investments in

cline

place early in the

human

life cycle. Following the termination of

capital, w = w(H) is expected to remain constant or de-

as a result of depreciation of human capital. The theorem expounded in

the preceding discussion would then hold unambiguously. But even during the
period of accumulation of human capital, the theorem may remain valid if human
and nonhuman capital were complements in the production of wealth, because
planned persistent increases in consumption expenditures, in the absence of
expectations for purely exogenous increases in wage income, must be effected
through some positive accumulation of future income-generating assets--human
or nonhuman--as long as initial (nonhuman) capital is less than or equal to

terminal capital (N0 <N). Indeed., human and nonhuman capital assets are likely
to be acquired simultaneously, at least throughout the latter part of the human
capital investment period, if only because an increase in human capital may en-

hance productivity in saving activities.'
The paths of capital accumulation derived above generally appear compatible with empirical evidence relating to asset holdings in a cross section
of age groups at a point in time (see, e.g., Projector and Weiss (1966), Tables

A8 and AlO). These paths might also be used to predict life cycle variations in

participation rates. If wage rates and the

hours of

work and

marginal

productivity of saving

labor force

time

were constant over the planning horizon,

.

27

the amount of working time devoted to labor market activities would tend to
decline as caiiital was continually accuilated and the amount of time devoted

to self-employment in the management of capital assets would adually increase,
peaking at the peak of nonhuman asset accunmiation. The latter result follows
from equation (1.12) since, with a constant market price of time and an un-

changing function r(h, k), there exists a unique relationship between the size
of capital accumulated and the expected absolute amount of time devoted to saving.
This prediction remains valid even if human capital changed. systematically over

the life cycle, provided that it had a neutral effect on the productivity of
time devoted to saving and to work, as well as to other potential pursuits.

Specifically, if

=

t-l

and rt =

r(ht

.

Hti),

an increase in

would. not affect the equilibrium condition for an optimal allocation of time

between work and saving since the ratio wt/rt(ht) would be invariant to

changes in Hti. It is possible, of course, that human capital acquired
through general schooling and training is biased in favor of conventional labor

market activities. Persons with such training would tend to specialize in labor
market activities at least through the period of intensive training and. other

related investments. Still, our basic prediction concerning the effect of
physical capital accumulation on the allocation of time between work
and

saving

is expected to hold at any given level of human capital accumula-

And it is expected to hold even more strongly during the period of

net human capital depreciation as long as there was no comparable deaccumulation of nonhuman

capital.

Indeed, empirical evidence controlling for family

income indicates that the share of nonhuman

assets

among all assets increases

continuously with age: controlling for family income, Projector and Weiss
(op. cit., pp. 7,
and.

age

8) report

a positive correlation between net asset holdings

across. the entire age range. A general implications of the analysis is

28

that

as age rises the fraction of all working time devoted to asset management

also rises. Evidence derived from the same data analyzed by Projector and Weiss

is consistent with this implication. It shows that among all household heads
the proportion of those who are self-employed increases monotonically with age.
Even retirement may be explained, in part, as a consequence of nonhuman capital

accumulation inducing specialization in saving activities. If, however, asset
holdings substantially decrease later in life, then the allocation of working time

between saving and work may once again shift in favor of the latter. Reentry
into the labor market after a period of specialization in self-employment might

be

explained as a consequence of deaccumulation of assets which decreases the

marginal productivity of saving time relative to labor market ea1ning power.

IV. The Average Propensity to Save
In the preceding section we discussed expected capital accumulation
paths

over the life cycle, Of course, realized paths may vary among consuiixp-

tion units of like characteristics, Consumption units also differ in their

initial endowments
careers.

of human

and

nonhuman

assets and. in their chosen occupational

In this section we discuss the effects of these differences on the

propensity to save in light of the productive saving hypothesis,
Consider, first, the effect of an

increase in wealth due to an

exogenous increase in the endowment of nonhuman capital or the corresponding
magnitude

of

the relative

nonwage income.

In the Fisherian model this would not affect

interteniporal allocation of goods if the utility function of life-

time consumption and. bequest were homothetic. This implication of the Fisherian
modelunderlies the well-known theories of the consumption function by Friedman
(1957)

and

by Modigliani and Brumberg (1951i-). Interms of the permanent income

hypothesis one can write

X =

kt(r)

(.1)

29

where

denotes permanent income (or wealth) as evaluated by the consunrption

unit at age t,

and

kt

measures its average propensity to consume out of

permanent income. If r were constant, so would be

k.

In constrast, our

model suggests that an exogenous increase in net worth or nonwage income would
increase simultaneously the desired amount of asset holdings, the optimal
amount of productive resources allocated to saving activity (including om time,
hired factors, and borrowing activity), and the rate of return on savings.

Consequently, we expect an exogenous increase in net orth to decrease the
average propensity to consume out of permanent income. This major implicatLon
of the analysis can be demonstrated, graphically via the

two-period consumption

model discussed in Section I. An increase in K0 (as in Section I, we here

identify K with N) implies that he initial endowment point B

in Figure 6

shifts out horizontally to point F. Since the consumption unit's wage rate
is unaffected, the consumption transformation curve passing through F, BFB',
is just a horizontal translate of the initial transformation curve, AEA'./

Clearly, the slope of the curve BFB' is steeper than the slope of AEA'

along the ray OP' passing through the initial equilibrium position P.
Thus, if the utility function is homothetic the new equilibrium position must

lie to the left of the ray OP',

say at point Q. Both the optimal level

of net worth in period 1 and the optimal ratio

increase as a result.

That an increase in the desired level of asset holdings increases the optimal
ratio

of future

differentiating

to current consumption can be verifed mathematically by

equation

(1.16) with respect to

d ao(x2/x)

as long as r'(K1)

=

K.1 since

22/1>

0 '

(1.2)

dr2/dX1 > 0. If desired bequest were nil, an increase

in x2/x1 necessarily implies that the percentage increase in wealth, defined

at the new equilibrium position Q by

=

X1 p(h2) + X2,

exceeds the

percentage increase in X1. The ratio of current consumption to permanent

29a

.

H

a,

.

to

p-I

0

N

.

0

.

30

income, k1, then is expected to fall. The same result obtains if the analysis
is generalized to n periods. Furthermore, since by equation (l.16a) the ratio
of bequest to the planned consumption expenditures in period n is independent
of

wealth, planned bequest, if

positive, would rise by the same 'proportion as

X. Consequently, the ratio of the

time

discounted, as

undiscounted, life

well as

consumption to life time income would necessarily fall." Regardless

of whether bequest is optimal, the decline in the ratio o± current consumption
to wealth as northuman wealth rises also implies that the ratio of current con-

sumption to current income falls. That is, the analysis implies that both

and X/Y decline as wealth rises.'

wealth

Next, consider an increase in

capital. Since the corresponding
increase in current wage income as well

due to a greater ?tendowmentt

power

of human

increase in earning

an

as in potential wage income in all

relevant ftiture

periods, the end.owment position in Figure 6 shifts upward and.

to the right of point E, but below the ray OE'. -'Point
increase
in

implies

in wage income in pexod 1 by an amount equal

H illustrates an

to the absolute increase

nonwage resources considered in the preceding illustration. If the increase

in human

capital

does not affect the consumption unit's rate of return at

given levels of nonhuman
consumption

capital, that is, if dr(K)/dH

transformation curve passing

a horizontal translate of curves

AEA.'

= 0,

through H, CaC',

then

the new

again would be

and. BFB' after adjusting for the

vertical distances between the different endowment positions. It can easily
be shown in

higher

ratio

this case

would be

to

that the new optimal ratio of

than their initial ratio at point P, but lower than the

associated with an equal increase in nonwage

(compare points R and Q

in

Figure 6).

income

or nonhuman wealth

A permanent increase in wage income

here is found to raise the optimal savings to wealth ratio by
an equal once and for

corresponding

all increase in nonwage income

less

or nonhuman wealth.

over, this conclusion is strengthened if the effect of an increase
income

than would
More-

in wage

is compared with the effect of an increase in nonwage income or nonhuman

31

wealth that led. to an equal

increase

in the consumption unit's

overall

wealth.

This easily can be verified by comparing the equilibrium positions R and. S
associated with the consumption transformation curves CHC' and DGD',

respectively. By construction these two
Since, in general, a change
of

in

curves

intersect at point R.

human capital

may alter

the allocation

resources to productive saving activity, the preceding illustration,assumng

no such effects, may serve only as a bencbmark for analysis of more general

cases. A neutral effect of human capital on the productivity of resources at
work and saving, as analyzed in Section III, would not affect the allocation
of working time and other resources between the two activities but would. raise

the productivity of time and other resources spent saving at given levels of

Kt1. The result could be an increase im r(K), hence in the steepness of
the arc OH along the curve CHC'. The implication of the preceding analysis
concerning the positive effect of an increase in wage income on the optimal

saving to wealth ratio then would be fortified. In constrast, if human capital
were "biasedt' in favor of conventional labor market activities, which is likely

if it were comprised mainly of "general" schooling and labor market experience,

then

an

from

productive saving toward "work," might decrease the levek of r(K), hence

increase in human capital, by

shifting the allocation of resources away

the steepness of the transformation curve OH. An exogenous increase in wage
earnings due to an improvement in labor market opportunities

example of a shift in opportunities

is an obvious

that may "bias" the allocation of resources

away from productive saving. In these cases the optimal savings to wealth
ratio resulting from an increase iii

wage income may be decidedly lower than

the one resulting from an equal increase in nonwage income or nonhuman wealth.

This analysis may be used to reinterpret the positive association
between the level of measured income and the average propensity to save as

reported in numerous budget studies without exclusive resort to explanations

32

on the effect of variations in transitory components of income on the
propensity to save. Households or spending units of given age, schooling, and
&rawing

labor market
have higher

experience

of nonhuman capital may

and with larger endowments

propensities to save out of permanent

relatively higher rates of return

income because of their

on savings. A similar

conclusion may also

apply to the propensities to save of consumption units o± a given age and net
worth and with higher levels

of human capital,

provided

the cha'acter of their

human capital were not %iased" significantly against saving

Inasmuch as cross-sectional variations in income

activities.--'

reflect variations in permanent

components of income, an observation of a systematic association between the
propensity to save and income may be explained,

at least in part,

as a con-

sequence o± a positive association between permanent income and. the productive

management of assets. That is, one may write

X =
dk
<0.

with

(•3)

k.(Y)

Equation (1,..3) is cctrpatible with Keynes' (second) "law"

pt

of consumption (see Keynes (1961), pp. 28,126). In our analysis the law is
conditional, however,

upon

the interaction between the optimal level of

accumulated assets and productive saving activity and. does not rely on any

systematic association between time preference for consumption and wealth.
It also should be noted that our result is stated

tion between

in terms

of a

negative associa-

permanent income and the averg, but not the marginal propensity

to consume.

The preceding analysis may be applied ire directly in interpreting
empirical, evidence on the average propensities to consume of different occupational
and racial groups. Assuming

tory

(as does Friedman (1957),

pp. 61, 80) that transi-

coiuponents of measured income and. consumption expenditures tend to average

33

to

out

zero across all income brackets of specific occupational and racial

groups, the average consumption

as

to

income ratios of these groups may serve

unbiased estimators of their average propensities to consume out of per-

manent income. Indeed, Table 1 contains evidence on average consumption to
average income ratios of independent business, farm, and other spending units
in

the United

productive

units can

States in l9l.8-5O

hich

appeai to be highly compatible with the

saving hypothesis. The groups of farmers and.

independent business

be distinguished from others in that they presumably are more

"specialized"

in

direct management of their assets and engage less 5n conventional

t?worktT relative to other groups. Not only are independent business units and.

farmers expected to allocate more resources into productive saving activities
relative

to those tho

capital--training

and

specialize in wage earnings, also their specific human
job

experience--is likely to be more complementary to

the management of their business assets. Consequently, we would. expect the
rate

of return on their nonhuman capital

and. hence their average

(especially on equity in own business),

propensity to save out of permanent income (especially

in the form of business assets), to be relatively high. Moreover, since independent
business units in the 1914.8-50 sample on the average have more income and pre-

sumablylarger portfolios of capital assets than

allocate

relatively more resources, own and

farmers, they are expected to

hired, into productive saving than

do farm units (many of which are farm laborers). Consequently, the average
propensity
to

to save of independent nonfamn business

units may indeed be expected.

be higher than that of farm units."
The well-known permanent

and

systematic explanation for

income

hypothesis provides

an effective

cross-sectional differences between least squares

regression estimates of marginal propensities to consume out of measured income
and. income elasticities of consumption of different occupational groups by

33a

TABLE 1

RELATION BETWEEN CONSUMPTION A.ND INCOME FOR
II1DEPE]JDENT BUSINESS, FARM,

A]D

OTI1R SPEIWING UNITS

(l9I.8-l95o)

Occupational
Group

Average
Disposable Income

Average
Propensity
to Consume

Income

Elasticity of
Consumption

Current
Prices

1935-59
Prices

Independent
business

lj.,789

2,795

.77

.70

Farmers

2,li.Oli.

1,1O3

.88

.69

Others

3,038

1,773

• 95

.86

Note: Figures

are for

.

money consumption and. money disposable

income.

Source: Friedman (1957, p. 71)

3)1

virtue of the different degrees to which variations in the total income of
these groups are accounted for by variations in transitory components of

income. However, it does not appear to offer similarly powerful explanations
of systematic differences in the average consumption to income ratios of

these groups. The main consideration raised by Friedman in connection with
the evidence reported in Table 1 is that the relatively larger variance in
transitory income obtained by business and farm units makes it optimal for
them to save more than nonfarm, nonbusiness units for the purpose of building

up reserves for emergencies. By similar reasoning, however, the average propensitytosave out of permanent incoae is also expected to be negatively related to the ratio of nonhuman capital to permanent income, as the discussion

in n. 25 indicates. Since the income of business and farm families derives to
a large extent from their nonhuman capitsi assets, the ratio of their nonhuman
assets to their permanent incomes should be markedly higher than that of other

families as an occupational prerequisite. Indeed, evidence based on the Survey
of Financial Characteristics of Cnsumers in 1963 shows that the ratio of mean
nonhuman wealth (including business assets) to mean income of self-employed units

j

about 7 as compared to 2 for salaried units. Even when business assets are

excluded, the nonhuman capital to income ratio of the self-employed is about 1j,

as compared to 1.8 for the salaried. (See Projector and Weiss (1966), Tables A8
and A3)-i-.)

The higher ratio of' nonhuman assets to permanent income of' business

fainilies might lessen the incentive in these groups to save for emergencies.

The productive saving hypothesis thus offers an independent and consistent interpretation for differences in the average propensities to consume of these
different occupational groupings (also see Friedman (1957), pp. 69, 78).
A second application of this analysis concerns the apparently
different average propensities to consume of black and. white families as

reported in Friedman (1957, Table 7). In each of ten comparisons of average
propensities to consume of black and white families in various city sizes in

35

Northern

and Southern states, the ratio is higher for blacks than for their

white neighbors. Reference to systematic differences in the relative dispersion of transitory components of measured income across the two groups fails

to provide a consistent explanation for the evidence just mentioned: the relative dispersion of transitory components of incon of black families is estimated

to be higher than or equal to that of white families in three of the four Southn
communities included in the sample. Yet the average propensity to consume of
black families still appears higher thanthat of whites for all income classes.
On the productive saving hypothesis the relatively lower propensity to save of
black families can be consistently interpreted as a consequence of objective op-

portunities. Discrimination in real estate markets and in markets for certain
unincorporated businesses may limit the range of investment options available to
blacks just as labor market discrimination reduces their wage income opportunities.
Even if discrimination in ]abor markets affected earning opportunities more than

discrimination in capital markets, any presence of the latter implies that r(h)

would be lower for blacks than for whites at any given value of h. Moreover,
blacks generally possess smaller endowments of assets andacquire less (specific)

human capital than whites. Thus, the average propensity to save from permanent
income for black fi1ies might be lower than that for whites not because of
unique motivation or diferent time preference, but becaues of inferior opportunities for producing returns on noithuman assets.

Although the productive saving model developed in this paper can
be applied in explanation of cross-sectional differences in average propensities

to consume,it is not directly applicable in explanation of secular trends in

the aggregate consumption to income ratios over time. The productive saving
hypothesis links cross-sectional differences in average propensities to
consume

to differences among consumption

units in their

private rates of return

on savings.

But while the theory identifies the basic factors affecting the

distribution

of private rates of return at a point in time, it

has no direct

36

implications

for movements in the level of the distribution over time. The

latter essentially depends on market forces determining the real rates of

interest in the economy. Moreover, trends in the allocation of resources to
productive saving activities depend on the secular growth Of labor-marketspecific human capital relative to other human and nonhuman capital assets
as well as on structural trends in occupational coniposition in the economy.

Thus, the cross-sectional implications of the theory would be consistent
with a virtually zero correlation between permanent income per capita and

the

aggregate propensity to consume out of permanent income over time if, as

seems to be the case, the proportion of business and farm families iii the
economy decreased relative to the proportion of "wage
per

earnerstt

while the average

capita portfolio sizes increased over the long haul. A comprehensive

analysis of secular trends in the aggregate propensity to consume in light
of this model further requires consideration of secular trends in institutional
and technological factors bearing upon the degree of segmentation or "efficiencytt
of various capital markets and, thus, indirectly on private returns available

from search and

related asset management efforts.

Conclusion
The thesis developed in this paper is that insofar as opportunities
for gains from saving activities by individuals exist in capital markets, the

rates of return on capital

assets will depend, in part,

on the amount and

efficiency of resources devoted to such activities. Accordingly, private
investment in information concerning the prospects of capital assets and other
related management efforts may be thought of as a special asset commanding a

unique market return. Since opportunities for productive saving activities
depend on the degree of segmentation in capital markets and the magnitude
of relevant transaction costs, the importance of the productive saving hypothesis in explaining saving behavior may vary across different economies or
over time according to the degree of ttimperfectiofltt inherent in capital markets.

37

Differences

in rates of return on portfolios of capital assets, or

private lending rates of interest, are

traced

exclusively to differences in

resource allocations to productive saving activities since the model is
developed on the simplifying
are

is

assumption

that individual attitudes toward risk

neutral, in practice, much of the variation in private rates of return
the result of differences in the

portfolios.

degree of objective risk associated with

The basic implications of the simple model developed here none-

theless are general since they apply to rates of return achieved on capital
assets classified in the same objective ttrisk class. tl A systematic study of

the full nature of the interdependence between productive saving, risk, and
return,

as

well as other generalizatiorof the model, are set aside for fu.ture

work.

The set of behavioral implications that are obtained follows

essentially

from the hypothesized interactions between allocations of

resources to saving activities and the level of human and nonhuman capital
assets possessed by consumption units.

The main results concern the alloca-

tions of productive and consumptive resources throughout the life cycle and
the interd.ependencies among these allocations. The analysis indicates that

the magnitude of om, hired, and borrowed resources generally is an increasing
function of net worth. It also implies that the paths of human and nonhuman
capital accumulation together determine the allocation of productive resources
between wage and nonwage earnings generating activities. Some of the observed varia-

tion in the extent of participation in conventional "work" over the life cycle
might be explained through consideration

of nonhuman

capital

accumulation

paths as derived in Section III. The model generally provides a framework
for analysis of the determinants of self-emplo,ment n the management of

assets

relative to participation in conventional labor market activities.

Since the magnitude of resources devoted to productive sawing, in
turn, affects the private rates of return on capital assets pertinent to consumption

decisions, differences among

consumption units in their allocations

of

38

consumptive

in

resources over the life cycle may result largely from differences

their private rates of interest rather than in their subjective time

erences or attitudes toward

risk.

pref-

Perhaps the most intriguing behavioral

implications developed in this paper concern the association between levels
of human

and nonhuman wealth

permanent

and the average propensity

to consume out of

income, Under certain conditions the analysis can be used to re-

formulate Keynes' postulates concerning a positive association between the

propensity to save and wealth without resort to any systematic associatn
between time preference for consunrption and wealth. The analysis also provides
consistent explanations for evidence reported in the literature concerning
differences in average propensities to consume across occupational and racial
groups without reference to variations in transitory component. of measured

income. Our analysis complements the permanent income hypothesis in one
important sense. whereas the permanent income hypothesis provides a systematic
explanation for differences in statistical estimates of marginal and average
propensities to consume out of measured income, the productive saving hypothesis

provides a framework for analyzing
sume out

of

differences

in average propensities to com-

permanent income across different wealth and occupational groups.

Since our behavioral propositions are based upon systematic variation in
expected rates of return from capital assets in
pirical ixixplementation

the

same risk class, the em-

of the theory should begin by estimation of nonwage

eariiin genezating functions by relating risk adjusted levels of portfolio
returns to the basic determinants of the allocation of resources to productive
saving.

.

Footnotes
1For an excellent survey of the literature pertaining to the "efficient
markets"hypothesis,

see Fama (1970). Although

the presentation of the h3rpo-

in the literature is general and may be interpreted as applicable to
all markets for capital assets, the illustrations usually have related to the
thesis

markets

for securities.

2For example, Scholes (1972) has presented evidence indicating that the
total adjustment of a price of a stock to a large secondary distribution of

that stock takes approximately six days. The evidence also indicates that the
sale period itself is too short to account for the entire length of the adjust-

ment period in the market.
3For theoretical and empirical analyses bearing upon the role of education in the efficient management of farm assets, see Welch (1970), Shultz (197tl),

and references therein. Differences in efficiency of management of agricultural
enterprises have been recognized in these studies in regard to the speed of
adoption of itmovations and the rapidity of adjustments in resource allocations
to changing market conditions.

Neiderhoffer and Osborne (1966), Lone and Niederhoffer (1968), Scholes
(1969), and Jaffee (1973) present evidence suggesting that officers of corpor-

ations consistently utilize superior information regarding the performance of

stocks. A similar finding concerning specialists in major security exchanges
also is presented in Neiderhoffer and Osborne (1966). Specialists and corporation officers constitute a small fraction of all investors, but the question
as to whether deviations from the strong form conditon of the efficient markets
model reach further through the investment community has not yet been adequately
explored.

5See Marshall (8th edition, l99, pp. 588, 599). Marshall noted in this
context that
"A pawnbroker's business involves next to no risk; but his loans are made
at the rate of 25 percent per annum or more; the greater parbof which is
really earnings of management of a troublesome business. Or to take a
more extreme example, there are men in London, and Paris, and probably
elsewhere, who make a living by lending money to costermongers . . . at a
profit of ten percent [per day]: there is little risk in the trade, and.
the money is seldom lost .
no one can become rich by lending to
costermongers . . .. The so-called interest on the loans really consists
almost entirely of earnings of a kind of work for which few capital.sts

. .. But

have a taste."
We are indebted to Lawrence Fisher for pointing out this reference to us.
6The overall, expected rate of return on northunian capital generally can
be thought of as consisting of two parts

r

r(O) +

rth

r' (h) dh

0 < h < ht

where r(O) is the expectedrate of return with no saving activity, and r'(h)
is an additional expected yield achieved through efficient selection and man-

agement activities. It may be noted that the expected rate of return is defined in equation (1.3) as a function of current saving activity only. A more

general formulation of the productive saving hypothesis would relate r to
past periodst allocation of time and otherresources to productive saving as
well. For simplicity, (the effect of) past experience is subsumed under the"en-

dowment" of human capital H0.
7The terminal stock of capital is given by the equation

Kw°+pK
n
nn-l-x
n

where

K1 = tnlW0 + %-1-2 -

10

K1=1w +p1K0 -X1.

.

in the first equation, one obtains

Substituting the values of K1, ..., K1

n

n+l
=

ptKo

+

(0

-

x)

p1(h)

1. By rearranging terms, the wealth constraint given in equation

where

(1.8) is easily derived.

8Equation (1.lOa) is derived on the assumption that 't-l = 0.

For

a simple illustration of the solution when rt is defined as a direct function

of Kt1, see n. 10. The sufficient conditions for values of the control
variables satisfying equations (1.lOa-l.lOd) to maximize equation (1.9) require
that the principal minors of the relevant bordered Hessian matrix of secondorder derivatives alternate in sign.

9The effect of an exogenous increase in Kti on the optimal value of
can be found by differentiating equation (1.12) with respect

ht, for ht > 0,

r'(h)
to Kti. Assuming that
K =0
•

t -l

-

d,(t

dKti

=

____ =

dKt1

,

_r'(ht)

(-)

r"(ht) Kti

r' (ht)

Evenif

<0,
t -l

dh

dKti

_r'(ht)[l -

=

r'K

r"(ht)Kti

=

(-

0

r'(ht)
there r'K = -

since by the assumption that ht and
r'(ht)'
are complements in the generation of nonwage income,

Kt1

r'(ht)[l -

r'K =

tt-l

Kt_i

0
d2h

Since

r't(h) < 0,

< 0 provided that

it is plausible to assume that

dcl

12

r"(h)

were either invariant to Kt_i or became more negative as

creased.

Figure 2 portray-s a relationship between ht

Kti inis

Kt_i

compatible with these assumptions.

10

If

r(h,K1)
were negative, differentiation of equation (1.13) with

t-l
respect to K1 would modify equation (l.l).#-) as follows

= P(K1)(l

-

p2 K1= '2 K1

where

+

p2K1

r2

r 1 + r2

p2

2i) '

marginal return. In this case, if e

and MRp2 replaces

2 as the gross

were constant and h were

,.

t

positive, then the consumption transformation curve AC depicted in Figure 3
would be convex toward the origin if, and only if,

dr

dK
t-l

r t
d
+
t

t-l

_____
t-l

>0.

We do not expect the direct negative effect of K on r to dominate its indirect effect on r through its positive effect on h except, perhaps, at very
high levels of asset holdings. In that case,

would be negative in sign

dKti
and the transformation curve AC in Figure 3 might be concave toward the origin.
11Specifically,

=0

Tt

(or

1) implies zero time preference for

X1 relative to X. This form of the utility function and the following
analysis leading to equation (1.16) are entirely based upon that of Becker
(1971,

pp.

192-193). For

a related analysis, see Modigliani and Bruinberg

(1951i-).

l2 alternative formulation of equations (1.lla), (l.l5a), and (l.16a)
can be achieved by redefining the choice variable K in terms of a "perpetual"
sequence of one-period endowments of the composite good X

ated

by

that

the terminal stock of capital beginning at period n +

indefinitely:

X =

dK,

1

can be generand

extending

where 0 < d < 1 is, say, an "institutional" yield

per unit of bequeathed capital. This approach is an application of the general
treatment of the problem of intertemporal decision-making as a choice between
current consumption and perpetual or permanent future income flows (see
Hirshleifer(197'O), p. 69).

in

If this definition of the choice variable implicit

is valid, equation (i.16a) can be rewritten as

log

=

o(log

d. -

T)

.

(l.16b)

Equation (l.16b) indicates that X would be smaller than X if the consumption i.mit had neutral (time) preference for own consumption in period n
relative to an annuity of consumption opportunities bequeathed to heirs, since

log d < 0. If wage earnings and saving activity in period n were nil, the
condition X < Xn would also imply that

< K1. Savings in the final

period of the planning horizon then would necessarily be negative.

Hirshleifer (1958) showed that the separation theorem implicit in the
assumption of "perfect capital marketst' collapses whenever there is a divergence

between the market's borrowing and lending rates of interest. The preceding
statement can be viewed as a generalization of Hirshleifer's famous result;

the separation theorem collapses even in the case of net lenders, since the
gross lending rates of interest are not constant.

lsince the length of a period in any discrete time analysis is arbitrary,
there is no loss of generality in this assumption. Alternatively, funds borrowed for a duration of more than one period can. be looked upon as two separate

loans taken on successive marketing dates, the latter designated to pay off
the principal and interest on the previously maturing loans.
15The marginal as well as the average borrowing cost of capital can be
expected to rise with the amount

borrowed if only because of seentation in

legal

capital markets that arises from transaction costs and

restrictions on

certain kinds of borrowing. In addition, the probability of default, as perceived by the lending institution, is likely to rise with the consumption unit's
debt-equity ratio even if the true risk per dollar of borrowing were constant
or nil (for a discussion of similar arguments in the context of corporate fi-

nance, see Fisher (1959) and Stiglitz (1972)). However, the effect of an in-

crease in Dti. need not be symmetrical to that of a decrease in Nt_i. In
the following analysis,

l6rrowing

"b" denotes the average borrowing rate of interest.

in order to finance the purchase of durable

own houses does not belong in this category since it is

goods including

essentially determined

according to whether it is more economical to rent the services yielded by

durable goods or to own them. Thus it is largely independent of time preference for consumption

and can

be considered as special borrowing for productive

saving that does not involve future management costs.

17Let the investor's initial net worth and his initial asset holdings be

given by N1 and K1 in Figure ii. below

and assume that he then finds it op-

timal to increase his current outlays on consumption by LC. He can follow
one of two policies to accomplish that. Policy 1 requires a reduction in his

net worth from N1 to N0, where

N1 - N0

N =

LC.

By the forthcoming

analysis of optimal borrowing for productive saving, the investor's optimal
asset holdings then would fall by an even greater amount from

K1 to K0

(see n. 20). Policy 2 requires additional borrowings in the amount of LC.
That policy thus amounts to a decision to keep intact the initial level of

asset holdings at K1, notwithstanding e decrease in N from

N1 to N0.

Clearly, Policy 1 is superior to Policy 2. In comparison to 1, Policy 2 generates higher returns but even higher borrowing costs. The net loss associated
with 2 relative to 1 is represented by the triangular area APB in Figure !..

24.5

l8Differentiating the wealth constraint given in equation (3.3) partially

with respect to Dti and equating the result to zero, we obtain

ttt-lD

(ii)
____

Dt-i

t

ni-i

t-l

i=t+l

from which equation (2.) is easily derived. This differentiation assumes

that r is not a direct function of K. If it were, the term r(h) in equation (2.5) would be replaced by MRRt =

t K1

Kti

5rIc =

r(ht,Kt

i)(l +

rk'

where

rt

19Equation (3.6) implies that

Ct/Dti > -[r' (h)]2/[ (Nt

+

Dt1)

(2.6a)

r"(h)] .

The left-hand side of equation (2.6a) is the slope of the supply curve of bor-

rowed

funds in Figure 3,

to be equal to dr(h)/dKti =
pression

and the right-hand side can easily be shown

MbC,

r' (h) dh/dKti (see n. 9).

represents the slope of

The

latter ex-

the demand curve for productive capital de-

picted by r(h(Kti)) in Figure .

The

curve r must then cut the relevant

MbC curve from above as Figure 4 illustrates.
20The effect of an exogenous increase in Nti on the optimal values of
can be determined by differentiating

Dt_i and t-

conditions

given in equations (2.4) and (2.5) with respect to Nt_i. It is

then seen that if r(ht)/Kt1 = 0,

ti

dD

*

t-1
where

the first-order optimality

—

ti (Nti

+

then

Dt1)

r"(ht) +

[r'(h)]2

is defined in equation (2.6). Similarly,

>0,

16

Mb,C

*
d,(t

t -l

dN

_r(ht) Dt-l

=

since r"(ht) < 0 and

MbC
t-l

<U,

is assumed negative in sign. The geometrical

proof illustrated in Figure

is based

on the following reasoning. If MbC

were just a function of Dti, then MbC1 would be a horizontal translate of
MbCQ, indicated by the curve CC, with the horizontal distance between the two

being equal to AN =

(N1

-

N0).

Even then, AK =

(K1

-

would exceed AN.

K0)

Moreover, since MbC is assumed to be a decreasing function of N, MbC1 would
lie below the auxiliary curve CC at any level of Kt_i. Clearly, then, the in-

crease in K would exceed the increase in N. It should be noted, however,
that if the marginal rate of return on assets were a decreasing function of the

size of asset holdings (see the discussion in n. 10), then the curve r(Kt1)
in Figure 1, interpreted as indicating the marginal gross rate of return on

capital, would be a domward-sioping curve. It might then be possible for an
exogenous increase in N to lead to a reduction in the amount borrowed for
productive saving. For evidence consistent with the proposition that the individual portfolio sizes are positively correlated with debt secured by investment assets, see Projector and Weiss (1966), Table Al4.

21Given the one-period resource constraint as summarized by equation (2.2),
the modified equation of motion (3.3) can be derived by sri analysis similar to

the one pursued in n. 22 and shown equal to

=

[1 +

r(ht1)

-

Dt_i

bt(Nt

Nt_i - Nt

where _Dti b'(Nt1) is, by assumption, positive if

,

(3.3a)

> 0. Clearly, the

qualitative implications of equation (3.3a) are the same as those inferred from

(3.3). Note that these implications would not be affected even if it were

'4.7

assumed that r(ht,1Vt1)/Nt1 0. In such a case, r(ht+1) in equation

(3.3a) would be replaced by t+l' where MRR

is

defined in n. 18.

22More specifically,

=

X÷1

-

X

w°

=

(Kt

-

+

-

Kti[r(ht÷1)

Kt1)rt+1

-

Kt

r(ht)]

+

+

By a Taylor expansion of r(ht+i) about r(ht) we obtain
2

rt÷1 =

r(ht)

+

r'(ht)t

+

Assuming that tht is sufficiently small,
r (ht÷i) -

r(ht)

+

rtt(ht)

can be approximated by r' (ht )

0, the difference

h,

and the second term on

the right-hand side of equation (4.2), Kti[r(ht÷i) -

mated by _Kt1 r'(ht)A(t .

r(ht)]

can be approxi-

By collecting terms, we obtain equation (3.2).

231n addition, as investments in human capital accumulate, they become

more specific and thus more risky to the investor. Relaxing our simplifying
assumption concerning neutral attitudes toward risk, we may conclude that a
risk-averse consumption unit would then seek to diversify its asset holdings
through the building of a positive stock of noithuman assets preceded, perhaps,

by a period of initial dissaving or net borrowing to finance investment in
human capital.

24m

prediction

is compatible with evidence reported by Becker concern-

ing the association between the mean number of hours worked in the labor market
by male cohorts of given educational and racial groups, the mean hourly earnings,

and the nonwage family income of the same cohorts. The evidence based on the
1/1000 sample from the 1960

Census shows that an increase in hourly earnings

1i8

increases the number of hours worked and that an increase in nonwage family
income reduces it at given average family size and age of the respective male

cohorts(see Ghez and Becker (1972, Ch. Iii). In Becker and GhezTs analysis,
changes in hours of work over the life cycle are expected to be independent of
anticipated changes in nonwage income (or initial net worth') since their model

does not recognize saving activity as an alternative to work and consumption
ac1ivities.

25Friedman argues, however, that k may increase with the ratio of

nonhuman capital to permanent income K/Yr,

because

nonhuman capital, being

more "liquid" and a better collateral against loans than human capital, pro-

vides a superior means of insurance against emergency consumption needs. An

increase in K/Yr thus reduces the need to save for emergency funds at any
given level of permanent income (see Friedman (1957), p. 16). With neutral
attitudes toward risk our

analysis

below implies that the absolute level of

nonhuman wealth and possibly even its ratio to permanent income may be posi-

tively related to the propensity to save. Empirical evidence compatible with
this latter prediction thus would indicate the relative importance of the productive saving hrpothesis in explaining observed behavior.

26m

result

holds even if working and leisure time were not assumed

to be constant in each period but were assumed to vary with wealth. Given
the market price of time, w0, then by equation (1.12) or (2.1.1.) the abso-

lute magnitudes of h and r, hence the slope of the consumption transformation curve, are uniquely related to the level of accumulated net worth

as long as labor market time were positive. Furthennor,insofar as productive

saving involved employment of hired factors, r(K) would generally be invariant to changes in wealth. As our

discussion

in Section I indicates,

.

I9

the optimal employment of hired factors, being determined through wealth maxi-

mizing principles, is an increasing function of K and is independent of the
consumption

unit's ealth constraint as well as its wage earnings.

27Utilizing

the preceding two-period analysis and assuming that optimal

bequest is positive, the ratio of the discounted life time consumption to total
wealth is given by
-

m1=
and

K2

2

<1

the ratio of the undiscounted life time consumption to life time income is

given by

—

m1 —

where

x1 +x2

x1 +x2
—
+ E + rK1

W2 - rX1

—

x1 +x2
+ K2 +

Y1 denotes total income receipts, iiicluding the initial endowments ob-

tained, in period 1. Clearly, any

change in W2 that increases the ratios

x2/x1 and K2/X1 by the same proportion necessarily decreases both m1
and
28i the two period-no-bequest model7 consumption in the second period

equals the total amount of resources available in that period: X2 = K1p(h2) + E2.

By definition, x2/w2 = [K1p(h2) +E2]/[Y1P(h2) +E2], where

in n. 27. Clearly, X2

and Y1. Thus

and
1 -

K1/Y1

is defined

are positive linear transformations of

K1

is a decreasing function of x2/w2. The same

result obtains if bequest is positive, since the ratio K2/X2 is assumed to be
independent of wealth.

9Future income endowments consist of potential wage income only.

Consequently, the endowment position E could shift along ray

CE'

fol-

lowing an increase in H only if current income endowments also consisted
solely of wage income.

50

30
Solmo,n (1971) reported a positive zero-order correlation between

mean savings to income ratios of families classified by schooling attainments

of their heads and the head's educational ranking. However, he has not controlled for the families' net worth or their age distribution.

31Some evidence in support of increasing average propensities to consunie out of permanent income is reported by Crocket and Friend (1967).

They

have attempted to estimate permanent or "normal" income from-cross-sectional

data containing observations of the samehouseholdformorethanoneyear. A
principal finding of their regression analysis is that the ratio of net worth to nor-

mal income increases with income when the age of the household's head is
held

constant. They suggest that this finding is inconsistent with saving

theories which contend that permanent savings is a constant fraction of
permanent income.
321t

should be noted that the statistics reported in Table 1 have been

derived by summing data on consumption and income over all imcome and age
brackets sampled in the nationwide surveys of consumer finances covering
191l8, 19119 and 1950 incomes. One interpretation of these statistics is that

they approximate the undiscounted ratios of life time consumption to life time
income of consuniptionunits in different occupational groups. Given a stationary

equi1ibrj wIth no bequest, these ratios would be unitary across all groups.
However, with optimal bequest being positive, the average undiscounted life
time consumption to life time income would be 1es than unitary and our theoretical analysis would be compatible with the ranking of the statistics reported
in Table las our discussion in n. 27 indicates.

An alternative interpretation of the ratios reported in Table 1 is that
they approximate, on the average, "current" consumption to inccme ratios of
consumption units

of

age brackets in which savings is positive (say, age l-0;

51

an assumption of this kind is made in a similar context in Friedman (1957, p. 92)).
Given this interpretation, our theoretical analysis, again, is compatible with
the ranking of the consumption to income ratios in Table 1, as the discussion in
n. 28 indicates.

Other data concerning the ranking of propensities to save of dif-

ferent occupational groups alsoare consistent with this analysis. For example, Klein (1960) reports relatively higher rates of saving among entre-

preneurial groups. He also shows that the self-employed save more than
other families principally because of their business savings. More generally,
Friend and Kravis (1957) show that saving rates of different occupational
groups are closely correlated with the average income of these groups.

References

Becker, G. S. Economic Theory. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1971.
Human Capital. New York: Columbia University Press for

__________

National Bureau of Economic Research, 1901-.

Crockett, J.,

and Friend, I. "Consumer Investment BehavioT," Determi-

nants of Investment Behavior. Edited by R. Ferber. New York:
Columbia University Press for National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1967.

Fisher, I. The Theory of Interest. London: The Macmillan Company,
1930.

Reprinted Kelly (1977).

Fisher, L. "Determinants of Risk Premiums on Corporate Bonds," Journal

of

Political Economy, 67 (June, 1959).

Friedman, Milton. A Theory of the Consumption Function. Princeton,
New.Jersey: Princeton University Press for National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1977.

Friend, I., and Kravis, I. B. "Consumption Patterns and Permanent Income,"

American Economic Review, Proceedings )7 (May, 1957).
Ghez, G.,and Becker, G. S. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time and Goods
Over Time," Report No. 7217, Center for Mathematical Studies in
Business and

Economics,

University of Chicago, 1972.

Hirshleifer, J. "On the Theory of Optimal Investment Decision," Journal

of Political Economy, 66 (August, 1958).
__________•

Investment, Interest and Capital. &iglewood Cliffs, New

Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1970.
Jaffe, J. F. "Special Information, Security Regulations and Insider
Trading." Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago, 1973.

.

73

Keynes, J. M. The General Theory of Emp1oment, Interest and Money.
New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1961.

Klein, L. R. "Entrepreneurial Saving." Proceedings of the Conference on
Consumption and Saving. Vol. 2. Edited by I. Friend and H. Jones,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1960.

Lone, J. H., and Niederhoffer, V. "Predictions and Statistical Properties of Inside Trading," Journal of Law and Economics, il (April,
1968).

Marshall, A. Principles of Economics. 8th ed. London: The Macmillan
Company, 1972.

Mincer, J. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia
University Press for National Bureau of Economic Research, 19711..

Modigliani, F.,and Brumbeng, R. E. "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data," Post Keynesian

Economics. Edited by K. K. Kurihara. New Brunswick, New Jersey:
195 Ii.

Neiderhoffer, V., and Osborne,M. F. M. t?Market Making and the Reversal on
the Stock Exchange," Journal of the American Statistical Association,

61 (December, 1966).
Projector, D. S., and Weiss, G. S. Survey of Financial Characteristics of
Consumers. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1966.

Scholes, M. S. "A Test of the Competitive Hypothesis: The Market for New
Issues and Secondary Offerings." Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University
of Chicago, 1969.

__________

t?The Market for Securities: Substitution versus Price Pressure

and the Effects of Information on Share Prices," Journal of Business,

+7 (April, 1972).

51t

Salmon,

L. "The Relationship between Schooling and Saving Behavior: An
Example of

National

the Indirect Effects

Bureau

of

of Education." New York:

Economic Research, 1971. (JIimeographed.)

hu1tz, T. W. "The Value of the Ability to Deal with Disequilibria."
Unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, 197)-i-.

Stiglitz, J. E. "Some Aspects of the Pure

Theory

of Corporate Finance:

Bankruptcies and Take-Overs,t' The Bell Journal of Economics and

Management Science, 1972.

S

.

