                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE ROLE OF PHYSICIANS

                   IN THE PRODUCTION OF HOSPITAL OUTPUT


                                           *
                              Mark Pauly




                     Working Paper No.73



CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
              204 Junipero Serra Blvd., Stanford, CA 94305


                           February 1975




                  Preliminary; Not for Quotation

     NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

     This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
nublicatlons; in Particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.

*Northwestern University and NBER

     Partial research support was provided by a grant from The Johnson
Foundation to the NBER for a research program in the economics of health.
I am grateful for helpful comments from Victor Fuchs, Michael Grossman,
Charles Phelps, Joseph Newhouse, Willard Manning, and Gerald Goldstein.
                   The Role of Physicians in the
                   Production of Hospital Output


                            Mark Pauly

 1. Introduction

      Physicians' time is an input in the production of useful hospital

 output. This elementary proposition is so obvious that it might be sur-

 prising that estimates of hospital production and cost functions for U.S. hos-

 pitals have not generally included physician inputs or any measure of their

 opportunity costs. The reason for this omission is not difficult to find;

 hospitals in the United States tvDically bill for
                                                     and compensate only those servicpg
 provided by hospital employees or for certain physicians
                                                          in specialty depart—
 ments such as radiology or pathology. But the bulk of physician services

 in the United States are rendered by physicians to their private patients,

 for which billing and reimbursement are handled wholly outside the hospital.

 Nor do hospitals typically record the amount of time a physician spends

 in the hospital providing services to his patients there.

   The purpose of this paper is to present estimates of production functions

for hospitals in which a measure of the level of physician input Is utilized.

Since no data on the total number of hours worked by non—salaried physicians

is available for a large sample of U.S. hospitals, alternative measures of

physician input had to be constructed. As these measures are somewhat

imperfect, the results I obtain should be considered tentative and preliminary.

     It Is worthwhile to get some measures of hospital production functions

 including physicians' Inputs for two reasons. The first Is that if the level of

this omitted input is related to the level of other Included inputs, estimates

of their coefficients will be biased.
                                   2




     For example, observed economies of scale might only reflect a systematic
                                                                                 .
 increase in the relative proportions of physician inputs as output increases,

with the "true" production function being one of constant or decreasing

returns to scale.1 The second reason is that estimation of a production

function may permit us to say something about the optimal combination of

productive inputs. There has recently been a considerable amount of research

on the process by which ambulatory care is produced in the United States

and the possibilities of input substitution to increase output and reduce

cost [Reinhardt (1972); Smith, Miller, and Golladay (1972)]. In particular,

this research has concentrated on the extent to which aides could be sub-

stituted for office physician time in the production of output. It is

ironic that the United States non—federal hospital sector, which uses a

considerably larger share of total medical resources, has not been subject

to the same scrutiny. While there has been some work on the substitution of

non—physician personnel in the hospital, there has been to my knowledge no

empirical estimation using United States data of the possibility of sub-

stituting non—physician for physician inputs in the hospital or vice versa.

Feldstein's (1967) estimates for the (ostensibly) very different hospital

system in the United Kingdom do include a measure of physician input.

     This scarcity of effort is not the result of a consensus on appropriate

resource allocation. On the one hand, it may be asserted that physicians

delegate too few tasks within the hospital, just as they appear to do in




1See Pauly and Redisch (1973), esp. p. 88.



                                                                                 .
                                  3




private practice. The fear of malpractice charges, the possibility

that "the hospital" will be able to capture monopoly rents that accrUe to

physicians as long as they are nominally in charge of the medical care

given, and the psychic costs of supervision might account for such behavior.

On the other hand, it has been contended that physicians have an incentive to

subtitute hospital inputs for their own to too great an extent. It would

appear appropriate to investigate the matter empirically to determine what

is actually happening.




2. Measures of Physician Input.

    The way in which inputs are to be measured when estimating a production

function depends upon the use to which the results are to be put. In an

engineering context, where it is the purely technical relationships that

are of interest, the most appropriate measure would be some index of homo-

geneous productive effort. If, on the other hand, one is interested in

the behavioral response of the system, the appropriate measure is the

level of input that can feasibly be manipulated by the decision—maker.

In more concrete terms, whether one wishes to measure labor input by

minutes actually worked at various tasks or by hours of work for which

full wages are received depends upon whether or not a feasible control

mechanism exists for monitoring, controlling, and paying for only minutes

of actual work. (This observation probably explains why task—analysis

studies, such as Smith et.al., tend to show higher productivity for

physician aides than do cross—sectional studies such as those of Reinhardt.

In the former case, there is no allowance for non—working free time or

waiting, while in the latter an hour of "work" really represents only the

average fraction of that hour devoted to productive activity.) Even this

states the matter too simply, since what is feasible may often times be
                                 4




 too costly, and the actual methods of control and reimbursement (and hence

 the actual allocation of effort) may vary widely among occupations, firms,

 or skill levels.

    All of this discussion is by way of elaborate rationalization for the

use in the production function estimates that follow of the number of

physicians available to provide care, rather than actual hours worked. The

concrete reason for this is the unavailability of hours—worked data, but the

reason for continuing with the analysis is that, at the present time,

the most that might be manipulable from a public policy viewpoint is the

number of physicians in an area or on a hospital staff, not the number of

hours the physician spends at the hospital. In general, the kind of

question to be posed is if one pours additional physicians into a hospital's

cachement area, or places additional physicians on its staff, what effect

will this have, ceteris pàribus, on the hospital's output? Put another way,

the question is that of how physicians affect hospital productivity.


    While allegations of physician overuse of hospital inputs are common, con-

crete description of the form this overuse might take are less common. The

possiblity of overuse is probably most transparent for hospital—employed

physicians; they can be substituted for the time of private practice physicians,

and one suspects that there is not an offsetting diminution in fees charged

by the private practice physician. A similar argument might be made with

respect to nurses; they can perform actions which can save the attending

physician the time and trouble of making a visit to the patient. The argument

that when nurses are scarce, physicians will end up making more visits is a

little weaker, but perhaps plausible, especially if one adds the notion of
"highly skilled" nurses.
                                 5




    Another way in which physicians substitute for hospital inputs can be

found in Feldstein, "By increasing the number of doctors, for instance,

a hospital may be able to shorten the length of patient stay and thus

decrease the input of beds for a given output." [Feldstein (1967), p. 93]. While

Feldstein's study referred to hospitals in the U.K., the same sort of

reasoning might be applied to hospitals in the U.S., and to other hospital

inputs (nurses, for instance) as well. The story here would seem to

be that either rate of recovery or delay in performing procedures can

be affected by the number of physicians. Where the number of staff members

are few, rounds may be less frequent, and patients may have to wait in

bed for the physician to come by to order procedures, perform operations,

or sign discharge forms. One of the things I shall be interested in is

whether any effect of physicians on output does come through length of stay.



3. The Model.

    What the hospital might be thought to maximize is a subject of contro-

versy. The most commonly suggested maximand is some measure of output

which enters the administrator's utility function (Feldstein, 1971; Newhouse,

1970). I have suggested elsewhere (Pauly and Redisch,l973) that it might be

appropriate to view hospitals as being run in the interests of their physician

staffs. Accordingly, the hospital will maximize whatever its staff physicians

maximize. A reasonable maximand for physicians would be a utility function in

money income and leisure, as suggested by Reinhardt. Assuming that all

staff physicians have the same utulity function, the hospital would maximize

physician utility subject to market and time and constraints and the production

function:
                                 6



                                                                                  .
        (1)     h= f (M, L, K)


where N is the amount of physician Inputs, L is a vector of non—physician

labor inputs, and K is a vector of non—labor inputs. Since it may be

reasonable to assume that input prices vary widely, that the level of

physician inputs is almost exogenous, and that hospital decisions on input

combinations may differ because of differential coverage, problems of

simultaneous equation bias should not be severe. A more serious problem is

whether one should assume that, once the level of inputs is chosen, output

is indeed maximized. If hospitals differ in their productive efficiency,

and if some maximization process analagous to profit or utility—maximization

is going on, the resulting coefficients will be subject to simultaneous

equations bias. Both the output—maximization models and a physician—income

maximization model would suggest that maximization occurs. But if physicians

maximize utility rather than profit, and if the variations in taste for

leisure and input prices are large relative to the variation in productive

efficiency, bias should not be severe.

     In short, it would appear that the same assumptions that were made by

Reinhardt to justify his ambulatory care production function estimates can

be made here, and that the results will have the same degree of veracity. The

fact that the sample hospitals vary considerably in size because of differences

in sizes of the population to be served is another reason why outputs should

vary primarily for reasons other than variations in productive efficiency.

Finally, Since I am primarily interested in the ratios of Input coefficients,

simultaneous equations bias in returns to scale estimates less of a problem.

                                                                                  S
                                 7




     There is, however, one additional problem in the hospital estimates.

It is likely that the degree of technical efficiency will be related to the

number of physicians, because of the difficulty of coordinating a larger

number of physicians. Since the data to be used do not permit physicians

to be varied without also changing the number of physicians, there is the

possibility that the effect of physician input on output is understated.

     There are two versions of the physician utility maximization model. In

one, physicians are assumed to cooperate perfectly in choosing input com-

bination and output. In the other, imperfect cooperation by physicians implies

that physicians may engage in behavior which, while individually rational,

leads to undesired results for the group of all physicians.

     In the first model, it is easy to show that the existence of cost—

reimbursement hospitalization insurance, which covers about 90 percent of

inpatient hospital care in the United States, will lead "the hospital," as

personified in its (non—salaried) physician staff, to use too much hospital

Input relative to physician inputs. Consider first the case in which there

is no insurance coverage of physician fees. Using more hospital imputs and

less physician time Input than the optimal combination will lead to higher

total costs (hospital plus physician) for a given level of output. The

reduced opportunity costs of physician time are more than offset by higher

hospital input costs. However, the rise in hospital input costs raises

Insurance reimbursement to the hospital—physician cooperative, and this will,

at least In initial departures from the optimum, more than offset any

increases in total costs. In effect, if insurance covers 90 percent of

hospital costs, the perceived cost to the cooperative of hospital inputs

is 10 percent of their true cost. Hospital inputs will be substituted for
                                    8



 for   physician inputs to a greater extent than is efficient.
                                                                                    .
        If physician fee insurance is present, it may provide an offsetting

 incentive to substitute physician for hospital inputs, but only if insurance

 reimbursement rises when physician input rises. This will not occur at

 all under indemnity insurance, which is a common method of fee insurance.

 It will not occur under insurance which pays the "reasonable and customary"

 fee unless that fee can be made to vary with physician time input. While

 some extra time might be reimbursable as additional procedures, not all will.

 Consequently, physician fee insurance, which is not as extensive as hospital-

 ization insurance anyway, will not fully offset the effect of hospitalization

 insurance on input combinations.

       The imperfect cooperation version of this model suggests that overuse will

also arise if the hospital does not or cannot price at marginal cost. Then

each physician will ignore some of the consequences of his own actions in

ordering hospital inputs which can be substituted for his own, since the cost

of such behavior is spread over all patients of all physicians. One

testable implication of this argument is that overuse should get worse as

hospital and physician staff size grow larger.

       The alternative "hospital administration utility—maximization" models

developed by Feldstein and Newhouse make no direct prediction about

physician—hospital input ratios, since they do not treat non—salaried

physician time as a productive input. The result of overuse of hospital

relative to physician input would, however, be consistent with this kind of

theory if higher "quality" is equated with more hospital and less physician



                                                                                    .
                                         9




     input. -   Whether hospital administrators, who run the hospital according

     to this theory, actually judge quality In this way or not Is unknown.

           It should be emphasized that, inasmuch as this is a production function

     estimate, these results do not bear directly on the question of whether

    physicians can create demand for hospital services. As in other production

     function studies, we do not ask whether the output should have been produced,

    or why it was produced; we only ask about the relationship between outputs

    and inputs. These results do, however, bear indirectly on the question of

    demand creation, in that they indicate the maximum extent of demand creation,

    at least as far as physicians directly are concerned. That is, they indicate

    the maximum amount of Increase in output that could be attributed to demand

    creation by additional physicians when all hospital inputs are held constant.

    However, since inputs and outputs are not measured in per capita terms, the

    results are not directly comparable to those from demand studies.



    4. The Sample.

          A sample of 165 predominantly rural counties in the 9 midwestern states

    was selected. Each of these counties had throughout the period 1966—72

    just one short—term general hospital with more than 50 beds, so that it is

    reasonable to suppose that the great bulk of hospital care provided by physicians

    in that county was provided at the sample hospital. The intent was to choose

    approximately 50 hospitals In each of four categories: not—for—profit, 50—100

    beds in 1966; governmental, 50—100 beds in 1966; not—for—profit, over 100 beds;

    and   governmental,   over 100 beds. There was not a sufficiently large

    number of hospitals with reasonably complete data in the third and fourth

P   categories    to permit 50 observations ,   the second category
                                  10



 was slightly oversampled, and later editing reduced the sample size in

 all categories. However, since the sample was non—random to begin with,

 these characteristics did not seem to justify a complex procedure of

 stratifying or replacing observations excluded by editing, which would have

 required adding observations from non—Midwestern states. Editing consisted

 of removing hospitals for which data was missing, and removing one hospital

which, though classified in 1966 as short term, changed to long—term in some

subsequent years. Data on these hospitals for 1966—72 from the American

Hospital Association Annual Survey was obtained. The American Medical

Association's Distribution of Physicians data was used to list the number

of patient care physicians of various types in each of these counties.

    This means that my measure of physician input is a measure of the

number of physicians available for patient care in the county. This is

obviously not the measure of physician input most desirable for production

function estimates. However, it is the level of input that is likely to be

manipulable by policy. That is, public policy has been and is generally

directed at getting more physicians to locate in rural areas. It is not

directed at controlling the allocation of their time. Thus my results show

what may be expected in terms of hospital output from adding or removing

physicians.

    While it has not yet occurred, it is conceivable that hospital staff

appointments might be a matter of public policy.    For a single year (1972)

I obtained data from the Social Security Administration's Master Provider

File on the number of staff physicians at each of the sample hospitals, and

on a finer breakdown of non—physician personnel into categories. This data

is provided periodically by all participating hospitals as part of the

Medicare certification program.
                                  11




 5. Functional Forms.

     A Cobb—Douglas function is probably the most convenient functional

 form to use in estimating production functions. Whether it is appropriate

 is another matter. One problem that arose in Reirihardt's study is not

present here. In the physician's office, output can be produced even if

 zero aides are employed. The four inputs that I use in most of the estimates

 are hospital beds, non—physician hospital personnel (full—time equivalents),

other non—labor hospital inputs (meals, drugs, etc.) and physicians. Each

of these inputs would appear to be essential. Hence, the requirement of

 the Cobb—Douglas form that every input be positive is not onerous. A

more serious restriction of the Cobb—Douglas form is that it constrains the

elasticity of substitution to unity. Other forms are available which do

not require this constraint, but their use raises more complex estimation

problems. Since a priori we do not know whether the Cobb—Douglas form is

reasonable or not, I have followed Feldstein [1967, chapter 4], in first

estimating that form and then considering alternative specifications only

if   the Cobb—Douglas form appears "unreasonable" Judgment is obviously
involved here.

      When physicians or personnel are disaggregated into specialty types,

zero observations do occur. Results are obtained both using the Cobb—Douglas

functional form, but with a positive constant (one) added to all values of

these variables, and using the "transcendental" form suggested by Reinhardt (1972).



6. Variables.

      For the cross—sections 1966—71, and for the pooled cross—sections, values

of both beds and personnel were taken from the American Hospital Association's

Guide Issue. A variable to represent non—labor inputs other than beds was
                                 12




 constructed by subtracting from non—labor expense the product (BEDS X 1000),

where $1000 is an estimate of the depreciation expense on beds alone.

Sensitivity of the results to this assumption will be discussed below.

Output was measured by the number of cases treated, as measured by the number

of admissions. While it would have been desirable to have an explicit measure

of casemix, such data were not available. Because the sample hospitals are

the sole hospitals serving relatively homogeneous populations and are not

major teaching hospitals, variation in casemix is not likely to be great. The

output of the hospital is assumed to a "treated case." Each case is treated to

the same degree; quality is assumed to be unrelated to input mix, and days

of stay are assumed not to be of value in themselves. Fuchs (1969) has noted

that it is not even clear whether additional days of stay should be treated

as beneficial, because they mean more bed and board, or as detrimental,

because they delay the patient's resumption of normal activities.



7.   Results.

     Table 1 indicates the results using total patient care physicians (MD)

as a measure of physician input, and hospital full—time—equivalent non—

physician personnel as a measure of the non—physician labor input. The

coefficient on the physician input, the elasticity of admissions with respect

to the number of physicians in the county, is always significant, and in the

range of 0.11 to 0.17.2 Personnel and non—labor expense are 1ikeise always


2One implication of these results is that increased medical staff will
lower cost per admission. Cost functions that were actually estimated
with this data do indeed show that hospitals in counties with more
physicians or with more active medical staff members tend to have lower
costs per admission or per patient day. These results contradict the findings
of Davis (1974) and Manning (1973) which indicate that, in the hospitals in
in theii data, more medical staff members meant higher costs. They attributed
these higher costs to the difficulties of coordinating larger medical staffs.
Une way to resolve this apparent conflict is to note that the hospitals
                                         (continued on following page...)
                                      13




      significant. Measured hospital productivity decreased during this period

      at a rate of about three percent per year. Beds is significant only for

      non—profit hospitals; except for this difference, the production function

      does not appear to differ across hospital types. Not—for—profit hospitals

      above 100 beds display approximately constant returns to scale, while for all

      other hospital subsamples the sum of coefficients is significantly less than

      unity. Large hospitals overall have returns to scale not
                                                                  significantly
     different from unity, while the full sample shows decreasing returns to scale.

           The most likely reason for the insignificance of beds is the high

     correlation of this variable with personnel (r =   .91).   High multicollinearity
     is to be expected in production function estimates; perhaps its existence

     might explain why Feldstein's results for British hospitals were "unreasonable,"

     with low or insignificant coefficients for such obviously important inputs

     as nurses. Heteroskedasticity was anticipated, but did not occur; error

     variances were almost identical for each quartile.


         The possibility of excess capacity in any of the inputs is disturbing

    in any production function study. It is even more disturbing here because

    the measured amount of one input may well be correlated with the extent of

    excess capacity in the other outputs. If it is supposed that hospitals may

    have excess capacity in the hospital inputs (beds, personnel, and other


    2(cont'd)

     Davis and Manning looked at were primarily in SMSA's or at least in areas
     in which physicians might be likely to hold appointments at more than one
     hospital. In such a situation, larger numbers of staff members might
     well not mean much more physician time iflput, but would mean that each
     physician would bear a smaller share of the costs of his cost—increasing
     actions.
I
                                14




non—labor inputs), and if physicians can in part create or activate demand

for hospital care, then It is possible that any observed increase in output

related to presence of larger numbers of physicians, observed hospital

inputs held constant, may not in fact reflect physician input productivity.

Instead, we may only be observing more intensive use of previously under-

utilized hospital inputs. Even if physician hospital inputs actually rise,

the total change in hospital output would be the sum of the direct effect

of physician inputs, holding the utilization of hospital inputs constant,

plus the increase in output arising from the greater flows of productive
services from the hospital inputs.

     In order to determine whether the estimates presented above can properly

be thought of as production functions, it is useful to determine whether

the measured effect of physicans on output varies with the level of

hospital excess capacity. For the lower the level of excess capacity, the

closer the coefficient on physicians will approximate the true output

elasticity. The average accupancy rates of all hospitals in the sample

is 70 percent. A subsample of these hospitals with occupancy rates (in any

year) greater than 75 percent was selected. The estimated production

function is shown in the second—last line of Table 1. The values of

coefficients on all variables, including physicians, are practically unchanged

from the full sample results. It does not appear that excess capacity in

hosiptal inputs, if any, varies with the level of physician inputs.3



0ccupancy rates of less than 100 percent do not necessarily indicate
excess capacity, because a hospital faced with demand which is stochastic
over short periods of time would want to have some empty beds on average.
An ideal occupancy rate for all hospitals of about 80 percent is sometimes
suggested in the literature, and for the isolated rural hospitals in this
sample a target of 75 percent might not be inappropriate.
                                         15




p
             Of course, If additional physicians mean no physician input, or if
                                                                                none

     of the hospitals ever reach a capacity constraint, then this argument does not

     hold. But neither of these suppositions seems plausible.

             Finally, comparison of the first and last lines in Table 1 indicates

     that omission of the physician input did not bias estimates of returns to

     scale. Omission of physicians does, however, lead to an overestimate of both

     the effect of personnel and of the rate of decrease in productivity over time.

     Adding the physician input makes only a modest contribution to the explanatory

     power of the regression, as might be expected given the high multicollinearity

     of the input variables.

           Table 2 shows the result of a similar estimate using disaggregated

    measures of physician input. (For each of these physician measures, a

    constant (1) was added to prevent zero observations.) The explanatory

    power of the regression is not appreciably improved by this change, but the

    results   do shed some light   on the way hospital output   responds to sub—
    specialities. (The coefficient on the time variable Is almost the same as in
    Table 1, and so is omitted.) Not surprisingly, hospital based specialists,
    uncommon in hospitals under 100 beds anyway, tend to depress output there, prob-
    ably   because their presence is a proxy for case complexity. Similarly, medical

    specialists (internists, pediatricians, etc.) tend to affect output only in the
    large hospitals. Both surgical specialists and GP's have positive output
    elasticities everywhere. Interpretation of the coefficients on GP's

    and surgeons can be simplified by converting the elasticities into marina1

    products per physician. Table 3 shows that the marginal product of a

    physician   is about 35   admissions per year. As might be expected, the marginal
                                         16




      product   is higher for surgeons than GP's, and the difference tends to widen
                                                                                         .
      in the larger hospitals and counties where specialization by surgeons may be

      carried to a greater extent. The purely hospital based physicians have

      a high marginal product in the larger hospitals.

           What is perhaps most striking about these figures is that they suggest that

      the hospital workload of the marginal physician is less than one admission per

      week, even for surgeons. Hughes et al (1972) have found the average complexity

      of operations performed by surgeons in their sample was 0.94 hernia equivalent,

      and the mean workload was 4.3 HE per week. The admissions to our sample

      hospitals are unlikely to be more complex than one HE. Our results

      therefore suggest that the marginal surgical workload is less than one

      HE per week. This shortfall of incremental workload relative to mean workload

      implies either that additional surgeons have low workloads or that the

      presence of an additional surgeon in a county, even if he shares the work—

      equally with others, reduces the average workload of all. If an average work-

      load of 4.3 HE is regarded as evidence of underutilization of surgical manpower,

      the results obtained here suggest that, at the margin, underutilization is even
                     4
      more severe.

4The specification used by Reinhardt was also applied to this set of data.
That specification takes logarithms of all inputs which are theoretically
needed in positive amounts, but is log—linear and log—quadratic in other
inputs. The particular specification used was:

      q = A + l persnl + 2 beds + 63 nlxp + l GP's + 2 SURSPEC

  +     MEDSPEC +        OTHSPEC   +   HOSPBDS + 6 (ff')2


where lower case variables represent logarithms.
   The results are roughly similar to those in Tables 2 and 3. For example,
for the full sample, P was .869 (vs. .869 in Table 2) and the marginal
admissions product for a GP was 38.4 (vs. 31.3) and for a surgical specialist
54.7 (vs. 46.0).
                                   17




     Since many of the measures of input used here are obviously very crude,

it seems appropriate to test the sensitivity of the results to alternative

measures. Table 4 presents the results of such tests.

    Output has been measured by the admission or case treated. I have argued

that "quality" or casemix is not likely to differ in a systematic way across the

sample hospitals, since the hospitals are stratified by size and since the

populations served are all from relatively rural midwestern counties. One

attempt to control for "quality" would be by introducing the number of approvals

(of education programs) and accreditations, as well as the number of facilities

at the hospital as independent variables (line 1, Table 4). While approvals were

signifiiant and positively related to admissions (somewhat unexpectedly), its

inclusion did not affect the production function coefficients nor contribute

appreciably to the explanatory power of the regression. The number of facilities

was not significant.

    Measuring hospital labor input with the number of full—time—equivalent

personnel and the physician input by the number of practicing physicians in

the county is obviously imperfect. One possible way to improve the measure

of labor input is to follow Feldstein's procedure with British hospitals and

use payroll expense. If personnel are heterogeneous, if relative wages

reflect relative marginal products, and if absolute wage levels do not

differ, the implicit weighting by marginal product should provide a better

input measure than does just counting all employees equally. Even though

there is no reason to suppose that quality—constant wage levels do differ, this

error may not be too severe. Lines 3 in Table 4 show the result of replacing

personnel with payroll.
                                      18




     In
                                                                                     .
          general, payroll did not improve, and sometimes worsened the explanatory

power of the regression. The only exception is in the case of smaller not—for—

prof it hospitals. The only other charge was an increase in the coefficient on

beds. A final test was to replace the measure of bed cost used in calculating

non—labor input from one in which the annual cost of a bed was figured at

$1000 to one in which the cost was set at $3500.   Except for the expected change

in the relative magnitudes of the BED and NLXP coefficients, the results were

unaffected.

     Since it is unclear whether hospital outputs respond immediately to the

presence of all inputs, espicially beds, medical staff, and specialized

facilities, since the precise dating of when an input was actually available

is questionable in the data, and since standard errors may be understated owing

to the presence of serial correlation, results were also obtained using seven—

year average values for each hospital for inputs and outputs. The results are

shown on line 5, Table 4. The results are very similar to the pooled results of

Table 1, except that beds is now insignificant.



8. Length of Stay

     Holding beds constant, the only ways physician input (or any other input)

can increase the number of cases treated are either by increasing the occupancy

rate or by reducing length of stay. Feldsteins results for Great Britain

strongly suggest that when output is increased, by increased medical input or

other input, average duration of stay declines but the occupancy rate is only

slightly affected (Feldstein, 1967, pp. 78—79). Does additional physician input

in this sample of U.S. hospitals also increase output primarily by shortening

stay? One way to tell is by including average stay directly in the production
                                        19




 function. One can either interpret this as a "characteristic" of output which

 one may wish to hold constant, or as another output of a multiproduct firm.5

      Line 2 of Table 4 suggests that reductions in stay are an important part

 of the way in which physicians contribute to output. The coefficient of mean

 stay is negative and significant; its inclusion substantially improves the R2.

The coefficient on MD's falls to about one—third of its former value, the

coefficients on personnel and LNIP fall by 25—35 percent, while the coefficient

on beds increases substantially. Since the percentage increase in cases treated

is much smaller when stay is held constant than when it is left free to vary,

one possible conclusion is indeed that an important way in which physicians

"produce" admissions is by shortening the length of stay. It also appears that

one of the reasons why the effect of beds on admissions was relatively slight

is that beds produce bed—days, and that many of these additional days show up

as extended stays rather than new admissions.

     There are, of course, some other explanations which are consistent with

these results. One is that there are substantial differences in case complexity,

and complexity tends to be positively related to the number of beds and negatively

related to the number of physicians.

     Another, perhaps more plausible explanation is indicated by Fuchs (1969) in

his review of Feldstein's book. He suggests that length of stay may vary for

reasons other than medical input ——    regional   differences in medical practice,

socioeconomic characteristics of patients and area, etc. If physician 1.nput

primarily "produces" admissions, not days of stay, while beds and (to a lesser

5The latter interpretation is not, of course, consistent with the simple
 Cobb—Douglas specification.
                                         20



 extent)   personnel do produce days of stay, a consequence of reduced length of
                                                                                     .
 stay will be a reduction in the ratio of medical staff to hospital inputs,

 but the increased ratio does nothing to cause the reduction in stay. This

 explanation would imply that there was, in some sense, an "excess" of days of

 stay (at least in the sense of not being needed for the production of a

 treated case) when medical input yas less; it suggests that some hospital inputs

 cannot be substituted for medical inputs in the production of treated cases.

 With the available data it is not possible to tell which interpretation is

 correct. In order to do so, one would need to have much more case—specific

 data on physician and hospital inputs and length of stay. In future work, I

 intend to explore more fully a model of the hospital in which some inputs

 produce treated cases, others produce days of stay, and still others contribute

 to the production of both.                                                          S
 9. Optimal Input Ratios.




     If the hospital minimized cost for a given output, it would choose that

mix of Inputs at which the ratio of regression coefficients (output elasticities)

just equalled the ratio of expenditures on the inputs. (This assumes that inputs

are purchased at constant prices, or at least at prices which are proportional

to marginal input costs.) For those inputs for which dollar cost estimates are

available ——   personnel,   non—labor inputs, and beds ——   the optimal ratios and
the actual sample mean input expenditure ratios are shown in Table 5. For

physicians, the table shows the shadow price of a physician ——       the price per
physician which would yield a ratio of inputs which equals the optimal one. A

shadow price for physicians relative to all hospital inputs is also obtained by
                                         21




calculating the price per physician which would produce equality between the ratio

of physician costs to hospital costs and the ratio of the coefficient on physicians

to the sum of all hospital input coefficients.

     There are two main messages from these
                                                computations. First, hospitals tend
to underuse personnel relative to non—personnel inputs ——     either   beds or other
non—personnel inputs ——   In   all but large non-profit hospitals.   Second, the shadow
price of the physician's annual input into the
                                                   production of hospital output is in
the neighborhood of $17,000 per year. It is higher for not—for—profit hospitals

than for governmental hospitals.

     There are other costs that should be considered, If only the data were

available. To the extent that Increased physician
                                                      input shortens stays, to the

opportunity cost of physician Input one should add the explicit and implicit costs of

home and other non—hospital inputs used to care for the patient during out—of—hospital

convalescence, but subtract the opportunity cost of Increased "sick time" that

may accompany longer stays.


         Physicians do not, on average, spend all of their working hours at the

    hospital. Instead, the most physician working hours are spent in their

    offices, treating and diagnosing ambulatory persons. How does this fact

    affect the interpretation of the output coefficient?

         Suppose for the moment that the ratio of physician office to hospital

   hours Is constant across the sample hospitals. If what the physician does

   in his office has no effect on the demand or supply of admissions, if

   physicians allocate their time to equate net income per hour worked at every

   location, and If prices reflect consumer evaluations, an appropriate measure
                                  22


                                                                                  .
of   the opportunity cost of the time spent per physician in the hospital would

be average physician net income times the average fraction that hospital

hours are of total working hours.

      But it may be objected that physician office time is in part spent

diagnosing or in other ways creating demand for hospital admissions, so that

the opportunity cost of an additional physician hour spent at the hospital

should include some reduction in demand as well as the explicit money cost.

Put another way, the effect of adding one whole new physician on hospital

admissions is the sum of his demand creation and production efforts, and so

overstates the effect on output of shifting physician time from office to

hospital holding total physician work time constant.

      The answer to this objection is the point made above: that a prod-

uction function estimate, in effect, takes as given the requirement to produce

output. The value of what the physician does in office practice is, under

the assumptions above, measured by his net income. These estimates do not

tell us what will happen if we increase physician hospital input without

creating a demand for output; they tell us what will happen if the demand is

there. That demand for hospital care might shrink if physicians all cut

back on office time to spend more time in the hospital might argue for

fewer physicians in total, but it is relative input use that is important.

       In what sense do these results answer the planner's question of what

will happen to hospital admissions in an area if he pours more physicians

in, holding hospital inputs constant? They tell him that if demand for

hospital admissions is related to numbers of physicians in his area in the

same way as it was related in the sample counties, then the increase in out—
                                  23



put is given by the estimated elasticities. On course, if he adds physicians

where there is little demand for their services in the hospital, then there

may be less increase in admissions.

    These considerations suggest that it is useful to measure the

opportunity cost of physician hospital time in the way described above. Even

such measures are not easy to obtain, but the following calculations are

probably reasonably accurate. Average physician net income in non—metropolitan

locations was about $39,000 in 1969. For non—metropolitan physicians in 1969

hospital visits were about 25 percent of total patient visits. If one assumes

equal time for hospital or office visits, this suggests that physicians spend,

on average, about one—fourth of the work time at the hospital.4 If the

average physician "wage" per visit is a legitimate measure of his opportunity

cost, that cost is about $9750 per year, compared to a shadow price of $17,000

per year. The conclusion then is that there is overuse of hospital inputs

relative to physician inputs in all hospitals taken together, and in all types

of hospitals except small governmental ones. The actual savings from moving

to an optimal physician—hospital input ratio in the average not—for—profit

hospital in the sample would be $144,000, or about 8 percent of total expenses.

To this should be added the net costs (positive or negative) of convalescence

out of the hospital owing to shorter stays. The relatively greater overuse

in not—for—profit hospitals, as compared to governmental ones, is consistent

with the notion that physicians may be able to control not—for—profit

hospitals more effectively than they can control governmental hospitals,

which at least have an identified political constituency.

10. Tests for Bias.

    As dscr1bed above, the initial measure of physician input was in


4Even less is, as suggested by Reinhardt, average time per hospital visit is
 less than average time per office visit.
                                         24


                                                                                       .
 terms    of   the number of patient care physicians in the county. The ideal

measure of physician input that we seek could be defined as



                       = h   •   s   M



where M is the number of physicians in the county, s is the hospital's

staff of active physicians as a proportion of the total number of physicians

in the county, and h is the average number of hours per week worked at the

hospital by each staff physician. Since niH is measured by N, there are

several possible sources of inconsistency. I will argue that the result

is that the estimates above, if they are in error, will tend to undestimate

physician productivity, and so tend to underestimate overuse of hospital

inputs.

     First, even if h, s, and M are uncorrelated, M will measure mH only with

an error. This produces a standard errors—in--variables bias toward zero.

Second, if either h or s             is correlated with M, the coefficient on M will

be a biased measure of

    To account for such correlation, two things are done: First, data was obtained

on the number of physicians with staff appointments at each of the hospitals

in late 1972. The Social Security Administration's survey also provides some

more disaggregated measures of the type of personnel. If the ratio of

physicians with staff appointments to total physicians in the county varies

across counties, and if it is correlated with one of the inputs, the earlier

measures would be biased.

     Physician staff members were divided into two       groups:   active staff
                                  25




 members, and all other staff members (courtesy, honorary, etc.). A comparison

 of the results for 1972 using alternatively all county M.D.'s and staff members

 is shown in Table 6. The coefficient on physicians is only slightly lower when Md's

 are used. When the sample is disaggregated, it becomes apparent that, at

 least in 1972, there was some bias in the coefficient estimate for larger

 hospitals, but not for smaller hospitals. There does seem to be a little

 evidence therefore that overuse of hospital inputs may be somewhat more

 severe than indicated above.

      Second, it may be hypothesized that physician hospital hours and numbers

 of physicians relative to hospital inputs might be inversely correlated. At

 least, with demand held constant, the number of hours worked in total by a

 physician may decline as the number of physicians increases (either because

 price declines or because of some pro—rata rationing effects). Moreover,

 as the number of physicians relative to beds increases, each physician

 may apend less time at the hospital. This is another reason to suspect

 that these estimates may underestimate the overuse of hospital inputs.

      One adjustment that can be made is to estimate the effect of physicians

 with the physician—population ratio held constant. If one supposes that

 physicians work shorter hours (at the hospital or in total) when they are

 plentiful, or if, as suggested by Reinhardt, the pace of work is likely to

 be less hectic, then omission of the physician—population ratio will bias

 the output—elasticity of physicians downward.


     However, when the physician—population ratio (or its log) was entered, it

had a significant coefficient only for the small non—profit hospitals sub-

sample, and the change there in the coefficient on MD's, while positive,

was not statistically significant.
                                 26


                                                                                     .
11.   Conclusion.

      The empirical results presented in this paper suggest that, at least

 for the sample hospitals, once a patient is hospitalized, there will be

 some overuse of hospital inputs relative to physician inputs. It would be

 possible to maintain the production of hospital admissions even while reducing

 the level of hospital inputs, if additional physicians' time were added.

 The reduction in costs from the hospital inputs thus saved would exceed the

 increase in costs attributable to the additional physicians, at least if the

 social costs are measured by the portion of physician net income coming from

 time spent at the hospital. Whether these costs equal the social costs of

 providing physician services is, of course, very uncertain, given the way in

 which physicians are supplied. Nevertheless, if these output elasticities           S
 are accepted as measures, of the effect of physician hospital hours, and if the

 cost measure is taken as appropriate, the conclusion is that the given stock

 of physicians could be used more efficiently if physicians spent more time at

 the hospital and hospitals eliminated some personnel and non—labor inputs.

      This is inefficiency in the opposite direction from that found by

 Reinhardt for office practices. However, it is by no means obvious that a

 shift toward more physician—intensive production of hospital care, even though it

 would lower hospital and total costs, would raise physician utility. For

 reductions in hospital costs reduce hospital insurance benefits. Depending on

 the amount and type of physician fee insurance, the result may be a decrease

in physician utility. Here, at least, we have a reason why resource

misallocation occurs.
                                        27




        One message for policy is that what is likely to be important

    is the relatively low   marginal   product of specialists, especially of surgeons.

    Given the high cost of training physicians and surgeons, one may wonder

    whether the hospital output, even if that output is thought to be appropriate

    in some sense, justifies those costs, Of course, in practice increases in

    physicians are likely to be accompanied by increases in hospital inputs; the

    hospital inputs mean more output, but also more cost.

        Another message is that even primary care physicians —— GP's and

    medical specialists —— have a significant positive effect on hospital

    admissions. If the goal is to increase the number of primary care physicians

    without increasing the hospitalization rate, the analysis above suggests

    than an appropriate strategy is to couple physician increases with hospital

    input decreases.




I
                              References
                                                                                  .
1. Karen Davis, "The Role of Technology, Demand, and Labor Markets in
    the Determination of Hospital Cost," in The Economics of Health and
    Medical Care, edited by M. Penman (London: Macmillan, 1974), pp. 283—301.

2. M. Feldstein, Economic Analysis for Health Service Efficiency,
    (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1967).

3. ____________,   "Hospital Cost Inflation, A Study of Nonprofit Price
     Dynamics," American Economic Review, 61 (December, 1971), 853—72.

4. V. Fuchs, "Health Services Research Moves Ahead," Health Services Research
    5 (Fall, 1970), 242—50.

5. E. Hughes, V. Fuchs, J. Jacoby, and E. Lewit, "Surgical Work Loads in a
    Community Practice," Surgery, 71 (March, 1972), 315—27.

6. W. G. Manning, "Comparative Efficiency in Short—Term General Hospitals,"
    Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University, 1973.

7.   J. Newhouse, "Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic Model
     of a Hospital," American Economic Review, (March, 1970), 64—73.

8.   N. Pauly and M.Redisch, "The Not—for—Profit Hospital as a Physicians'
     Cooperative," American Economic Review, 63 (March, 1973), 87—99.

9.   U. Reinhardt, "A Production Function for Physician Services," Review of
     Economics and Statistics, 54 (February, 1972), 55—66.

10. K. Smith, M. Miller, and F. Golladay, "An Analysis of the Optional Use
     of Inputs in the Production of Medical Services," Journal of Human
     Resources 7 (Spring, 1972), 208—25.




                                                                                  .
                                                 TABLE 1

                     PRODUCTION FUNCTION ESTIMATES: ALL MD's
                              DEPENDENT VARIABLE: ADMISS IONS

                                (t   ratios in parentheses)
                                                             NON-
 SAMPLE     CONS-    BEDS            PERSON-        MD' s                                           2
                                                             LABOR     TIME     Z CO-      n    R
            TANT                     NEL                     INUT               EFFS.

FULL         3.9     .086                  .52       .15       .15    —.029      .904    1145   .864
SAMPLE                (2.7)           (16.4) (10.7)           (8.7)     (7.7)   (41.1)

BEDS>100     3.7      .16                  .49       .16       .14    —.030      .941     421   .857
                     (3.3)            (10.2)        (3.3)     (4.9)    (5.1)    (29.2)

BEDS:       4.2      .002               .53          .13       .15    —.027      .810     724   .658
50—100               (0.1)            (12.1)        (6.0)     (7.3)    (53)     (32.7)

GOVERN—     3.9       .00               .57          .14       .17    —.031      .873     615   .807
MENTAL               (0.01            (11.0)        (:6.2)    (5.2)    (6.2)    (19.7)

NOT—FOR—    3.8       .18               .45          .17      .13     —.030      .934     530   .907
PROFIT               (4.0)           (11.2) (10.0)           (6.7)     (6.1)    (40.0)

NFP,        3.6       .28              .37           .16      .16     —.032      .979     240   .877
BEDS>100             (4.5)            (6.0)         (6.8)    (4.2)              (33.8)
                                                                       (4.3)

NPP,BEDS    4.1      .091              .50           .17      .12     —.027      .878     291   .700
50—100               (1.6)            (9.5)         (5.8)    (5.3)     (4.0)    (32.0)
GOVT.       3.9      .004              .62           .15      .11     —.026      .888     181   .800
BEDS>100             (0.0)            (8.5)         (3.7)    (2.2)     (2.9)    (16.3)

GOVT. BEDS 4.3      —.057              .53           .11      .19     —.032      .778     434   .637
50—100               (0.9)            (8.0)         (3.9)    (5.2)     (43)     (13.1)

OCCUPANCY   3.9      .065              .47           .17      .19     —.032      .898    463    .887
>75%                 (1.4)            (9.2)         (7.4)                       (49.9)
                                                             (6.1)     (4.8)

FULL        3.5      .088              .64           ——       .18     —.041      .904    1145   .849
SAMPLE                                               ——
                     (2.6)           (19.3)                  (7.2)    (10.0)    (60.0)
                                                TABLE lÀ

                               SAMPLE MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS
                                  (STANDARD DEVIATIONS IN PARENTHESES)




                                                                                         HOSP.
            HOSPI—          PER-               NLIP            SURG      MED     OTHER   BASED
SAMPLE      TALS BEDS SONNEL           MD's    ($ thou) GP's   SPEC      SPEC    SPEC    PHYS.
FULL         165     108
SAMPLE
                            190        17.4   491    9.3        3.7       1.8     1.8     0.7
                     (60)   (127)     (15.4) (435) (5.1)       (4.9)     (3.3)   (3.1)   (2.1)
BEDS          60     158    292        28.3     777   11.8      7.3      4.0      3.7
>100                                                                                      1.5
                   (70) (154)         (20.4)   (561) (6.5)     (6.4)     (4.5)   (4.3)   (3.2)
BEDS         105      78    131        11.1     325    7.9      1.6      0.5      0.7     0.3
50—100               (24) (46)         (4.9) (202) (3.3)       (1.5)     (0.9)   (1.1)   (0.7)
GOVT.        88       97    171        15.3     432    9.3      2.9      1.2      1.4     0.6
                     (45)   (45)      (10.7)   (335) (4.6)     (3.2)   (2.2)     (2.3)   (1.2)
NON—         77      119    212        19.8     560    9.4      4.7      2.5
PROF
                                                                                  2.3     0.9
                     (72) (153)       (19.2) (519) (5.6)       (6.2)   (4.1)     (3.8)   (2.8)
NFP BEDS:    35      168   315         30.8     860   11.4      8.4      4.9      4.3     1.7
>100                 (80) (174)       (23.9)   (621) (7.0)     (7.5)   (5.1)     (4.8)   (4.0)
NFP BEDS:    42       79  127          10.8     312    7.8      1.6      0.5     0.7
50—100                                                                                    0.3
                     (22) (42)         (4.6)   (194) (3.3)     (1.5)   (0.7)     (1.0)   (0.5)
GOVT BEDS    26      143   262         25.1     666   12.4      5.9      2.8     3.0      1.1
>100                 (48) (117)       (13.7) (449) (5.8)       (4.2)   (3.2)     (3.2)   (1.4)
GOVT BEDS:   62       78    133       11.2             8.0
                                                334            1.7       0.6     0.7      0.3
50—100               (26) (48)         (5.1)   (206) (3.2)     (1.5)   (1.0)     (1.2)   (0.9)
0CC>         66      120   229        22.1     596    10.3     5.3       2.9     2.6     1.0
75%                  (76) (161)       (20.3) (524) (5.9)       (6.4)   (4.3)     (4.1)   (2.9)




                                                                                                 .
                                              TABLE lB

                                          POPULATION RATES
                             SAMPLE MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS

                              RATES ARE RATES     PER 100 PERSONS




            POPU-                            PERSON-
            LATION    ADM         ND           NEL        BEDS        GP's      SURG
SAMPLE      (00)      POP         POP          POP        POP         POP       POP

FULL          283    14.4        0.060        0.75        0.45       0.036     0.012
             (185)   (6.5)      (0.025)      (0.35)      (0.23)     (0.013)   (0.012)
BEDS          402    16.0        0.072        0.85        0.48       0.031     0.019
>100         (238)   (7.3)      (0.029)      (0.40)      (0.27)     (0.011)   (0.015)
BEDS:         214    13.5        0.054        0.69        0.43       0.039     0.008
50—100        (94)   (5.8)      (0.019)      (0.31)      (0.21)     (0.013)   (0.009)
GOVT.         271    13.7        0.057        0.70        0.41       0.036     0.010
             (164)   (6.5)      (0.022)      (0.33)      (0.19)     (0.011)   (0.011)
NON—          297    15.2        0.065        0.80        0.49       0.035     0.014
PROF         (208)   (6.4)      (0.027)      (0.37)      (0.27)     (0.014)   (0.013)
NFP BEDS:    403     17.2        0.076        0.93        0.53       0.030     0.021
>100         (251)   (7.6)      (0.032)      (0.42)      (0.31)     (0.012)   (0.015)
NFP BEDS:    208     13.5        0.055        0.69        0.45       0.040     0.008
50—100        (99)   (4.6)      (0.016)      (0.27)      (0.21)     (0.014)   (0.008)
GOVT   BEDS: 399     14.3        0.066        0.74        0.42       0.033     0.016
>100        (220)    (6.6)      (0.024)      (0.33)      (0.18)     (0.010)   (0.013)
GOVT   BEDS: 218     13.4        0.053        0.68       0.41       0.038     0.008
50—100       (90)    (6.4)      (0.020)      (0.33)      (0.20)     (0.012)   (0.010)
0CC>         336     14.8        0.064        0.76        0.42       0.034     0.014
75%         (233)    (7.3)      (0.029)      (0.37)      (0.20)     (0.011)   (0.015)
                                           TABLE 2

                                PRODUCTION FUNCTION ESTIMATES
                                   DISAGGREGATED PHYS ICLANS

                                 (Logarithmic Specification)
                                          NON
SUB—           CON-    BEDS      PERSNL LABOR    GP' s     SUR-   MED   0Th HOSP
SANPLE         STANT                     INPUT             GEONS SPEC SPEC BASED


FULL           4.1      .068        .53    .13   .088   .059 .028 .037 —.001 1145            .869
SAMPLE                  (2.1)     (16.1) (8.1)   (6.1) (4.9) (2.1) (3.4) (0.1)
BEDS>100       4.3       .14        .45   .11    .049   .080 .034 .038   .033 421            .856
                        (3.0)      (9.1) (3.7)    (2.6) (3.8) (2.0) (2.4)      (3.7)

BEDS:          4.1 —.001            .56   .14        .11   .055 .001 .029     —.043 724      .662
50—100                  (0.2)     (13.0) (6.9)    (5.6) (3.7) (0.2) (1.9)      (2.1)

GOVERN—         4.0     —0.0        .56   .16        .10   .071 .032 .003 —.016        615   .810
MENTAL                  (0.0)     (11.2) (5.3)    (4.3) (3.8) (0.1) (0.1)      (0.8)

NOT—FOR—        4.1      .13        .47   .12    .082      .046 .025 .078      .012    530   .910
PROFIT

NOT—FOR—        4.4
                        (3.1)

                         .25
                                  (10.2) (8.2)

                                    .34   .11
                                                  (4.6) (2.9) (1.6) (5.2)

                                                  .043     .055 .068 .068
                                                                               (0.9)

                                                                               .028    240   .888
                                                                                                    •
PROFIT,                 (4.0)      (5.8) (3.2)    (2.1) (2.0) (3.4) (3.4)      (1.6)
BEDS >100

NOT—FOR—        4.1     .036        .55   .12     .14   .065 —;057 .067       —.019    291   .709
PROFIT, BEDS            (0.0)     (10.0) (5.0)   (4.7) (3.3) (1.9) (2.9)       (0.5)
50—100

GOVT.,          4.2      .00        .60   .12    .063      .087 .008    .00    .026    181   .800
BEDS>100                (0.0)      (7.5) (2.0)   (1.6) (2.6) (0.1) (0.0)       (0.9)

GOVT.,BEDS     4.3     —.053        .53   .19    .093   .058 .021 —0.0        —.044    434   .643
50—100                  (0.8)      (7.7) (4.9)   (3.3) (2.6) (0.8). (0.0)      (1.6)

OCCUPANCY      4.2      .017        .49   .18    .097    .12 —.004 .036       —.005    463   .893
>75%                    (0.3)      (9.1) (6.1)   (4.7) (6.0) (0.2) (1.9)       (0.1)




                                                                                                    .
                                            TABLE 3

                     ANNuAL MARGINAL ADMISSION PRODUCTS, BY PHYSICIAN
                              SPECIALTY TYPE, EVALUATED AT MEAN

                      (— = coefficient     not significant or negative)


     SUBSAMPLE       ALL MD's       GP's        SURG      MED       OTHER   HOSP
                                                SPEC      SPEC      SPEC    BASED

    FULL SAMPLE        35.8         31.3       46.0       36.7      48.4
    BEDS>100           33.3         21.2       53.5       37.7      44.8    73.2
    BEDS 50—100        34.8         31.8       54.3        ——
    GOVERNMENTAl..     32.6         32.3       60.5       48.3
    NOT—FOR—PROF.      38.9         32.0       32.8       28.9      95.9

    N—F—P,BEDS>100     34.7         20.6       34.7       68.3      76.1

    N—F—P,BEDS         44.1         39.9       62.6                 98.7
    50—100

    GOVT.BEDS>100      30.1         23.7       63.6
    GOVT.BEDS          27.9         27.0       56.0
    50—100

    OCC>75%            38.1        38.0        84.5                 44.3




I
                                            TABLE 4
                                                                                                             .
                         ALTERNATIVE SPECIFICATIONS OF PRODUCTION
                                         FUNCTION

                                          FULL SAMPLE
                                    PAY- PER-         NLIP NLIP AP-           FAC-     AVG.
LINE     BEDS    MD's      TINE     ROLL SONNEL BEDS= BEDS= PROV— ILITIES STAY                   R2
                                                      1000 3500 ALS
  1.     .064     .15     —.028               .53      .14             .043   —.00              .867 1145
        (2.1)   (10.1)      (7.8)           (12.0) (8.7)              (4.1)    (0.0)
  2.      .48    .055     —.027              .34       .11                             —.66     .947 1145
       (20.3)    (6.1)     (11.3)          (14.3) (10.8)                               (40.2)
 3.       .18     .16     —.061     .44                .10                                      .861 1145
       (6.2)    (10.5) (15.4) (18.7)                  (5.8)
 4.      .17      .16     —.026              .55              .030                              .863 1145
       (5.1)    (10.2)     (7.1)           (16.3)             (7.8)

 5.     —.04      .13                        .69       .11
       (0.1)     (4.1)                      (7.0)     (2.2)                                     .906   168
    V                                                               W                                                              V

                                                             TABLE 5

                                            OPTIMAL INPUT RATIOS AND SHADOW PRICES

                                                       OF PHYSICIAN INPUTS

                                                    (USINC ESTIMATES OF TABLE   1)
                                  (—) =   Coefficient not significant at (b.8) or better

SAMPLE                     BEDS /Mi)S            PERS/MDS      NLIP/MDS          BEDS   + NLIP      ALL HOSP      IP          PERS
                                                                                       MDS                 MDS             NLIP + BEDS
                    OPT         PRICE     OPT        PRICE   OPT        PRICE   OPT      PRICE      OPT          PRICE     OPT     ACTUAL
                    RATIO       OF N])    RATIO      OF MD   RATIO      OF MD   RATIO    OF    MD   RATIO        OF   MD   RATIO   RATIO
FULL SAMPLE         0.57          107     3.47        148    1.00        283    1.57         219    5O4          170       2.20    1.49
BEDS>100            1.00           56     3.06        167    0.88        310    1.88         176    4.94         169       1.63    1.53
BEDS 50—100                               4.08        129    1.15       250     1.15         310    5.23         169       3.53    1.43
GOVERNMENTAL                              4.07        126    1.21       233     1.21         286    5.29         162       3.35    1.48
NOT—FOR—PROFIT      1.05           56     2.65        194                       1.82         189    4.47         191       1.45    1.50
                                                             0:75
N—F—P,BEDS 50—100   0.54         136      2.94        182    0.71       407     1.24         291    4.18         215       2.38    1.48
N—F—P,BEDS>100      1.75           31     2.31        220    1.00       280     2.75         122    5.06         166       0.84    1.52
COVT.BEDS 50—100                          4.82        107    1.73       172     1.73         212    6.55         136       2.73    1.41
GOVT.BEDS>100                             4.13        122    0.73       364     0.73         442    4.87         170       5.64    1.57
OCC>75%             0.38         143      2.76        177    1.12       241     1.47         221    4.24         192       1.88    1.50
                                                    TABLE 6

                                   1972 PRODUCTION FUNCTION ESTIMATES
                            USING PHYSICIAN STAFF AND DISAGGREGATED LABOR




    i—i
           o
           cz
                             —S
                                     U)


                                                    ou
                                                  FULL SAMPLE
                                                                       U)


                                                                                             oIz




    1.      .57      .20    —.01    .10
                                                                                                     160 .908
          (6.6) (3.8)      (0.1) (3.2)
2.          .55     .20     —.02            .13      .019                                                .911
          (6.3) (4.0)      (0.3)          (3.8) (1.3)
3.                  .19      .00            .13      .018            .076     .056    .045    .40        .905
                  (3.6)    (0.0)          (3.6)     (1.3)           -(2.3)   (3.6)   (1.6) (5.6)
4.                  .18                     .12      .018     .19    .040     .046    .045   .32         .915
                  (3.6)                   (3.3) (1.4)       (2.8) (1.2) (2.9)        (1.7) (5.7)

                                                  BEDS: 50—100
1.          .55     .21     —.09   .088
                                                                                                     101 .792
          (5.1)   (3.3)    (1.0) (2.1)
2.          .55     .22     —.10           .084  —.00                                                    .788
          (4.9) (3.4)      (1.1)          (1.9) (0.0)
3.                  .21     —.06           .080       .00            .092     .059    .035    .38        .786
                  (3.3)    (0.8)          (1.7)     (0.0)           (1.9) (2.7)      (0.9) (4.2)
4.                  .21                    .076       .00     .12    .058     .051    .032    .30        .789
                  (3.4)                   (1.7) (0.0)       (1.4) (1.1) (2.8)        (0.9)   (4.1)

                                                   BEDS>100
1.          .50     .27      .11   .066
                                                                                                     59 .892
          (3.3)   (2.7)    (1.0) (1.2)
2           .50     .16      .08            .22     .045                                                 .913
          (3.3)   (1.6)    (0.6)          (3.2) (2.1)
3.                  .16      .09            .23     .047             .038    .038     .031   .37         .908
                  (1.7)    (0.7)          (3.2) (2.1)               (0.8)    (1.6)   (0.7) (3.1)
4.                  .13                     .21     .043      .27    .019    .031     .042    .32        .919
                  (1.3)                   (3.2)    (2.2) (2.7)      (0.4) (1.4)      (1.1) (3.7)
