NBER flRKENG PAPER SERIES

Alternative Prior Representations of
Smoothness for Di sUibuted Lag
Estimation

Robeut J. Shiller*
Working Paper 89

COMPUTER RESEARCH CENTER FOR ECONOMICS AND MANAGENT SCIENCE

National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
575 Technology Square

Cambridge, Massachisetts 02139
June 1975

Preliminary: not for quotation
NEER working papers are distributed infonna.lly and in limited
numbers for conments only. They should not be quoted without
written permission.
This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER

publications; in particular, it has not yet been sulinitted for
approval by the Board of Directors.

*NBER Research Fellow, 1974-75, and University of Pennsylvania.

Abstract
In some applications of the di stributed lag model, theory ruires that
all lag coefficients have a positive sign. A distributed lag estimator
which provides estimated coefficients with positive sign is developed
here wi-ich is analogous to an earlier distributed lag estimator derived
from "othness prior s" which did not assure that all estimated coefficients be positive. The earlier estimator with unconstrained signs
was a posterior mode of the coefficients based on a spherically normal
"smoothness prior" in the d+l order differences of the coefficients.

The newer estimator with constrained sign is a posterior mode of the
logs of the coefficients based on spherically normal "smoothness prior"

on the d+l order differences of the logs of the coefficients. The
meaning of both categories of prior is discussed in this paper and
they are compared to prior parameterizations of the lag curve. Both
varieties of "smoothness prior", in contrast to the parameterizations,
allow the coefficients to assume any "smooth" shape subject to the
sign constraint. The sign-constrained estintor has the additional
advantage that it easily forms asnptotes. Moreover, the sign constrained estimator is easily implemented. The estimate can be obtained
by an iterative procedure involving regressions with dumiiy observations
similar to thnse used to find the unconstrained sign estimator. An
illustrative example of the application of both estimators is given
at the end of the paper.
Acknoledgement s

The autbor is indebted to Stanley Wasserman who wrote the TROLL Macro
which implements the estimator developed here and which produced the

illu strative example in this paper. This paper also benefited from
discussions with Richard Hill, Edward Leaner and Forrest Nelson.

•

Contents

I.
II.

Introduction
The Estin±ion Problem and Thaditional (Parametric)
Approaches to It

III. Bayesian Approaches to Distributed Lag Estiation .

3

.

.7

IV.

An Iterative Procedure

18

V.

An Illustrative Example

21

VI.

Conclusion

27

Footnotes

29

References

30

Figure 1

15

Figure 2

22

I. Introduction
Linear distributed lags are widely used in econometrics to model
relationships between economic variables when the relationships

are not well described in terms of a simple correlation between
contemporaneous values of the variables but are rather distributed

over time. Typically the response of an economic variable y to
variations in another economic variable x may be sluggish and delayed.

For instance, a response in terms of personal consumption expenditure
(y) to government policy which influences disposable personal income
Cx)

may be felt for a period of years following the policy action.

In the absence of a theoretical structure for the relationship, it is
often valuable to assume that it has a simple linear form.

A tine series y at time t is said to follow a 'tlinear distributed
lag" on another tine series x if:

.E .1 xt-i. +
t 1o

y

where the .1 are
A

is the "lag

zero

the

mean

c

t

(1)

constant coefficients (which will have to be estimated)

stationary stochastic process with
and independent of x. In this paper we will be concerned with
length" and

is a

question: how can we represent our prior knowledge concerning the

vector of distributed lag coefficients

iO X-l? Since the distributed

—2—

lag model has many parameters, the representation of this prior knowledge

is an essential element of our modeling. A number of parametrizations

or

prior distributions has

arid

been suggested

economic applications

we will discuss their meaning. In particular, we will discuss a prior

"normal

distribution on which we call
and

for

will

develop a variant

of

it

smoothness priors" (Shiller

[1973])

which we call "log normal smoothness

priors". These priors can be used to derive estimators of the coefficients
which have desirable properties. The new prior yields an estimator which
has

the

than

property that all the .,

zero. The earlier

prior

iO, A-i, are specified to

be greater

yields an estimator with unconstrained

sign.
We will also present here an illustrative example of an estimation

problem using the constrained sign estimator as well as the unconstrained

sign

estimator.

.1

—3—

II. The Estimation Problem arid Traditional

(Parametric)

Approaches to it

The literature on the estimation of distributed la is very extensive
since it is a fundamental problem for econometric modelling. We cannot

do justice to the litrature here. The reader is referred to two articles
which survey the literature: &i1iches [1965] and Sims [19 74]. However,
we do wish to make sane comparison between the traditional parameterizations
and a Bayesian approach with regard to their assumed prior knowledge.

The term "distributed lag" in economics we first coined by

Irving Fisher
of

in

the 1920's who used this model to represent the response

interest rates to inflation rates. The distributed lag model may

called a "linear

transfer function" model

also

be

or "linear filter" model. Such

linear model have been used extensively in many branches of science and

engineering. What distinguishes our econometric problem from these

applications

other

is just the nature of the vague prior knowledge concerning

the coefficients coupled with the shortage of data available in most
economic applications.

When the relation (1) is structural (i.e. will continue to hold even

after policy makers interfere with x) then we generally expect the lag
coefficients

to trace out (if plotted against i) a ttsimplett or "smooth"

curve. Given that (1) is a structural relation, then we can assess

our

prior beliefs regarding the

by asking what would we expect about

x0 is given a unit shock by policy
other time periods. The increment in

the result of an experiment in which

makers without changing x in

caused by

is

the shock will be .

y

If the structural relation from x to y

a sluggish one, we would expect the curve

will he a smooth one which

tails off for high t. We may
possibility that

the

curve may

not,
be

however, wish to rule out the

interval, etc. The minimal kind

some

or

bijrodal

have negative values over

of prior Imowledge that we

generally will wish to assume is that the curve is probably fairly
simple.
Sims (1974) has

emphasized

is projected on current

that if a random economic time series

and lagged

values of another time series

there is no reason to expect a "smooth" distributed lag even
series themselves

if

the

time

are smooth. This should caution those who estimate

distributed lags in cases in which there is no theoretical structure.

However, cases in which (1) is likely to be useful for policy purposes are
likely to be confined to those cases in which (1) in a
relationship with a simple, stable form.

The

problem is to

estimate .

and

;-+2

of y,

given a matrix X whose coluirns are curTent

and lagged values of x, X. .x
ij

iO, A-l given n observations

.

.

t—n+i-j+1

Then we may write:

Y=X+

(2)

where iB is the vector o'l' xa) and

c is spherically normally distributed

with precision h (i.e. with variance cY2l/h) and is independent of x. The
likelihood function of

is then:

(3)

exp(— h(Y-X)'(Y-X))
The maximum likelihood
estimate

estimate of

is then the ordinary

least squares

—5—

The

problem with the maximum likelihood estimate is that it is

not based on any (proper) prior knowledge regarding the coefficients.

Since economic time series are usually short and X exhibits multicollinearity

the problem is significant. If the values
shape

the

are

plotted

against i,

one typically gets in jagged and erratic, with coefficient

frequently changing sign.

The simplest way to represent the assumption that the coefficents

lie on a smooth curve is to parametrize the ,

to

1g(i,a,b,c,..)

and

reduce the problem to the estimation of a smaller group of parameters

a, b, c,. The most popular such parametrization is that proposed by
A].nion [1965], in which the f3 are assumed to lie on dth degree
polynomial in i.

Thus, Ay where A is a matrix with d+l independent

coluims whose 1th element is given by a polynomial in
or

of degree d

lower. The constrained maximum likelihood estisrte a of
The estimates of

lie

is then

will if plotted against

then

on the familiar class of polynomials (a straight line if thi, a

parabola if d2,
they

etc.).

While the coefficients are

assured

a more simple shape,

are probably constrained too much by this procedure. For instance,

the coefficients cannot then "tail off". A polynomial can approximate an
asymptote in a region only by "oscillating" around it, the number of
slope changes limited to d.
The Almon procedure can easily be improved by substituting a different

matrix A. Any parametrization of which is linear in the parameters

i.e.

=Ay can be estimated as easily. For instance, piecewise linear

distributed lags have been thus implemented. An

improvement on the A]on

—6—

procedure

would clearly be to assume an A matrix which can more easily

produce as>miptotes. We might hypothesize an A matrix whose columns
consist of negative powers of i, for instance.

such linear

While

they

parametrizations may be convenient and useful,

have a united ability to represent prior information. By setting

3=Ay' where A has m independent columns, we constrain the coefficients

to lie on an (mt) order linear manifold. There is no linear manifold
which well represents the kind of prior }iiowledge we have regarding the

coefficients. This kind of constraint always allows the coefficents
to change sign m-l tines or to fit rn-i "outliers". We cannot prevent
erratic shapes without keeping rn very small, in which case the lag has been
to lie on an elementary class of shapes.

constrained

Other
which

parametrizations which are nonlinear have

been suggested

are less convenient computationally but are in some cases more

accurate as representations of prior knowledge. These include Koyck's
geometric lag and its generalization the rational lag of Jorgenson which
has a rational generating function,and Solow's negative binomial distributed
lag.

Some of
problems

make

these parametrizations (e.g. the rational lag) may create

because they do not prevent certain inprobable

lag structures

and

assumptions about the tail of the lag distribution (for which the

data may carry no information) which do not have any intuitive economic

interpretation. When one uses the rational lag parametrization it is often
found that the estinated lag oscillates in sign or explodes rather than

tails off for high i. Before using any parametrization, one must always
ask what

are

the constraints mean in

appropriate

economic terms

for the application.

and whether

these constraints

—7—

III.

Bayesian Approaches to Distributed Lag Estimation

An

alternative approach to distributed lag estimation is

a Bayesian

approach

which uses probalilistic prior information rather

than parametrization

(see e.g., Learner [1972], Cleveland [1974],

Shiller [1973]): This approach has the advantage that we do not impose
arbitary constraints

which we do not believe in. A Baye5ian estimation

procedure generally allows the estimated coefficients to take on any form,

the prior beliefs

only influence the estimates rather than constrain

them and allow the data to overwhelm the priors in any direction

which

in

the data is strong.
We are interested here in Bayesian priors which represent only

the belief that

the

trace out a "smooth"

information about the size of any

one

curve,

and which carry

no

coefficient considered separately.

One class of such priors which was suggested in an earlier paper

(Shiller, [1973]) we call, "Smoothness priors". The priors are designed
to effectively break the near multicollinearity among the lagged variables
often

that

produces erratic coefficient estimates even when the standard error of

the regression in small, yet otherse carry no information, These priors
put a zero mean spherically normal distribution on the d+l order difference
u of the coefficients:

u
where

R

R is a (X-d-lxX) matrix which forms

d+l

order

differences of

the

coefficients and which has rank A-d-1EP. The ij th element of R is zero

if j-i>d+l or if i>j and is otherwise equal to (_i)J1() . Given
this prior on u, we take an uninformative prior f() constant on any

d+1 of the ,

and

get

with a change of

variables a prior which is

uninformative on any of the ft, taken separately:

—8—

exp

f(s)

—
'R'R
22

is small, then the priors assert that the

If the prior variance

coefficients will in some sense "hang together". In the limit, as
goes to zero, our priors approach the Aixion prior that the coefficients
lie on a d degree polynomial2. It is irnporrtant to emphasize, however,

that the priors are not well described is asserting that the coefficients

lie near a d degree polynomial. One could have alternatively assumed, as did

Maddala (19Th), that a0+a1i+.. .adi E1 where c. is spherically normally
are independent of c: and

a

distributed and the coefficients a ,a

d

have a flat marginal distribution. The Maddala prior would assert that the
coefficients can not deviate far from some polynomial and is indifferent as
to how irregular are the deviations of the coefficients from the

polynomial. The smoothness prior, on

the

other hand

asserts,

if

is

relatively small, that the can deviate dramatically from any polynomial
if it does so gradually, i.e., in a "smooth" manner. If do then the priors
will readily allow

the lag curve to assume any shape

which does not require

the adjacent coefficients to be much different. If dl the priors allow
any

shape

in which the slopes do not change quickly, i, .e. it does not like

"jagged" shapes. These may

A flexible curve is a

be

rubber

understood as "flexible curve" priors.

ruler used

by draftsmen

to interpolate

points.

In a sense, the first degree smoothness prior allows any distributed lag
shape which could easily be drawn using a flexible curve, that is,

which does not require that

the

curve be bent too hard.

—9—

This prior, when applied to the likelihood function (3) yields a

posterior by Bayes Lw1, assuming for the mcnent h is given, which is
multivariate

rionrial:

n
2

f(IX,Y,h) _- exp
where K=

This

.

One

will be our

may take

the

2
(—hC(Y—X)'(Y—X)+1< B'R'R]

as

mean (or mode)

estimator with unconstrained

can be obtained by regressing Y and

(5)

an estihate of .

sign. The estimate

X matrices augnented with dummy

observation. Defining:

xjXl

(6)

1o

then the posterior mean can be found by regressing the auT1ented matrix

Y on the augnented matrix X:
(7)

(x'x+K2R'RY- x'Y

The great advantage of this procedure over parametrizat ions is

most evident in cases in which the standard error of the regression is

small and the X matrix exhibits near-multicollinearity. In this case,
ordinary least squares will either fail altogether to produce a unique
estimate or will produce a jagged erratic estimate. A parametrization

will of course

always produce a lag

curve which

lies in the class of elementary

shapes that the parametrization allows, even if this produces a much higher

standard errcr. The smoothness priors estimate, on the other hand,
effectively deals with the multicollinearity by smoothing the curve,

— 10

-

but at the same time allowing the curve to take on any simple shape.

If the true lag curve is a simple curve which does not lie near the class
of curves specified by the parametrization estimates, than the smoothness

estimate will have a much better fit. Moreover, the estimate

could not have been seen at all in the ordinary least squares estimate.
One cannot visually "smooth" the ordinary least square estimate to
produce a rough smoothness prior estimate, since in so doing one would

not be taking into account the nature of the multicoilinearity in the X
matrix. These properties of the estimators as compared with the AJinon

estimator are illustrated in a case with a Iciown
[1973] and

lag

curve in Shiller,

in Wilson [1975].

The smoothness prior estimate with unconstrained sign

has proven

very useful, but suffers from a couple of problems at least in certain

applications: 1. it is of-ten difficult to specify the
unit free

and

2.

parameter K is not

the prior allows coefficients to change sign, whereas in

many applications we believe the coefficients should all be positve or

all be

negative.

The first problem, that of choosing K, has led some authors to a
ridge regression approach to the problem: Hill and Johnson [1975],
Learner [19714] and Maddala [19714]. It is true

that

information we have in applications of distributed

of

the same vague nature as that which many

approach inherent

the kind of prior

lags may indeed be

think justifies the kind

the ridge regression procedure.
The difference between our estimator
and the original ridge
of judgemental

in

estimator is then merely that our priors relate to the differences of

— 11

—

coefficients rather than their levels,
It is quite possible, on the other hand, that we can in fact easily
specify a proper prior on sane function of the coefficients which is
unit free, such as their ratio. Even though we rray have no prior notion
the

-

as to the magnitude of the difference

we

should not differ from
information that, say,
The natural extension of smoothness priors to

may have prior
by more than n%.
deal

with these

problems is then a prior on the d+l order difference V of the logs

of

the coefficients, (as mentioned in Shiller

[1973]):

Rb

V

where b log(s).
We then give V a spherically normal distribution with zero mean.

If we

now choose flat

priors

on d+l of the blog

constant, then we

get, with a change of variables, a prior on the b which is uninfoniative

on

any b1

considered separately:

f(b) exp(- —-- b'R'Rb)

2

This

expression, with

distribution

a change

of

(9)

variables, implies a prior

on which is a partially degenerate (uninformative)

multivariate log normal distribution. The marginal prior on any
considered separately is the Jeffreys (1961) uninformative prior

f(.)o l/.

If R is a matrix which forms first differences (i.e. d0)

lag shape is probable for
adjacent coefficients is not too high.

then the priors assert that, in effect, any
which the proportional change between

- 12

If

—

is very small, the priors reduce to the zero degree

Almon contraint.

If dcl, then the priors assert that the rate of change between adjacent
coefficient should not change too fast, thus the prior also asserts
that the lag curve should not be too "jagged". If dl then as + 0
the priors approach the Koyck constraint that the coefficients should lie

on a geometric distribution, If d2, the limiting case as + 0 is the
constraint -that the lag curve be proportional to a noniial density

(or its inverse), These limiting constraints are likely to be more
acceptable than the polynomial constraints.

The log smoothness priors have the additional property that the prior
conditional variance of

given adjacent coeficients il' l' etc.,

is small when the adjacent coefficients are small and large when the

adjacent coefficients are large. The priors thus "tighten" up in
regions in which the coefficients are small, as in the tail of the lag
distribution; and assert that a single large coefficient in the tail
is very improbable. The priors thus embody essentially what Learner [1972]

has called the "principle of proportionality" in distributed lag priors
In contrast the variance of
of

i÷l•• with

conditional on il' F3j+l...

is

independent

priors which are multivariate nonrial on the coefficients

themselves rather than their logs.

Combining (9) with (3) and substituting eb for , we get, by Bayes
Law, the posterior of b:

f(bIX,Y) hr/2

which is, unfortunately, not

exp-

[(Y_Xe(Y_Xeb) K2b'R'Rb])

an easy distribution to deal

(10)

with.

.

— 13 —

A modal estimate of b may, however,

be found with an iteretive procedure.

We can write an expression which give the posterion mode

It will

i.1icitly.

convenient to write the expression in terms of

be

which will be our constrained

sign

estimate.

By differentiating (10)

respect to b, setting to zero and substituting we get an iinplicit
function for the mode b . Substituting b( log
with

X'X

+

K diag ($)'R'R log

X'Y

where K is a/ and the matrix diag ( ) is defined as a diagonal matrix
element is

whose
positive,

squares
having

then

If the ordinary least squares estimate is

as K + 0

the estimate

estimate. This property

chosen

rather than

of

the estimator of

as an estimate the mode

of

approaches the ordinary least
of

is the result of

the posterior distribution of b

the posterior distribution of .

In

general, the limit

of c as K goes to zero is the constrained maximum likelihood

which

all

estimator in

elements are forced to be positive.

An understanding

of the behavior of

the estimator is facilitated

by considering the isoensity contours of the prior distribution of

and

b.

and

when d0 is shown in Figure 1. In Figure la, the isodensi-ty

The siuplest case, in which has

only

two elements

for normal smoothness priors appear as a series of parallel lines. The
center line, representing the prior mode, is a 1.f5° line which passes

through the origin. In Figure lb we see the isodensity curves of the
log normal smoothness priors, i.e., the prior on blog( ),

but

expressed

(11)

- lL -

in

of rather than b. These are

terms

positive quadrant

only

a series of

straight

lines in the

which converge at the origin. Learner [1975] has

discussed both classes of isodensity contours; the first he calls
"cylindrically uniform priors" and the second "conically uniform priors".
A discussion of these contours is of course more general than a discussion
of the prior

distribution since more than

one prior density can have

same set of contours.

the

In

each case, the mode of the posterior distribution will lie on the

locus of tangencies of the isodensity contours with isolikelihood contours.
This locus has been called the "information contract curve" [Learner, (1975)]

or

"curve decolletage". Just where along the curve the mode occurs depends

on K.

The likelihood contours are concentric ellipses centered on the
maximum likelihood estimate. In Figure 1, these are drawn for a
(somewhat pathological) case in which the maximum likelihood estimate would
make

negative and 2 positive. For Figure la the curve of tangencies

is a straight line connecting the maximum likelihood estimate with the
tangency of an

isolikelihood

ellipse with the center

line

of the isodensity

contours. Modes can occur only on the segment (shaded darker) connecting

the maximum likelihood estimate to the 5° line. The higher the value of K,

the closer the Bayesian estimate will be to the 145° line, for low K, the
estimate

of

coefficients

is still

negative, but for K sufficiently tight both

must lie in the positive quadrant.

- 15 -

A

likelihood

n)dJTUm

likelihood

estinte

density contours

B

density

locus of
tarigencies

/

/
/
/

/

/

1

I

Figure 1. Density contours for smoothness priors, likelihood contours arid their tarigencies, A: normal smoothness priors, B: log normal
smoothness priors.

— 16

For

log

tangencies

—

normal smoothness priors, on the other hand, the locus of

lies on an

ellipse which passes

through the maximum likelihood

estimate and the origin, arid which has the same eccentricity as the

likelihood ellipses (for proof, see Learner [1975]). Not all points on
this

ellipse are eligible modes however; only that

dark)

which likes in the positive quadrant between

estimate and

the Ll.5°

line

part (which is shaded

the maximum likelihood

qualifies. As K approaches zero the estimate

approaches the cons-trained maxiiaun likelihood estimate (i.e., the

of

tangency

a likelihood ellipse with the vertical axis).

As K approaches infinity, the estimate approaches the 5° line.
For this case, when dO, both estimators have the same limit as K -'-

but this result does not hold with higher d.

Had we specified the same prior on the ratios of the coefficients but
instead required the individual coefficients to be negative rather than

positive, we would find a mode which lies instead on the section of the

tangency ellipse which lies in the negative quadrant between the 5°
live and the maximum likelihood estimate, (also shaded darker in

Figure ib). Here, as K

00 -the estimate would approach zero. Had

the maximum likelihood estimate appeared elsewhere, negative modes
might not exist.
It should be noted, that the above two dimensional example is somewhat

misleading, It should be remembered

of

that

the three dimensional generalizations

the priors are not symmetrical cylinders or cones but "flattened"

cylinders and cones. That is, -the isolikehood cylinder in the three
dimensional case

with dO has

an

intersection with the plane

- 17

+

constant

+

dimensions

which is an ellipse, not a circle. In three

the curve of tangencies for normal smoothness

priors with d 0

not, in genex.l, be a straight line.

will

One problem

which might arise in estimation is that

positive quadrant the modal
of the right form, we might
defining

This

situation

would be

even

find a dependency among the equations

a unique maximum cannot

to that

analogous

in which

the Alnon

be found.

procedure

cannot be inverted. In addition, it is also possible

that the posterior distribution may have more
It might be a good idea to search for all local

under some circumstances

one local maximum.

maxima in order to

find

multiple modes may

arise,

which

estimate

in the
may not be unique. If the X matrix is

(expression (11)) so that

fails when A'X'XA
than

—

the

global maxijiuim.

we are

likely

lies closest to the prior mean.

However,

even in

cases

where

to be satisfied with the mode

— 18 —

IV.

An Iterative Procedure
A Gauss-Newton type iterative procedure to find the constrained estimate

was chosen which is easily implemented once we have a computer program

which implements the unconstrained estimate .

Though

our estimate will

be the mode of b, it was thought convenient to deal directly with .
That

is, our estimate

will maximize the expression:
(12)

(Y—X)'(Y—X) + K2 1og()'R'R 1og()

with

respect to .

To do this, we will approximate the second term in

the expression by a quadratic function of

in the vicinity of a guess

If we chose this approximation to be a positive definite quadratic
form in (s-c) where c is a constant, then the miniiaim

of

the

approximation to the expression (12) can be found by an ordinary
squares

Along

regression involving matrices auented

observations.

Gauss-Newton lines, we substitute the first degree Taylor approximation

log(s)

into

by dummy

least

]og(') +

diag()_1(_)

(13)

(12):

(Y—X)'

(lL.)

The maximum i1) of (1L1) is then given by:

[X'X]X'Y

S
(15)

- 19

-

where:

[_iuog(U

[icdiagy']

(16)

If one already has a program which implements simple smoothness
priors, it is a very easy matter to have the program build these

matrices as well. The procedure, then, will be to form an initial
guess (O) for the posterior mode, and then form X and Y based on
this guess, and regress Y on X to get a revised guess
is then used to form new matrices X and Y to yield a new
estimate

The process is repeated until

up to

some tolerance. When this occurs, expression (11) is satisfied

and j+l is the posterior mode

by

In each iteration we can say that we are approximating the
prior distribution of

by a normal distribution, that is, the

Taylor representation of Rlog: R(log)+diag(-'))
rather than Rlog itself is assumed spherically normally distrib-

uted with zero mean and with variance .

In

terms of the isodensity contours displayed in figure 1,

we see that the approximation substitutes a system of parallel
lines for the system of intersecting lines in lb in such a way
that the isodensity contour of the approximation which passes
through the guess

coincides with the actual isodensity

contour in lb which passes through this point.
If the regression program prints standard errors of the

coefficients, then these too will have an interpretation in

— 20

—

terms of the aDtroximating normal Eriors. Under the assumlDtion
that the estimated standard error, of the regression is the
true standard error, then the standard error of the coefficients
printed by the program will be the posterior standard errors

based on the approximating normal prior. If the standard error
of the regression a is not known but is given a prior distribution f(a)

1/a then, under the assumption that the ratio

K a/ is known, the marginal posterior of each coefficient
will have a student distribution with scale parameter equal to
the standard error printed and degrees of freedom as printed
by the program (see Zellner [1971]).

The iterative procedure may be compared with the Newtor-Rapheson

Method. The complete Newton step for maximizing (12) would be:

(i+l)

XtX +

K2diagR'Rdiag()

_K2diag_2diag(RcRlog) ]_l
x [XY -

2K2diagR'Rlog']

(17)

which cannot in general be implemented by a regression technique
involving dummy observations, so that the procedure is less

convenient from our point of view. However, we note that if we

choose our initial guess 0) so that Rlog0 0 (i.e. so that
the guess is itself a truncated Koyck, normal density etc.) then
the two procedures will be identical for the first iteration.
If in subsequent iterations Rlog$ remains small, subsequent
iterations will also be similar, and our iterative procedure will
show approximately quadratic convergence.

- 21

V.

—

An Illustrative Exanp1e
To illustrate the application of the estimator based on

log smoothness priors, we have chosen an example in which simple

smoothness priors do not perform as well as we'd like. This
is a case in which we expect the coefficients to be positive
and yet the final estimated coefficients (estimated without

endpoint constraints) do not "tail off at the end but instead
become negative. The equation estimated is a term structure
equation developed originally by Modigliani and Sutch which
relates long term interest rates to a distributed lag7on

past short term rates of interest. Modigliani and Sutch
hypothesized that long term interest rates are determined by
expectations of future short rates of interest which in turn
are related to a long distributed lag on past short rates of

interest. The distributed lag, they asserted, should be
smooth except that the first coefficient in the distributed lag
(i.e. that corresponding to the contemporaneous short rate
of interest) might differ substantially from the others due

to an impact effect of the current short rate. They estimated
the relation with the Almon polynomial constraint that did not

constrain the first coefficient of the lag. The relation was
improved and reestimated using the estimator based on first
degree smoothness priors in Modigliani and Shiller £1973]

,

and

was also discussed in Shiller [1973]. It was discovered at
this time that if the distributed lag is extended to 2
quarters, that the 'tail" of the distributed lag becomes

— 22 —

.I—..———--—---.

A

0.80

-3. 18
1

11

16

21

26

11

16

21

26

-0. 10

- 1)
C.

C

.-e.le

6

11

16

21

26

Figure 2. Estimates based on smoothness priors of .. A. (upper plot) unconstrained
sign estimate, thi, k20, sum of coefficients is l.±O,. R2.978. B, (center plot)
C, (lower
cons-trained sign estimate, tight priors, d1, k2O, suml.12,
plot) constrained si-i estimate, loose priors, dl, k3, suml.l2, R2.977.
Coefficient sums include C) (not plotted). R2 is computed from original data
only, excluding duniny observations.

— 23 —

negative.

Prior information that coefficients should not be

negative was then incorporated in an ad hoc manner by merely

truncating the lag after 16 quarters. It would be interesting
to see, then, what kind of lag curve our log smoothness prior
estimate will produce when the lag is extended over the entire
24 quarter period and estimated without endpoint priors.4
The unconstrained sign estimate
lag with K

20 and d

of the distributed

1 appears (except for the first

coefficient) in figure 2a.5 The shape is roughly as expected
except for the negative coefficients in the tail. If the curve
is reestimated using endpoint priors, then the lag curve is
still negative in the tail but heads up at the end.
An Almon procedure using a third degree polynomial constraint
produces an estimate which is similar to that in figure 2a in

that the final coefficients are negative. An Almon estimate
using a third degree polynomial constraint with the far end
point tied to zero also produced negative coefficients in the

tail. Among these procedures, the best way to impose nonnegativity in the tail appears to be to truncate the lag
distribution, i.e. choose a shorter lag length A.
Ordinary least squares produced the typical jagged erratic

estimate of the lag coefficients. The coefficients frequently
alternated in sign, and ranged from -.15 to .24. No semblance
of the above estimates could be seen in the ordinary least square
estimate.

—24 -

Using the absolute value of the estimate in figure 2a as
an initial guess, the iterative procedure described above was
used to find the constrained sign estimate
with K = 20.

with d = 1 and

In each iteration the absolute value of the

coefficient estimated in the previous iteration was used as

the guess .

The first two iterations still produced

negative values in the tail, but all negative values disappeared

by the third iteration. The coefficients had all converged to
two decimal place accuracy. by the sixth iteration. The
estimated lag curve, which appears in figure 2b, looks like a

truncated geometric (Koyck) lag. This is not surprising,
since a value of K = 20 represents a tight prior. Based on the

standard error estimated at .28 in the first simple smoothness
prior estimates, this prior variance on the second differences
of the logs of the coefficients is only

.014. That is,

the priors assert that the ratio of a pair of adjacent
coefficients should probably not differ from the ratio of the

next pair of coefficients by more than 1 or 2%. In our estimate,
V

Rlog has its largest (in absolute value) element just after

the hump, where it reaches -.008. All elements of V are negative,
so the estimated curve does deviate systematically from a
geometric lag. althrough not to a great degree.
In order to view the effects of a weaker log smoothness
prior, K was changed from 20 to 3 and the iteration continued,
using as a starting guess

the estimate that had been reached
0

— 25 —

with

K

20, and again substituting in each iteration the

absolute value of the estimate from the previous iteration
as the guess

Negative values of the coefficients in the

tail of the lag distribution immediately reappeared in the

first iteration. Since by the second iteration the negative
coefficients did not seem to be getting smaller, the tail
coefficients were changed to small positive numbers in the
guess

that was used for the third iteration. There were then

no negative coefficients estimated in the third iteration,
and convergence to two place accuracy was again achieved by

the sixth iteration. The estimate appears in figure 2c.
The estimate no longer appears as a geometric lag, but rather
has a humped shape which resembles (except for the tail) the

shape which appears in 2a. The priors which produced 2c are
much weaker than those which produced 2b:
=

is

if

.28 then

about .1; i.e. our priors assert that the ratio of

a pair of adjacent coefficients should probably not differ
from the ratio of the next pair of adjacent coefficient by

much more than 10%. In the estimate the largest (in absolute
value) element of V =

Rlog

is -.041. Apparently the likeli-

hood function does not carry much information on V

Rlogt3,

so that the estimates of V will come out close to the prior

mean. This means that even with very loose priors, the
estimated distributed lag will appear relatively smooth. The
smallest (in absolute value) elements of V were those which

— 26 —

correspond to the tail of the distribution, apparently because
the likelihood function carries very little information about
the ratios of such small coefficients.

Figure 2c illustrates well some of the best properties of

the estimator with constrained sign. It should be remembered
that no constraints were placed on the lag of any kind and the
priors were uninformative on each coefficient considered

separately. The prior did not contain information that the
final coefficients were small. The asymptote which appears here
is the result of the interaction of the likelihood function
with the prior information that coefficients must not be
negative plus the information that no single coefficient should

be large in the neighborhood of other small coefficients. It
should not be concluded that an asymptote occurs only when the

unconstrained estimate is negative in the tail. Experience
with the estimator shows that asymptotes will also arise when

the final coefficients are positive. The estimator with constrained sign naturally forms asymptotes (especially when d
or higher) in cases where the final coefficients are small, and
thus makes the estimates much less sensitive to the error of
setting A, the lag length, too high.

— 27 —

VI.

Conclusion
Both estimators:

with unconstrained sign and

with

constrained sign, should be useful in different applications.
The unconstrained sign estimator may be used in cases in
which there is no theoretical presumption that all distributed

lag coefficients should be positive. Since the unconstrained
sign estimator has more straightforward properties and does not
require an iterative procedure, it may also be the choice in
cases in which there is a presumption that all lag coefficients

be positive. It can also form asymptotes, although it depends
on the data more to make this happen. Information that all
coefficients should be positive can also be used in an informal
"Bayesian't approach by estimating the coefficients for several

different lag lengths and choosing a truncation point that
leaves all coefficients positive.

In cases in which we know all coefficients are positive we
may also wish to consider whether the log normal smoothness
prior might not represent our prior information sufficiently
better to warrant the greater computational burden of the

constrained sign estimator. It is easier to specify the
parameters of the log smoothness prior since they are expressed

in percentage terms and are hence unit free. The estimator
is less sensitive to an overstatement of the lag length since

it easily forms asymptotes. Since the estimator essentially

— 28 —

embodies Learner's principle of proportionality, isolated large
coefficient estimates in the tail of the lag distribution are

effectively prevented. So little damage is caused by overestimating the lag length A that one might use for A one's
upper bound to the possible true lag length in the estimator.
Finally, the limiting behavior of the constrained sign estimator
as the tightness of the prior goes to zero is probably more
acceptable than is the case with the unconstrained sign estimator.
The limiting constraints with the log Smoothness prior are,
for d

1 the truncated geometric (Koyck) constraint, for d

a truncated normal density constraint, rather than polynomial
constraints as is the case with smoothness priors.

2

— 29 —

Footnotes
For the fundarnetitals of Bayesian econometrics, see Zeliner
t1971].
2

The priors approach the constraint the the coefficients
lie on a d degree polynomial. Almon also constrained the
polynomial to pass through zero at the head
and
tail
To make the analogy to the Almon procedure
complete, we can take the spherically normal prior on

u R where R is a (X-d-l+h+t xA) matrix whose
element is zero if j-i>d+l-h or if i>j+h and otherwise

equals (-l)' (!.)

where h

1 if the head is
constrained and is zero otherwise, t = 1 if the tail is
constrained and is zero otherwise. These priors then
include the zero "coefficients" beyond the lag and
approach the Almon constraint as
Henceforth in this
paper we refer to the Alrrion polynomial constraint without
head and tail constraints,
3

Learner formulated his "Principle of Proportionality' for
fully informative multivaria-te normal priors on the ..
His principle actually states that the prior standard'
deviation of the . should be inversely proportional to
the prior mean of the

4

It should be noted that the result of using endpoint priors
in the log smoothness priors case which are analogous to
the endpoint priors in the smoothness priors case (footnote
2 above) amounts to assuming prior information that the
final coefficients lie near 1 rather than zero.

5

Estimation was done with a program written by Stanley
Wasserman, which took the form of a MACRO file on the
TROLL system. The MACRO, which is entitled &SHILLER, is
available to users of the TROLL system, but cannot be
used separately from the system. The dependent variable
is a version of the Federal Reserve Board new issue yield
series, formed by splicing an older unpublished series to
their published series which starts in 1960. The independent
variable is the 4 to 6 month prime commercial paper note.
The sample period is 1955 second quarter to 1974 fourth
quarter.

I'
— 30 —

References
Almon, Shirley, "The Distributed Lag between Capital Appropriations and Expenditures", Econornetrica 33 (1965); 178-196.
Cleveland, William S., "Estimation of Parameters in Distributed
Lag Econometric Models" in Zeilner and Fienberg, editors,
Studies in Bayesian Econometrics and Statistics, North
Holland, 1975.

Griliches, Zvi, "Distributed Lags: A Survey', Econometrica 35
(1967):, l6—Li.9.

Hill, R. Carter and S.R. Johnson, "Distributed Lag Estimators
Derived from Smoothness Priors: A Comment", unpublished
paper, Department of Economics, University of Missouri -

Columbia,

1975.

Learner, Edward E., "A Class of Informative Friars and Distributed
Lag Analysis', Econometrica 40 (1972): 1059-81.

——

, "Regression Selection Strategies and Revealed Priors",
Discussion Paper, Harvard Institute for Economic Research,
1975.

______ Ridge Regression Metrics and Distributed Lag Coefficients",
Discussion Paper, Harvard Institute of Economic Research,
Cambridge 1974.
Maddala, G.S., "Ridge Estimators for Distributed Lag Models",
NBER Computer Research Center Working Paper No. 69,
Cambridge, Mass. , 1974.

Modigliani, Franco and Robert J. Shiller, Inf1ation, Rational
Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest Rates",
Econojnica, Feb. 1973: 12-43.
Shiller, Robert J., 'A Distributed Lag Estimator Derived from
Smoothness Friors", Econometrica. 41 (1973): 775—88.
Sims, Christopher A., "Distributed Lags" in Intriligator, ed.,
Frontiers of Quantitative Economics Volume II, North Holland,
1974.

Wilson, John F., "Have Geometric Lag Hypotheses Outlived their
Time?", unpublished manuscript, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., 1975.
Zeliner, Arno1d- An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in
Econometrics, New York, Wiley, 1971.

