                  NEER WORK[NG PAPER SERIES




         RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS AND THE DYN1IC
           STRUCIURE OF MACROECONOMIC MODELS:
                    A CRITICAL REVIEW


                    Robert Shiller*

                    Working Paper   No.   93




COMPUTER RESEARCH CENTER FOR ECONOMICS AND MPNAL3EMENT SCIENCE
          National Bureau of Econa'nic Research, Inc.
                    575 Technology Square
                Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139




                           June 1975



                Preliminary:   not for quotation



NBER working papers are distributed infornally and in limited
numbers for conrrnts only. They should not be quoted without
written permission.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for
approval by the Board of Directors.

*NR Canputer Research Center. Research supported in   part by
National Science Foundation Grant DCR 70-0 3i56-A0' to the National
Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                                 Abstract


     The recent literature on rational expectations in nacroeconomic
theory  issurveyed here with the objective of distilling fran the various
papers useful suggestions for econanetric nthodology. The paper is
not concerned with the enfrical questions with which these models have
been associated, but rather with the value and usefulness of the
concept of rational expectations. The paper begins with a brief
discussion of the theory of martingales as it has been applied to
imcroeconomic theory. Then, the general linear rational expectations
model (of which most models discussed in the literature are, in tercns
of their structure, special cases) is developed arid its pr'operties,
advantages and drawbacks discussed. The paper concludes with a
discussion of the possibilities for estination arid application of
such   linear   models.
                                Contents

I.    Introduction                                    .1
II.   SimpleMartingaleMode].s                          8

III. The General Linear Rational Expectations Model   16

iv.   conclusion                                      32

References                                            36
I.   Introduction
    One of the irrst difficult probleme which has confronted builders of
macroeconcguetric ncdels has been the need to ndel the mechanism by which
the public forms its expectations of future ecoriiic variables. The dilezrina
has been that many of the nst important theoretical macroeconomic behavioral
relations depend critically on public expectations of future economic variables
and yet we do not even have any data on what these expectations are. Even if
we do have survey data or other data which purport to represent expectations,
if these expectations are endogenous in our nodel then we still must nodel
the determination of these expectations.
       It   is very   easy to provide examples of macroeconomic behavioral        relations

which   depend essentially on public expectations. In fact, if one looks at

one of the major nacroeconatric            models one is impressed that nost of     the

essential    behavioral relations must incorporate assumptions about how expec-
tations     are formed.   Public   expectations of future inflation rates, interest
rates, rental rates, demand, and particular cnponents thereof influence
current behavior in a fundamental way. Even the siJTlest IS-IN curve apparatus
with its characterization of the liquidity preference curve and possible
liquidity trap, the consunption function and the invesbnent function has
at its foundation some assumptions about expectations, and changes in expec-
tations would shift       all   of the curves. It is, in fact, substantially for

this    reason that it has      been   such a tricky   business   to predict the macro-

economic effects of policy.
                                      —2—


       Builders of macroeconatric models interested in short term policy
evaluation and forecasting have dealt with the problem of expectations
nx1elling about the only way they could: by guessing at how individuals
form their expectations in practice and trying to find s quantitative
representation of this behavior. For instance, it has seeTred reasonable
that individuals might forecast future inflation rates by looking at past
inflation rates. A common quantitative representation of this hypothesis
has been that individuals expect future inflaticn rates to behave like a
weighted average or "distributed lag" of recent past inflation rates. Such
a weighted average, which we call an "expectations proxy", may then be in-
cluded in our quantification of the behavioral relation in place of the
actual expectation which    may   be unkrwn. Behavioral relations which rely on
such expectations proxies usually work pretty well. They may also predict
very badly if something happens which changes the way people form their
expectations, e. g., if price      controls are instituted or   if there is a
sudden hyperinflat ion. Macroeconometric modellers have attempted to deal with
these problems as best they could by making a guess as to how expectations
will respond to changes. Thus, U. S. macroeconometric model builders, when
confronted with the Phase I price controls in 1971, were obliged to make
some outright guess of their own as to how this policy uld affect the
mechanism which generates price expectations.
       Recently, a number of macroeconomic theorists, Lucas [1973a], Sargent
and Wallace   [197L], [1975], Nuench and    Wallace [l97], Prescott and Kydland
[19 7L] and others, dissatisfied with     conventional macroecorometric models,

have   suggested a   different approach to economic modelling. This we call the

"rational   expectations" approach. The approach differs in its objectives as
                                  —3-.


well as its mathods. The problem with the usual objectives of conven-
tional ncroeconomatric models, it is argued, is precisely that they are
concerned only with short run prediction of nacroeconamic response to parti-
cular alternative policies. What is perhaps of eater interest, as Lucas
[1973a] has stated most forcefully, is the ultinate effect of a proposed
policy rule. A policy rule is a rule by which policy makers decide what to
do in response to the econamic situation. A policy rule can be descr'ibed
as a functional relationship from econamic variables to variables policy
makers control. What we want our models to tell us, then, is the   ultinte
behavior of the economy after individuals have learned how the policy rule
affects the tine paths and random properties of econamic variables. It is
conceivable, for example, that the high inflation rates which we are ex-
periencing today is the result of a concentration of attention by policy
makers in the past on the short run effects of their policy. The result of
the 'thigh pressure" economics in the United States in the 1960's was that
individuals began to realize that higher inflation rates could be extrapo-
lated into the future. Perhaps a change in inflationary expectations is the
reason for the outward shift in the Phillips curve. What economists should
have been asking was not "what will the proposed policy do over the next
quarters?" but "what would a policy rule of the proposed kind have achieved
                                                                             f
if we had followed it over the last 20 years?" In this context we might also
ask, as did Lucas [1973c], "what has been the experience of other countries
which have consistently followed different policy rules in response to inflation?"
     Given that we are interested in long terTn, rather than short term, pol-
icy analysis, it is then possible to adopt a different approach to the
ntdelling of expectations. If a policy rule is followed consistently over a
long period of   time,   rational individuals will eventually learn how that
policy rule has affected the random character of economic variables, and
if they are truly rational, their expectations will not differ substantially
fran optimal forecasts. After a policy rule is adopted it nay at first be
difficult   for individuals to mike forecasts of future economic variables
and they must rely on crude guesses.         Since the nature of these guesses nay

in   turn again affect the stochastic properties of the endogenous variables,

the   period inmedjately   after   the   adoption of the policy rule    nay be a
chaotic   one for which it   is hard     even   to define how   variables should be
forecasted. The essential assition that rational expectations theorists
then neke, however, is that eventually the econarny will converge on a
dynamic path. for which the expectations mechanisms which are involved in
determining the path are indeed      rational. The economy       will then have reached
a   state in which "rational expectations" holds. The essential advice offered
by tile rational expectatIons theorists is that, in ccparing alternative
policies, we should ccare their respective ultimate states of rational
expectations.
    A rational expectations imcdel, as defined originally by Muth t1961],
is defined loosely as any rrdel in which economic behavior at tine t depends
on public or rket expectations of future economic variables and in which
these expectations are true mathematical expectations of the future variables
conditi onal on all variables in the rrodel which are krwn to the public at
time t. The nchanism by which expectations are supposed to be generated
in the rTodel must be one that gives the true mathematical expectation of the
future variables in view of the observed stochastic properties of the
variables. If the structure of the model itself has implications for the
functional relationship between true conditional expectations and the
                                   —5—


variables used for forecasting, then these implications must be consistent
with the mechanism by which expectations are supposed to be generated.
     Since the behavioral relations are rot necessarily "rational"
from the standpoint of individuals who make up the econonr, Walters [1971]
has, suggested that we speak of "consistent expectations" rather than rational
expectations. Cyert and DeGroot [19 7'] have suggested that "rational
expectations" should refer to those nodels in which individuals are presl2ned
to know the structure of the entire econony and to use this to form forecasts.
They suggest then that individuals nay exhibit what they call "consistent
expectations" if their forecasts are -true nathenatical expectations even
if individuals have an incorrect model of the econony. The difference
between "consistent expectations" and "rational expectations" in this
sense has irical significance only in terms of the learning procedure
by whIch. we reach an equilibriimi in which expectations are consistent.
In this paper, however, we shall perpetuate the conventional use of the
term "rational expectations".
     The changes in econometric methodology proposed by these authors are
radical departures from our customary way of doing things. To date, however,
the theory of rational expectations has had little inipact on practical
econometric methodology. In part, this is because the concepts are still
unfamiliar to most econometricians. MDre important, however, practicing
econometric ians nay have the ina'ession that the concept of a rational
expectations model is too fraught with theoretical difficulties and com-
plexities to have any relevance to actical policy.
     Our purpose here will be to review the literature on rational
expectations models with the specific objective of sorting out what it
is that the literature really has to offer, if anything, for practical
                                   —6—


ncroeconometric modelling. Since our objective is to find those suggestions
which might iidiately be implemented, we will confine our attention to
the simple linear structure which has characterized the less theoretically
advanced discussions.
    A more general definition of rational expectations was given by
Lucas and Prescott tl97L] and ossmen [l972],[1973]. In models in which
human behavior at time t is supposed to depend on the subjective distribution
held by market participants of future economic variables (not just its
mean) rational expectations requires that this subjective distribution
be the sane as the true distribution conditional on all inforntion
available at time t. Literature which makes use of this more general
definition would take us into the literature on optiial decision under
uncertainty or optimal search theory and is beyond the scope of this paper.
     The concentration of attention on the mean of the subjective
distribution of future economic variables rather than other paremeters
of the distribution has been a characteristic of most of the papers
(especially npirically oriented papers) which make use of the concept of
rational expectations. There is a good reason for this: if models are
linear then models involving simple expectations of variables are easily
handled. The theory of martingales, already developed by probability
theorists, is readily applied to them. Moreover, most of the characteri-
zations of human behavior in the practical ncroeconomic literature
which preceded the development o the rational expectations nodels
depended on simple expectations of future variables, rather than other
moments. The new assumption that these expectations are true rrathatical
expectations is then a natural outgrowth of this literature.
                                    —7—


     Since we are concerned here with methodology we shall not discuss the
particular empirical questions raised by these nv.dels, except insofar as they
shed light on the realism of the assiztions rerding the generation of
expectations. We emphasize in this context that the characteristic assumption
nade in meny rational expectations macroecornic nodels that variations in
aggregate economic activity are due primari].y to errors mede by economic
agents in forecasting prices has no necessary connection to the methodology
implied by the concept of rational expectations. The validity of this
assumption about fluctuations in aggregate eooiunic activity is a bigger
question than we can deal with here.
     In the next section of this paper we shall discuss single mertingale
models. This section will introduce some basic concepts which precede a
discussion of the nore general linear rational expectations nodels. Some of
the properties of inartingales discussed here have already seen application in
the estimation arid refinement of inacroeconaitric nixiels.
     In the third section we will discuss the general linsar rational
expectations model. This is a sinuiltaneous equations rrcdel which involves
as variabl expectations of endogenous variables. This general model then
represents, a special cases, the struct.wes of most of the models in the
rational expectations literature. We can write cqn in matrix form, using
forward operators, the true conditional expectations of the endogenous
variables given the structure of the model and hence we can describe the
behavior of the model under alternative policies. We can then discuss in
general terms the estimation and use of these models.
                                               —8—


II. Simple      Martingale Models
       The concept of a rnartingale,        originated by     Levy and tob [1953], has had

an important place in the development of the theory of stochastic processes.

Economists were late to appreciate the possibilities of martingale models, and

it was apparently not until the concepts were introduced to economists by
Sajaielson [1965] and Mandeibrot [1966], that these models saw widespread use.

The obvious application of these models was to the theory of the pricing
of financial assets, and the theory of martingales has become the groundDrk

for   the theory of     efficient rrarkets. The literature on efficient irrkets

has    been surveyed elsewhere (Fama,        [1970]).    Our interest here will instead

be    the use of martingale theory in the construction of macroeconomic models.
        For   our   purposes, we may
                                     define a martingale as follows. (For a more

theoretical discussion see Kemeny et al., 1966.) A vector stochastic process

x-t     [Xlt x2t,...xnt] is a martingale for t ? to with respect to a vector

of information           if the expectation of x conditional n I equals x_1:
                                                          t       t0, t0+1,...             (1)
                     E(xtllt) x1
where 1t0-l          0 and Iinc1udes 1-' _1 and possibly other random van-
                          It follows ininediately from the definition also that:
ables u, v
                                                          n       1, 2, 3,...              (2)
                     E(x+ II) x1                              =   t0, t0+l,...

The    term   "martingale"     arises   because in a fair game (fair with respect to

information             the   martingale b€tting system of increasing the stakes
every    time there is     a loss to rec';up the loss and returning           to the original

 stakes   after a win     results   in a s(quence   of   accumulated winnings      x which
 satisfies (1). In fact, an important            property of fair gaines is the impos-

 sibility of systems: accumulated winnings x by any                     betting strategy   will

 satisfy      (1). The accumulated wirui ings need not, however, be a random walk,
                                             —9—



since the distribution of future increment. in accunulated winnings may
depend   on previous winnings even t]ugh the expected value of the incrnt
is always z.
       Martingales arise in economics as piblic or market expectations of
future economic variables. If ( k ,t) is the expectation at time t of an
n element co].rn vector random variable t+k conditional on a vector of
public information I. available at time t, (k,t) E(yt+kIIt) where
includes           1- and perhaps other variables, then:
                                        t   (k+t—t,, t0)          to     t
                   E[y(k,t)IIt°   ]

                                        9(k,t)                    to      t
and        (k-t,    t)   satisfies (1) and is      hence a martingale         with respect
to I•
       One consequence, euphasized by SATrnjl son and Mandeibrot, is that                the
vector stochastic process              is   spectrally   white,   i.e.   serially uncorrelated.
Sargent   (1971] eictended this in a way that can be sunmarized in terms of
the   array:

[9(j,t)—(j+l,t—l)]            [(j+l,t—l)—(j+2,t—2)]               ((j+2,t—2)—(j+3,t—3)],...
['(j—l,t)—'(j,t—l)]           [9(j,t—l)—ç'(j+l,t—2)]              [(j+l,t—2)—(j+2,t—3)],... ()

[(j—2,t)—(j—l,t—l)]           [y(j—l,t-.l)—(j,t—2)]


The expectation of each elnt in the array is zero, and rs and diagonals
(but not colunms) are spectrally white.
       It is well Jcnown that mart ingale properties have been attributed to
stock prices. This assertion was             discussed   nost   concisely by Sarxu.ielson

[1973]. Other macroeconcmic variables which have been                    characterized   as
martingales    with respect to        public infartion      are forward interest rates.
                                          — 10   —




Sargent [l97] has    also   asserrted   that long-term interest rates   should

resemble   mertingales since, by the expectations theory of the term structure
of interest rates, long-term interest rates are averages of expected
future interest rates. Finally, it has been pointed out that the popular
simple rational expectations model which asserts that variations in
aggregate econanic activity are due to errors in forecasting prices uld
imply that certain measures of aggregate economic activity (such as the
unemployment rate) should resemble first differences of a mertingale
with respect to public information. This last assertion, incidentally,
is demonstrably false and has been used to criticise these simple rational
expectations models.
      The use of mertingales in eoononiic theory is relatively new.
Iwever, the idea of representing expectations by optimal linear forecasts
has a longer history drid yields sind ar results. Defining the optimal
forecast (k,t) of t+k which is linear in the vector             information at
time t as the linear forecast with smallest expected squared error we get:


where the matrix t+k isdefined by:
                    t,k E(I.tIt)E(I.4+k)
Now the process              (k-t,t) is not necessarily a mertingale
                     defined by
with respect to but has the analogous property that the optiiil linear
forecast of t+n for n 0 Ls   If we replace elements 9(i ,j) of the
array (14) with   (i ,j),   then rows and diagonals (but not columns) are again

spectrally white.
      Two important principles regarding optimal linear forecasts of
stdtionary processes have had important uses in economic theories: the
error leirning principle and the chain principle of forecasting. Both have
                                              — 11    —




simple forms only under the assumption that                   consists onay of the entire
history of the foreoasted variable                  so that the k-period forecast of y
can be written:
                                 (k,t)         j1
                                                                                              (6)

where each     ., il, , is      an n x n matrix. On this           assumption, then, we
have   the error learning p'inciple:

                           (k,t+l) —     (k+1,t)           •(k)[ —   (O,t)]                   (7)


or, more generally:

                       (k,t+m) -   (k+ni,t)     =                     —
                                                                          (rn-i,t)]           (7')


Meiselmari [1961] was     the   first   to   assert that charges in economic forecasts

might   be   related to the most recently           discovered forecast error. He       did

not   perceive, however, that such forecast               behavior is a property of optiia1

linear   forecasts, a fact      which was later pointed out          by Diller [1969]
and Nelson     [1970]. Benjamin Friedman [1975] has also             derived a     relation

of the form (7) under the assumption that                     x. +        where   xis a known
vector of variables, 8 is an unknown vector of constants and                          an

error term with zero mean. If the forecast (k,t) =                            where bt is
                                                                     xt+kbt
the ordinary least squares estimate of 8 based on x ,...x. and y ,...y
                                                   to            to
then (7) holds except that the coefficient on the right hand side is not

       but   is instead   a function of      x,.. .x1 and Xt+k.
        The chain principle of forecasting states that               the optinl linear
forecast     of tk given (6) is also given by:
               (k,t)       Z9(k—i,t) +                ytj                      k 0            (8)

so that the same relation that is used to produce the zero-periOd                     forecast
                                                   — 12 —




may   be used to produce the k-period forecast. To produce a k-period
forecast one begins by producing a zero-period forecast. This forecast
is then used in the zero-period forecasting equation to produce a one-period
f'eaast, which in turn i.s used to produce a to-period forecast, and so on.
In other words, the k-period forecasting weights may he defined by the
recursive     relation:

                          (k)
                           i
                              (0)
                               k4i +                (O)(k—j)i                                       (9)



If we accept the proposition, then, tha L market expectatlonE are optJTa1
linear forecasts based on the ent5 re h story of certain ]own variables,
then these principles can be used to provide structure to our ircdels.
Saiie papers that have used these results in an essential way are those by
Sutch [1968], Modigliani and Sutch [1967], Diller (1969], Nelson [1970,a,b],
                                 [1972], and Modigliani and              Shiller (:1973].     For
Sargent   [1972], Shifler

example, butch [1968] wished to test the proposition that the yleid


on rn-period    bonds is an rn-period weighted average of expected future

one-perio'i    int€rest    rates y1          at   time t    which are in turn iinr forecasts

based on    iagge    short      rates   only;

                                      (rn)        1 rn-i
                                                     r —(1)                                           (10)
                                    Y4.               L y   (-j,t)
                                                    j0
so that, by (6):

                          (m)
                                   rn—i
                                          1 v        (k)    (1)               (1)                     Ui)
                                   kO iQ
                                    L         1            t-±-i     i1 BjY_
                                                                     L

                      rn—i
where the 1.                              SutoL    then    computed the t.
                                                                            (0)
                                                                                  two   different ways:
                    rnkO
 (1) by regressing y on (a finite iurnber A of) lagged
                                                       values of

                                    to get                                          0), j
 y:                                               the vector of coefficients


                    (2)                               on the same number of lagged           values
 directly     and         by regressing
                                              — 13       —




y., y,. . .y              to obtain estimates of B., 82,... arid then using (9)

and (11) to solve for 40), j =          1,.   .   . A.   Except   for   sampling   error and    if

all true            0 for I > A, the t estimates of the vector (0),                       =    i,..   .A

should be the same (in fact his two estimates were rnarkably close).

Essentially      the same   Emalysis s extended by Shilier (1972] arid Modig] iani

and Shiller      [1973]   to the case in which               includes both   the   histc' of
inflation rates as well as the hity of one—period interest rates.
       Another exdsnple of the application of these principles is afforded
by the tests of the assumption of rationality in forward interest rate

deteniiination performed by Diller [1969] and Nelson [1970]. 'These authors

reproduced Meiselnian'      s regression   of changes in forrd interest rates

(computed from     data on   the term structure of            bond yields) onto the difference
between   the current     one-period   interest rate and evious period's one-period
forward rate which applied to the curDent period (i.e. the "forecast error").
They then effectively compared the coefficients with the leading coefficients
(k) of an estimated optimal k-period forecasting equation. The coefficients,
incidentally, turned out to be very close, which would seem to suggest that
actual forward rates mey indeed        be   optimal linear forecasts.
         The success of the caiarison mede by Sutch, Diller, and Nelson ny
actually      seem quite surprising since one would hardly have expected that
forward   interest   rates   actually arise by a forecasting equation which is
linear    lagged interest rates only. In fact, business forecasters use
         in

a variety ct information in fond rig their expectations, infonatiori that
riy often riot even have a quantitative nature. This leads one to suspect

that the tests that these authors ran are also tests of a nze believable
martingale lTcde:I   in which   market expectations            are   niatheinatical expectations
                                            — 14 —



of future variables conditional on an information set which includes other
variables as well as lagged interest rates. In fact, this supposition is
valid   for the Sutch test but not for the Diller and Nelson test.

         It is easily shown     that    if ç(k,t) is the expectation of t+k

conditional on the vector of       information       then   the coefficient

E(t4U)E(t49(k,t)') of a regression of (k,t)' on a vector                  which is a

part of      (i.e.        [UIVt]) are the same as the coefficients

(U.Ut)E(14y.+k) of a regression of 't+k onto            U. This is      just another

property    of our basic martingale model. It follows then (Shiller [l973a])
that    under these assumptions we still have a sort of chain principle of

forecasting: if a regression of ç(ü ,t) onto y1_1' t-2''' produces
coefficients           q40),... then the
                                             coefficients of a regression of y(m—l,t)
               40),
onto
             t-2'       should be related to the coefficients of the first

regression   by the   relationship (9). But we cannot show that a regression

of   ç(k,t+l) - 9(k+l,t) onto y - (0,t) should give us the coefficient
Thus the error learning        principle   is specific to the narrow   assumption that
forecasts are    linear   in   lagged      only.

          The proposition that a regression of y(k,t) onto U. yields the same

coefficients    as a regression of t+k onto           has also provided the framework

for other' recent studies of forward rate determination: Rutledge [1974],

Lucas [1975]. Lucas tested the hypothesis that interest rates at t:ime t

equal a    constant   real rate   of interest plus a rational     expectation (1,t)

of inflation      by regressing y. onto the lagged interest rate and other
variables (as well as a constant). Our proposition would imply that the

coefficient of the lagged interest rate be one arid all other coefficients
 (except the constant) he zero. Along similar lines, deMenil [1975] regressed
                                    — 15   —




direct observations of price expectations derived fraii survey data onto
publicly available data and ocinpared the coefficients with tbose obtained by
regressing actual prices onto the same data.
       The general impress ion one gets fran this literature is that the
assumption that public expectations of future variables are ixxleed mathe-
matical expectations conditional on public information is borne out far
better than one u1d have expected, Thus, the st'ucture obtained by
assuming martingale properties for expectations is likely to be valuable in
helping us to nxdel the dynamic strticture of the econciny.
                                   — 16   —




III.     The General Linear Rational Expectations Model
       In the preceding section we saw that the theory of martingales helps
us to put some structure into our econometric models. The theory has already
been used to refine nacroeconornetric models. For example, the relation
(11) between one-period interest rates and rn-period interest rates was
used as an equation in earlier versions of the MIT-Penn-SSRC Econometric
Model of the United States. Infon.tion on the coefficient vector can
be obtained not only from the observed relation between rn-period interest
rates and one period interest rates but also from the observed stochastic
properties of the one-period interest rate itself. The additional infor-
mation in the observed random behavior of the one-period rates enables
us to improve our estimates of the coefficients        or to check the
reasonableness of our model.
       Once econometric model builders nake explicit reference to such
expectations mechanisms in their derivation of their models, hcMever,
they become vulnerable to a couple of important criticisms.
       A first criticism is that while the expectations in the individual
equations which make up the model may indeed be rational In the sense
we have described, they may not, as was suggested in the introduction to
this paper, be rational in terms of the model as a whole. Given the stochastic
structure of the exogenous variables, the irodel implies a stochastic structure
for the ndogenous variables. The resultant stochastic behavior nay be
different from that which was ofierved in t:he original data, aml so the
expectations mechanism hypothesized by the model may not be rational
in terms   of the model itself. Thus, in a    sense, the nodel may be internally
inconsistent.   Perhaps, it has been suggested, it nay    be   possible to
                                            — 17 —



 estimate     econatric ndels which are constrained to be internally
consistent in this     sense.      idea is clearly due originally
                                 This                                        to Muth

[1961].     We will discuss in this section the kind of structure            that such

internal consistenoy may        isrç,ose   on our nodels and the possibilities for
econometric models.
      A second criticism, also noted in the introduction,              applies   to
the usual use of most econometric models, which              is   to evaluate the
effects of alternative      policies       by simulation of these policies with the
riodel. The criticism is that if the policies have any effect at all, they
are likely to change the stochastic structure of the policy variables
and also of the endogenous variables which will in turn affect the
coefficients     of the riodel. For     example,      suppose the monetary   authority

wishes to use a macroecorometric irodel to uge the effects of a proposed
policy of stabilizing short term interest rates. If they had not been
fo1ldng the policy in the past, then the n.z policy will change the
stochastic structure of one-period interest rates y. and, in general,
of the optimal linear autoressive forecasting coefficients (O), 4)(O),
The effect will be, via expression (9), to change the coefficients
in (11). Thus, the model is not stable under alternative policy rules

and thus cannot be used to evaluate the effects of these rules.

           Ivbst of the rational expectations models in the literature

which attempt to handle these criticisms have been linear models which

can   be   represented in the general form:

                   Ayt +   B(F1)9(O,t)
                                            +
                                                CZ.    Ut
                                                                                         (12)
where        is an n x 1 colimri vector of endogerous variables at time t,
        y.
Z is an m     x 1 vector of egenous variables and             U. is an   n x 1 vector
                                              — 18 -


of errors with zero mean, which is uncorrelated with Z. for all t arid                       is

itself serially         uncorrelated. The vector y(k,t) is the market               or public
expectation at time t +k A and C are                     coefficient matrices           of order

n   x n and       n x m respectively, while
                                              B(F1)
                                                       is an n x n order matrix whose

elements      are    polynomials in   the operator F1. The operator F1 is here
defined by         F(u,v) (u+j ,v), that is, F1 is the forard operator on the

first argument of the function it is applied to. We then write the ij th
element of B as b +          +
                               bF1       bF
                                       + .
                                           . .b1j)Fj where d1 is the degree
of   the polynomial.

             The ith equation represented by (12) can also be written

                        n                                     m
                          a. .y. +
                                      ndj)..
                                           b.. y.(k,t) +          c. .Z.       U.
                       j:l     t   5:1 k:O                   j1            t        t

where y. is the 5th element of ''             etc.     Each of the n equations is linear
             Jt
in   today ' s expectation of future values of the n endogenous variables
     ..y .           It is important to note the model does not include lagged
y1  t   ,.
        nt
                       Expectations held by the      public in previous time            periods
expectations.

do   not eWer' into the determination of current endogenous variables.
Although such lagged         expectations   u1d probably enter into any realistic
modl, except in certain degenerate cases they pose difficult mathematical
problems, as we shall         see below. Expectations of future exogenous variables

may enter         as elements of Z.. They may be treated as ordinary exogenous
variables for our purposes and hence we do not deal with them separately.
             The model (12) becomes a rational expectations model when the public
expectations y(k,t) are assumed to be mathematical expectations                         of t+k
conditional         on the information publicly available         at time t:
                                (k,t)       E(yt+kIIt)
                                                                                                   (13)
                                             — 19 —



where     I is the vector of information publicly available at time t.
We assume          includes Z.,                             lit does not include
                                        U1,
and U.
         If we   then define Z(k,t)                         U(k,t)   =
                                        E(Zt+kIIt) and                   E(Ut+kIIt),
we have:

                             y(k,t) =
                                        't+k'   U(k,t) =
                                                            Ut+k      k < 0
                                                                                            (1L)
                             Z(k,t)
                                        Zt+k
                                                                     k 0
In     addition, we assume that     U(k,t)      0 for k     0.
         It   is rth pointing out     that   it is also possible to define a "partly
rational" expectation ndel in which certain expectations in certain
equations are either exogenous or have an imposed relationship with other
variables. For instance, one could include an "irrational expectation"
which is exogenous airng the variables Z. One could even hypothesize that
the behavior of half of the individuals in the econany shows rational
expectations and half of the individuals have some sort of irrational
expectations, so that what appears in the equations which represent their
aggregate behavior might be a weighted average of the two. All of these
possibilities can then be represented as special cases of (12).
    The original discussion of rational expectations by Muth [1961]
developed a degenerate case of (12) in which              B(F1) contained only one
non-zero      element which was a   constant (i.e. d.            0). Also   in this    category

are papers by Walters [1971], LLlcas [1973c],             Cyert and De&oot     [19Th],
arid   Roll [l97L1]. Papers by U.icas [1970], Sargent and Wallace [19Th,1975]
arid Barro [1975] involved B(F1) matrices which had non—zero elements
which were not constant but were linear in
                                                      F1.
                                               - 20   —




       The   essential property that rational expectations models of the
form (12) share is the dependence (except in certain degenerate cases) of
the expectations of future y on the exogenous variables ccirLprisirlg Z
and on the form        of   the stochastic process Z. Thus, if policy makers
interfere with        elements of Z, then the stochastic process B(F1)(k,t)
may also change in character. The strength of models of the form (12)
is that they enable us to evaluate the effects of any policy rule by
defining a "final form" for (12) which depends only expectations of Z,
not y.
     Replacing t with t+k in (12) and taking expectations conditional on
     we get:
                      Ac(k,t)   +                             +   CZ(k,t)         I)(k,t)                 (15)
                                    E(B(E9c(O,t+k),It)
If k   < 0, we       see,   using (3) and (14), that           (15)   is identical to (12).

However,     if   k    0, using       ( 3)   we instead    get:
                            Ay(k,t)   +
                                          B(F1)9(k,t)
                                                          +   C(k,t)         0                             (16)


Expression        (16) is a system of linear difference equations                        in k which nay

be   solved to yield an expression for y(k,t), k ? 0 in terms of the foroing

function     Z(k,t). To fM the               solution we need a terminal condition for

each   root of the de-terminantal equation IA +                   B(x)   I
                                                                                 0.     If all the roots

of IA +      B(x)I      0 lie outside the unit ciro].e, however, then the condition

that   ç(k,t)      does not     explode as k —)           is sufficient to            define   the   solution.
The    terminal condition is rarely menti(ned in the literature. In one
instance, Sargent and Wallace [1975] described this terminal condition
as    "ruling out speculative bubbles". Of course, for Muth and                              others wt
assumed zero.-or'der         difference equations, no             terminal       conditions are neces-

sary. In another instance, Sargent and Wallace [1975]                                 built a macroeconard.c
                                         — 21    —




nodel for which oen of the roots of A + B(x)    0 lay on the unit

cirole. In this nodel, which was a macr'oeconanic nodel with the interest
rate exogenous because the nonetary authority was assumed to stabilize
it, the authors concluded that the solution (for the endogenous variable
which was the ice level) was "indeterminate" because the terminal
condition required was "a much stronger terminal condition" than they had
to impose on a previous convergent nodel. However, the terminal condition
which is in fact routinely placed on convergent rrodels is also very strong.
Since the economy has not had this structure forever, there must have been
some first date at which the structure (12) held. On this date, knowing
(12) alone     would not enable us to forecast y, since one would not know

that    the solution would not explode. If somehow the public initially
(or even at sane later date) got the idea that y would explode, then their
expectations would be borne out.
        In   any   event, under these assumptions       about roots and    terminal
conditions,        we may   then write
                                         —[A +
                                y(k,t)
                                                 B(F1)]C(k,t)                                (17)


where [A +B(F1)] is a matrix whose elements are power series in
                                                                                    F1
so that [A
                   +B(F1)J[A +B(F1)J     I. It is easily verified           that

x.     y(k—t,t) is then a inertingale     in    t.

       Substituting (17) into (12) yields, after simplifying:

                                   = —[A
                                         +B(F1)]CZ(0,t) +        AUt                         (18)

whish   is the desired final form for      our       model.   It shows   that      depends
on   the expectation at time t of all future values of the exogenous
variable, but not at all on the expected future values of the endogenous
variables. The expected values of the endogenous variables are themselves
                                      —22—


functions of the expected values of the exogenous variables, so they

have been solved out. Once we know how Z(k,t) depends on 1' we can also

write (18) in terms of            We may constrast (18) with the reduced

form of (12):

                                  1
                               -A B(F1)y(k,t) - A
                                                   —1"
                                                    CZ(k,t)
                                                                  —1
                                                               + A Ut               (19)


The final form (18) resembles the reduced form (19) and reduces to

it if B(F1)         0. If B(F1)    0 and we wish to consider the u1tiute effects

of   alternative policy rules which can be translated into changes in
parameters     or   changes in the stochastic structure of Z, then according
to the criticisms made by Lucas, Sargent, Wallace arid others it is
(18) and not (19) we rmist use. Expression (19) cannot be used to forecast
the   ultimate effects of policy because B(F1)y(0,t) may change when

any   parameter or    element of 7. is changed.

       There   has been little discussion in the    literature   as to how an
economy reaches the equilibrium (18) after a        policy   change which changes
(k,t) or after a change in one of the parameters A, B, or C. Cyert
and t)eGroot E197J proposed a model in which individuals learn about
the parameters in A, B, or C by updating an initial prior distribution
in a Bayesian learning procedure. Their model did converge u1tmate1y
to the rational expectations so] ution. However, the model they analyzed
was Muth's origina.1 model for whLch nc tennirial conditions need to be
determined. Taylor [197k] examined a simple process which converged on
another' simple rational expectations equilibrium. It would be interesting,
however, to see a learning process which converges on the rational expecta-
tions equilibrium of a more general model for which it           was   necessary
to provide terminal conditions in the solution, i.e. in           models   which allow
                                             -. 23 —



other   explosive solutions.

       Until economic theorists come up with a believable story as to how

an   economy converges on such a rational expectations path             in a short

period of time these models will be of rather limited interest. There
are a lot of other questions we will want to answer before we can rely
on such models. We will want to know how sensitive are the forecasts
to all errors in the parameters. If they are very sensitive, our
rational expectations solution will not be reliable. We will have to
confront the obvious possibility that all roots need not lie outside the
unit   circle. As regards the process to the equilitium, we will need
to have sane idea how long this process will take and what may be the cost,
in terms   of economic    distress, on the way to equili1xium.
       To use the model, it is important to note that the model (18) can

be rewritten to eliminate the expectations of variables extending into
the infinite future if we can provide a forecasting rule for Z. Suppose,
then, that we know      that   the forecasts of Z are given by a linear auto-
regressive forecasting rule:
                                  Z(k,t-l)             4zj                            (20)

where each 4,       i     i,. .   .   is an m x rn matrix. Now premultiply (17)

where k = 0 by A +
                        B(F2) where F2 is the forward operator which applies
to the second argument of the function it is applied to. We then have:

           [A +                         —CA +              +
                  B(F2fly(O,t)                  B(F2)][A       B(F1))CZ(0,t)
Now since we know that,        fonrl1y, the substitution of F2           F1 in the
expression [A + B(F2)][A              B(F1)J yields the identity matrix, it must
                                  +

be the case that if we expand the expression [A + B(F2)J[A               +
                                                                             B(F1)i
                                                — 2'   —




in powers of F2 and F1, then the sum of the (matrix) coefficients of all
rth degree terms FFS must be zero if r > 0 (and I if r 0) We can
write the sum of all rth degree terms Tr r d as:

         Tr
                          +
                              R1F2          +                +.   .



where    d is the degree of the highest order polynomial in B. Thus,
             0 if r > 0. For 0 < r < d there will be fewer terms in the
i 01
expansion, but the sum of the coefficients will renkiin zei'o. Since the
sum of the coefficients is zero, we can rewrite the                        as:

     T RF'(F2 -. F1) + Rr)F_2(F - F) +...R'1(F - F)
Fran the generalized error learning principle (7') the product of Tr
with C(0 ,t) can thus be written in terms of d forecast errors:

         TC(0,t)                   W[zt+d+1 (d—i+l,t)]
                                           -                                r>      0



so   that, in turn,       the     i'roduct [A +
                                                  B(F2)]   [A +
                                                                  B(F1)]*Z(0,t)         can   be
written    in terms   of Z( 0 ,t)      and the d forecast errors. Then, since

y(t) =   (0,t)    +
                      A1Ut        we can write:

                              +                        - z[d-±+1,t)J   +   [A   4
                                                                                    B(F))A         (18')
[A +
       B(F)]y      CZ             ii V1(Zt+d±+1
where the coefficients V depend on                 the pdrarneters of A, B, C,
1     1,. . . . TIis Yt is described by a dth order linear difference
equation driven by a forcing function which is given in terms of d forecast
err;rs in Z and d error tcrmsU. In other wurdS, one may iep1ace the expecta-
tioris of future      y   in (12) by theii real izat ions if one adds the additional
variables consisting of forecast errors. The error term then acquires
d   + 1 order   noving avelage serial cor'reiation.
                                         — 25 —




           special case, we note that if all forecast errors are zero
        As a

in (18') then the model reduces to a straihtforwar'd rational distributed
lag model of y on future values of Z. This result could be seen directly

fran (18) by noting that, if there are no forecast errors, then Z(k,t)

Zt+k.     Incidentally,   one   should not confuse this case with a     case in which
all future y's are known. In that case, substituting                  for (k,t)
onto (12), we get a different result, different in that the error term is
not autocorrelated.
        How might we estiirte the parameters of such a model? There appears
to be, surprisingly enough, very little discussion in the literature on
the estimation of these rational expectations models. Most of the
literature has been purely theoretical. What empirical work has been
done has generally merely tested sane isolated consequences of the models.
        Suppose now that   we wish to estimate the parameters       of A, B(F1)
and C given the structure (12), sane identifying coefficient restraints,
arid a c]-racterization of the randan character of Ut (say that it is

spherically normal). If we have data on y, y(k,t) arid Z. one could
estimate    (12)   directly using standard simultaneous equation methods.
As a rule, though, we      do not generally have data on 9(k,t), so this route

is   generally not of Tmich interest. If we did have survey data purporting.
to give 9(k,t) then, on estiirting (12), one would of course run the risk
that the model would imply that the observed expectations y(k,t) are,
through (17), irrational. Another possible procedure would be to attempt
to find optimal forecasts of future y first, using Box Jenkins' techniques
or the like and then substitute these forecasts into (12) as expectations
proxies. This      procedure    is   already caTmnp1ace. If   one   does indeed come
                                         — 26 —




close   to the optimal forecasts first before estliriating the model, then
the estiiiate of A, B, and C should be valid. Again, however, we run
the serious risk that the optimal forecasts :implied by these parameters
through (18) will contradict the optinl forecasts with which we started
out.
        Since   we generally wish to assure internal consistency for our

model,   estimation would better proceed via expression (18) or (18').

Clearly,     one must first obtain some characterization        of (k ,t), arid our

model provides no help with this. Suppose, then, that somehow (through
Box nkin' techniques, for instance, or through other modelling of
the exogenou5 variables or even from survey data) we have obtained the
optiirl forecasts of future Z, (k,t). Then the problem of estimating
the pararnetersof (18) or (18') is relatively straightforward. One could
derive an expression for the full infoniiation maximum likelihood estimate

 (assuning      of course that the    parameters are   identified).
             should be noted that another     procedure, which is essentially one
        It

 suggested      by Sargeri and Wallace, will not yield the maxiTrulfl likelihood
 estimate. This procedure is to forn initial guesses of (k,), substitute
 these into (12), and then estim&te         A, B(F1), and C.     From these estimates,

                 we could then get revised guesses of ç(k,t),
                                                                      substitute these
 using    (17)
 into (12) and repeat       the    proce ;s until it converges. Although such a
                                  the niximrrun 1iklihoOd estimrte,
                                                                    it will, if       it
 procedure       does not yield

 converges, yield a consistent model, so the procedure
                                                                  may have some   merit.

                                                                        This would be
         ExpressiOn     (18') suggests another simple strategy.

 merely to substitute actual y(t+k) into (12) in place
                                                                   of   (k,t) and add

 the additional variables corre;ponding           to the   forecast errors in (18').
                                                    — 27 —



We might then estimate the parameterB                   A, B(F1, C, and V, 1       1,.. .d

using   conventional sisnultaneoue equations methods,                 and then   disregard
the coefficients v1, j =           Since the error term in (18') is
                                  1, . . . d.
serially correlated and since lead values of the dependent variables are
included in the equations, conventional methods which do rt take
into account the serial ccavelation properties of U will be inconsistent.
However, if the error terms U. are small such procedures may be satisfac-
tory.
      An important generalization of the model (12) would be a nodel in
which lagged dependent variables occur. Such a model would be especially
important for determining the effects of a policy rule which depends on
lagged values of the endogenous variables, Alternative policy rules
of this nature can then be evaluated by making the policy variable an
endogenous variable in the model and considering alternative parameters
in the rule. Suppose, then, that our model is:
         Ayt
               +
                   B(F1)ç(O,t)
                                      +
                                          CZ.
                                                +
                                                    D(L)y    =
                                                                 Ut                          (21)

where D(L) is                             polynanials in the lag operator
                   a matrix whose elements are

L   which do not include constant terms, Substituting t+k for t and taking
expectations with respect to                    we get:
                   [A +           +
                            D(L1)](k,t) + CZ(k,t) 0
                          B(F1)
                                                            k> 0

where     is the lag operator on the first argument of the function it is
applied to and L1F1 1. This equation is again a difference equation in
k which may be solved far y(k,t). This time, ]uever, we have initial
conditions that 9(k,t) = t+k for k < 0.
                                                    — 28 —



      Anotherimportant generalization of                         the model        (12) would be a model

in which lagged expectations enter:
                                        +                            +                                       (22)
                                  Ayt       D(L2)B(F1)y(O,t)              CZ.      U
where L2 is the lag operator on the second argnent of the function it
is applied to so that L2F2                   1.     D(L2) is a matrix whose elements are
polynomials         in L2. As before, we can then replace t in (22) with t+k

and take expectations conditional on It:

                Ay(k,t) +
                                  E[D(L2)B(F1)y(D,t+k)II]
                                                                         +   CZ(k,t)       O(k,t)            (23)


As before, if k <           0,    (23) is identical to (22). If k is greater than

or equal to the degree d of the highest order polynomial                                  in    D(L2) then

using     (3), the system (22) reduces to:

                Ay(k,t) +                                      +CZ(k,t)       0                              (2k)
                                  D(L1)B(F1)y(k,t)
On the other hand, for values of k greater                          or    equal to zero but less than

d,   a different system of partia] difference equations holds.

         Expanding D(L2) into D(L2)                  D0 + D1L2 +          D2L     +.   . .DI4   we get,

using (3):

A (k ,   t)   + ED0    +
                           D1L1
                                  +
                                      D2L +. .DkL
                                                           +
                                                                D1LL2
                                                                             +                 +,, ,DLL]
                      B(F1)y(k,t)
                                        +   CZ(k,t)        0                                                 (25)


The introduction of lxth                     arid        in the matrix D is due to the inequality
                                                    L2
in   (3).      Expressions (2'4) and (25)                then    constitute a system of linear

partial difference equations in k and t with variable coefficients.

They may       be   solved for 9(k,t) and                the   result substituted into (22) to

yield the final fonTi for the model. The solution requires, of course,

the   specification of terminal conditions in terms of                                 entire   functions,
not   just a finite number              of points.         The difficulties posed by               this
                                        — 29 —




problem    are sufficiently eat, however,        that it   has generally been ignored
in    the literature, except     for the sirr1e cases discussed by Sargent             [1973]
and    Sargent   and Wallace [1973]. In these oases, the authors set d 1
and made B(F1) a constant times F1 so         that   the problems caused by (25)
did   not arise. It was then sufficient to solve the ordinary difference

equation (2L1) and then substitute the result into (22) to yield the final

forn.

        A further   generalization that would    be   desirable if we    are to    discuss
believable models in these terms would be        to   allow for nonlinear models.
In some cases it      is possible   to handle models which are     nonlinear in        certain
variables    along lines discussed above. As a general          rule,   however,
nonlinear models do not enable us to reduce the problem to that              of    a
system of difference equations at       all   - nonlinear difference equations or
otherwise. This is another defect of the model, insofar as it has                  been

developed, since clearly most realistic macr'oeconcanic         models    are   likely
to have nonlinear terms.
        Sargent and Wallace [l973aJ have proposed dealing with the problem
of nonlinearity simply by linearizing our macroeconanic models. They
have, in   fact,    been devising a log linear econc*netic model of the U.S.
econany for the purpose of applying rational expectations estination
techniques to it.       This   clearly seems like the wrong approach. Since
the real econciny is not log linear, not much purpose wculd             be served by

deliberately misspecifying the true model so that          we   can apply our tech-
niques to it.          especially true of rational expectations estimation
                    This is

techniques, since the concept of a rational expectations equilibrium
is   such a slippery one. Obviously, the rnisspecified model will not produce
                                      — 30   —




good   forecasts of future endogenous variables, so what is the point of
requiring internal consistency in the expectations hypothesized by the
model?
       There are, it should be noted, some       cases   in which we have simple
models which    can be represented   as linear without doing too nuch violence
to the facts. The best example is probably           Sargent   and Wallace's model.
of hyperinflation [197 3b]. In general, however, we will have to accept
the fact that our models must be nonlinear.
       With nonlinear models, the best we can probably do in the spirit
of the rational     expectations   mcd.els at the present time s to assure that
hypothesized    expectations   formation mechanisms      are not grossly irrational.
Thus, we may estimate a "limited information rational expectations"
model by using as expectations proxies forecasts of future variables based
on Box         techniques or other' imp1e forecasting t:chniques.
         Jenkins'

As was noted above, some existing rrcroeconanetric mode1 have used such
procedures. These existing macroeconometric models, however, have not
been used as rational expectations theorists would requli e. In the spirit
of the rational expectations theories, we should use these models to compare
alternative policy rules without assuming that expectaticns mechanisms
do not change when we change the policy rule. A possible procedure to
follow then would be first to simulate the model under the proposed
policy    under the asumpt lot tha 1 the expectations mechanism is not
         rule

changed by the policy rule. On could then use the simulated values of
the endogenous variables to che( k th tt the expectations mechanism
hypothesized is still reasonably rat:ionai. For instance. if the
hypothesized expectations mechtnism was aut'eessive, one could then
                                     — 31   —




regress the simulated values of the erKiogenous variables on their n
lagged values to see if the coefficients hd changed dramatically.
If not, then the first simulation would appear to be acceptable. If
the coefficients do change a lot, then we might t'y substituting the new
autoregressive schene estimates frau the simulated variables for the
original expectations generation mechanism arid then run another simulation.
If we repeat the procedure and it finally converges so that the auto-
regressive scheme estimated frau the simulated data is the same as that
assumed in generating the data, then we will have found a "limited inforuiation
rational" expectations equilibrizi associated with the different policy rule.
This procedure is analogous to the iterative procedure discussed above
in connection with linear rrcdels.
                                          — 32   —




IV.     Conclusion
       The literature reviewed here has made criticisms of conventional
econometric methodology which can be -translated into some concrete suggestions.
The suggestions would relate first to the use of existing macroeconometric
rrvDdels and second to the improved estimation of macroecononietric rrodels.
       If we assume first that existing macroeconometric models correctly
represent the manner by which individuals formed their expectations over the
sample period, then we can use these models to evaluate what would have
been the effect of alternative policy rules over the sample period under
rational     expectations assumptions, by replacing the expectations proxies in

these models with optinl forecasts. If the existing models are linear of

the   form (12) where     y(k,t) are   expectations proxies,   then this is a simple

matter.   The evaluation of alternative policies which can        be   described
either in terms      of parameter changes    in the model or changes in the
stochastic structure of Z can then be evaluated through           (18). In attempting

such    a policy evaluation with an existing linear model one runs the risk
that,   in   va1uiating the policy which wis actually followed over the sample
period, the model (18) will not track well, i. e., will not reproduce
well the actual values of the endogenoiis variables. This may mean that the
expectations proxies used by the model builders were not close to the true
opt 1JTal    forecasts in terms of the model. Theoretically, such an outccne
shouldn't occur      if   the original model with its expectations proxies tracked
well and     if the model builders saw to it, as was discussed in the second

section    of this paper, that their expectations proxies were indeed close to
the optimal forecasts. In practice, however, we suspect that meny existing
models do not use expectations proxies which resemble optimal forecasts,
                                                                               I
                                       — 33 —



     The   other suggestions that have been made for estimation of rational
expectations nodels would take into account the relationship of the expec-
tations to the true structe of the rrcdel, and uld eliminate the
possibility that hypothesized expectations proxies are inconsistent with
optimal forecasts inplied by the nodel.
     Unfortunately, nost existing rracroeconometric irodels axe nonlinear,
and this then leaves us in a theoretical vacuum regarding rational
expectations. The best we can do then to meet the objectives outlined
by the rational expectations theorists would be to run "limited information
rational expectations" policy sim.ilations of the ]drKl described in the
preceding section. This anunts to checking to see that the hypothesized
expectations proxies do not become ossly irrational under alternative
policy rules. We nay then compare the long run behavior of alternative
policy rules in the manner described in the preceding section without
the assumption that expectations mechanisms are unchanging. Such "limited
information rational expectations" simulations nay be practically valuable
to help us to evaluate policy rules, arid they can be done with existing
nacroeconcznetrjc    nodels.
     We conclude with a couple of caveats.

     Firstly,   in   building econometric   nodels,               routinely
                                                      we should not

assume   that all expectations   are optimal forecasts.    We can, in fact,
probably   identify which behavioral relations involve rational expectations
arid which do not. For instance, expectations which affect corporate
investment are nore likely to be optimal forecasts than are expectations
which affect consumer durable investment. The tendency to ascribe too much
"rationality" to individuals has been a ccariron error in this literature.
                                         — 34   —




If we need a justification for the failure of individuals to forecast
              this can be had by noting       that   forecasting itself has costs.
optinally,

Feige and Pierce [1974] have formalized this idea with the concept of
"economically rational" expectations. In their view, forecasts by
individuals    confronted by big decisions (e. g., whether to build a

new plant) will be nore nearly optinl than                forecasts by individuals
meking snail decisions       (e. g., whether to buy a new television set). As

was noted above, we can       incorporate "irrational expectations" within the
sicture outlined       in   this paper, or we can incorporate "partly rational"
expectations    thich are weighted averages of optimal forecasts and suboptiBl
forecasting rules.
                           builders   should not become excessively concerned with
      Secondly,    nodel

the   constraints that      internal consistency     in    rational   expectations imposes

on   their   nodels. The    problems we have    ndelling expectations        are only a part

of the   problem   we face in trying     to   gauge the ulti1Tte effects of our       policy
rules.   The internal consistency constraint for expectations has probably
received  undue attention simply because it produces a neat mathematical
 structure of the kind econariic theorists like to work with. Mcreover, there
 are still deep problems that have been brushed aside by theorists on their
 way to rational expectations rrodls. how does an economy reach a rational
 expectations equilibrium? How long does it take to reach it? What are
 the costs in terms of economic distrhaflcéh of a transition to rational
 expectations? How are the terminal conditions necessary for a solution to
 the difference equations determined? how likely is it that the roots of
 the characteristic equation lie outside the unit circle, and what do we
 conclude if           do not? How    sensitive     are   the   optimal forecasts to certain
                they
                                  — 35   —




small paremeter changes in the ncdel? All these problems together mean

that, for the present at least, rational expectations ndels, except
possibly for the "limited infontion rational expectations" idels, are
properly rerded as interesting additions to o ways of viewing the
econonw, and axe not ready to replace on' conventional ndels.
                                           — 36 —



References

Banjo,            "Rational Expectations arid the Role of Monetary Policy"
          Robert: J.,
     unpublished manuscript, University of Chicago, 1975.
                                          "Rational Expectations and Bayesian
Cyert, Richard M. and Morris H. DeGroot,
     Analysis" Jotial  of Political Econon   82:521—36, 19714.

deMenil,     George, "The Rationality of Popular Price Expectations", unpub-
         lished paper, Princeton University, l97.

Diller,     Stanley, "Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest Rates",
                                                                 New York, 1969.
         in J. Mincer, ed., Economic Forecasts and Expectations,
Doob, J.     L., Stochastic Processes,      Wiley, New York, 1953.

Faima,    Eugene F., "Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and
         flnpirical Work",   Journal   of Finance 25:383_Lt17, 1970.

_____ "Short-Term
                        Interest Pates as Predictors of Inflation", American
         Economic Review 65:269—82, 1975.

Feige, Edgar L and Douglas K Pierce, "Economically Rational Price
     Expectations" unpublished paper, I Jniversity of Houston, 19 7.

Friedman, Benjamin M.,        "Rational Expectations are   Really Adaptive After
     All", unpublished        manuscript, Harvard   UnIversity, 1975.

           Robert H., "Can Econometr 1c Pa]           ion be Salvaged?"
                                                icy valuat                       forth-
Gordon,
         coming in a volume edited by Karl Brunner, North Holland.
Grossman,     Sanford, "A Bayesian Approach to Static Stochastic Equilibria",
         unpublished paper, University of Chicago,       1973.


            "Self-Fulfilling Expectationsand the Theory of Random          Markets"
     —,
         unpublished paper, University of Chicago, 1973.

 Kemeny, John G., J. Laurie Snell and Anthony Knapp, Denumerable Markov
      Chains, 1966.

 Lucas, Robert E., "Econometric Poiicy Lvaluation A Critique"
                                                     North
                                                              1973 (a)
                                                           Holland.
     forthcoming in a volume editcd by Karl Brunner,
                      Testing of -the Natural Rate Hypothesis" 1970 in
     —, "FiionometriC                                               Conference
      Otto Eckstein, ed., The Econometr Las of Price Determination
          Board of Governors oTThe Federal Reserve System, Washigton, 1972.
            "Expectations and the
                                  Neutrality of Money" Journal of Economic
 _____
          Theory L:103—14, 1973 (b).
                                                                                     American
            "Some International Evidence     on Output Dnployrnent     Tradeoffs",
 _____
          Economic Review, 1973 (a).
                                          — 37 —



 Lucas,       Robert E. and Edward C. Prescott, "Pquiliium Search and Un1oy-
         inent", Journal of Economic Theory, 7:188—209, 1974.
 Mandeibrot, Benoit, "Forecasts of Future Prices, Unbiased Markets and
    Martingale Models", Journal of Business 39:242—55, special supplement,                1966.

 MeiseLn, David, The Term        Structure of Interest Rates,    Engle.iood   Cliffs   N. J.
        1962.

 Mincer,   Jacob, "Models of Adaptive Forecasting" in Mincer, ed., Economic
        Forecasts and Expectations, New York, 1969.
 Modigliani, Pranco, and Robert Shiler, "Inflation, Rational Expectations
     and the Term Structure of Interest Rates", Economica 40:12-43 1973.
 Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Sutch, "Debt Management and the         Term
      Structure of Interest Rates", Journal of 1iticaJ. Eoorxiy
        75: 569—89, 1967.
Muench, Thomas, and Neil Wallace,          Finding a Good Stabilization Policy:
                                         "On
        Models    and Methods", unpublished menuscript, University of Minnesota, 1974.
Muth,    J.    F., "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements",
        Econometrica 29: 315—35 1961.
Nelson, Charles R., "A Critique of Some Recent flipirical Research in the
     Explanation of the Term Structure of Interest Rates: Coirment" in
     Journal of Political Ecorny 78: 764—7, 1970.
_____ "Testing a Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates by Sijruilation
        of Market Forecasts", Journal of the American Statistical Association,
        65:1163—90, 1970.
Prescott, Edward C., and Finn Kydlarid, "Optiine.l Stabilization F1icy: A          New
     Fornulation" unpublished paper, Carnegie Mellon University, 1974.

Roll,   Richard,    "Rational Response   to   the Money Supply", Journal of Political
     Ecor1oTr' 587—97, 1974.

Rutledge, John, A Monetarist Model of Inflationazy Expectations, Lexington
     B ooks, 1974.
Sanuelson, Paul A., "Proof that Properly Anticipated Prices Fluctuate
     1965, in R. C. Merton, ed., Collected Scientific Ppers of Paul A.Randomly"
     Samuelson, vol. 3, ch. 98, pp. 782—90,1    .T.)ress, C,ridge7 1972.
         "Proof    that Properly Discounted Present Values of Assets Vibrate
   Thandomly", Bell       Journal of Economics    and Management Science, 1973, 368-74.
Sargent, Tlomas J. , "Rational Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest
    Rates", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 1972.
                                        — 38 —


                                                     Rate of Interest
Sargent, Thomas J., "Rational Expectations, the Real Papers on Economic
     and the Natural Rate of Unemployment" &'oo1dng
    Activity,      1973, pp. '429—72.

_____            for Rationality and Neutrelity", unpublished paper,
          "Testing
     University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 197'4.
                                                             Macroeconomic
Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil
                             Wallace, "Notes on Loglinear
     Models", unpublished paper, University of Minnesota,     1973 (a).

_____, "Rational Expectations and the ])jnamics of Hyperinflation",
     InternatiOnal Economic Review 114:328—50, 1973 (b).

_____ "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Economic Policy",
     unpublished manuscript, University ofMinnesota, 19714.


_____    "Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instr.mient and the
        Optiiil Money Supply Rule", Journal of Political Econo1T 83: 2141-55, 1975.
Shiller, Robert J., "Omitted Variables in an Expectations Model of the
                                                           University of
     Term Structure of Interest Rates", unpublished paper,
        Minnesota, 1973   (a).


_____     Pational Expectations and the Structure of Interest Rates, unpublished
     Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts InsitiEi.ite of Technology, 1972.
_____ "Pational
                 Expectations arid the Term Structure of Interest Rates"
     Journal of Money, Credit and Bankpg, 1973 (b).
                    c., "Expectations, Risk and the Term
                                                         Structure of Interest
 Sutch,   Richard
        Rates,   unpublished Ph.D. dissertati6,SSaChuSetts Insitute of
        Tichnology, 1968.
                                                      Rational Expectations"
 Taylor, John, "Monetary Policy during Transition to19714.
     unpublished manuscript, Columbia University,
                                                             arid the Quantity
 Walters, A. A., "Consistent Expectations, Distributed LagS
        Theory",    Economic Journal 81:273-81, 1971.
