               NEER )RXINC PAPER SERIES




          QUALITATIVE INFORMATION, REPUTATION,

             and MONOPOLISTIC COMPETITION


                 by Michael R. Darby*




             Working Paper No. 95



        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
                   261 Madison Avenue
                  New York, N.Y. 10016




              Preliminary; Not for Quotation


     NBER working papers are distributed informally and in
limited number for comments only. They should not be quoted
without written permission.
     This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for appràval by the Board of Directors.



*University of California, Los Angeles and National Bureau of
 Economic Research.
                                                     Not for quotation without
                                                     the author's permission.
                                                     D. 2: July 28, 1975




   Qualitative Information, Reputation, and Monopolistic Competition

                                   by

                           Michael R. Darby*

               University of California, Los Angeles and

                  National Bureau of Economic Research




     Much recent research in the economics of information' has analyzed the

implications of alternative market structures in the presence of qualitative

characteristics which cannot be accurately and objectively measured or de-

scribed.2 This approach avoids the more basic question of the influence of

qualitative information on the emergence of market structures. This paper

argues that market structures arise which minimize total average production

and information costs and that qualitative characteristics produce structures

utilizing reputation.

     The analysis applies directly to Chamberlin's model of monopolistic com-

petition in the case of branded goods. Chamberlin's assumptions can be re-

conciled in this case with utility maximization because a firm's reputation is

fixed at an instant of time. However, the cost of acquiring a reputation implies

that free entry and a price equal to average production cost are inconsistent.

Full equilibrium occurs at the minimum point on the total average cost curve.

     The informational efficiency of reputation is analyzed in Section I.

Section II applies these results to the analysis of monopolistic competition.

Other applications are discussed in Section III.
                                                                                    2


                I. The Qualitative Information Problem


    Economists have long been troubled by ——     or   have ignored ——   the   subjec-

tive nature of qualitative information and qualitative differences in goods.

Subjective information ——   like   tastes which are often involved —— has the unde—

sirable ability to explain price differentials between any two goods and is thus

of little direct use. However, the existence of valuable characteristics of a

commodity which cannot be accurately or objectively described does have definite

implications for market structure.

     Qualitative information implies that, after the transaction, buyer and

seller have knowledge concerning the characteristics of the commodity which

cannot be objectively demonstrated to a disinterested third party unless at

prohibitive cost. Market structures will arise to conserve this subjective

information and thereby minimize total production and information costs. This

necessarily involves a partially nonenforceable contract.

     In order for a contract to be enforceable by recourse to legal action,

all conditions must be explicit and demonstrable to disinterested third parties.

Where enforceable contracts alone are used in the sale of commodities with quali-

tative characteristics, information loss and moral hazard or fraud results.

Analyses of such markets have been made by Arrow (1963), Akerlof (1970), Spence

(1973), and Stiglitz (1975).

     It Is not generally appreciated that the qualitative information problem

implies moral hazard under any contract system enforceable at law. As a re—

suit various "reforms" are proposed which would legislate a certain type of

enforceable contract. Consider for example the durability of automobiles.

It is often argued that limitations on warranties provide automobile manu-

facturers with an incentive to produce less than optimal reliability. So
                                                                                      3



it is proposed that unlimited warranties be required. This treats repair

frequency as solely determined by -- and so an objective measure of --

automobile reliability. But in fact the manner in which the automobile is
operated makes a big difference in repair frequency. Unlimited warranties

induce   less careful operation by car owners. This incentive to moral
hazard   on   the part of the unburdened party ——   whether buyer or seller ——

is   the essence of the qualitative information problem. No enforceable

contract can cover all the relevant characteristics of the transaction.

      The buyer and seller have information about the actual qualities of the

traded commodity. Suppose that a trade is made under strict caveat emptor

rules. It is impossible to distinguish before the trade between the two

qualities of a certain good --     high and low. Under perfect competition       in

which buyers and sellers are randomly matched, only the cheaper low—quality

400d wIll be produced.3 Net income of producers will be zero.

      Now suppose a producer decided to produce the      high quality good and
place    a trademark on it. Initially he can do so only by selling his goods

at the going price for low quality goods, so his net income is negative.

He will however provide his customers with an incentive to return to his

product instead of choosing at random. The more goods he sells, the more

people who will be willing in the future to pay a premium for his goods.

Thus a reputation is formed by a period of investment during which income

is foregone. In order for the investment to be worthwhile, the branded

producer must eventually charge a price sufficiently high to cover the

marginal firm's average production costs for the high quality good plus

the going rate of interest on the capital value of the foregone net

income during the period of investment. Entry will assure that it is no

higher. Only if the industry declines will exit occur through running

down reputations.4 A more formal analysis will be presented in Section II.
                                                                                   4


    A closer look at the concept of reputation is in order. Reputation is

the source of the ability to charge a positive price for information.5 It

is invariably based on past performance. The past performance may have been

the free provision of valuable information or the provision in market transac-

tions at a price commensurate with the value of the information. In the par-

ticular case at hand, the information concerns the qualitative characteristics

of the commodity. Developing a reputation through free provision of information

has the advantage of reaching individuals who would not pay for the information

from the unknown source. The provider of the information must bear all the

costs of the production and dissemination of the information; so this free

provision is advantageous only on an introductory basis.

     Both parties to the sale of a commodity with qualitative characteristics

have subjective information about the characteristics. If the seller uses

his reputation to sell at a high price, the buyer can judge whether the seller

in fact provided qualities which justified the premium price. There are markets

however ——   especially   the labor market ——   in   which the seller provides a com-

modity and the buyer uses his reputation to assure that the buyer will set a

fair price after the commodity has been consumed and evaluated. Once again

the fundamental symmetry of the qualitative information problem arises. Econ—

ondes of scale in the maintenance of reputation appear to be quite significant

as it is normally found on the side of sellers or buyers according to which are

the least numerous.

    Markets for commodities with qualitative characteristics can be divided

into two hypothetical categories: unbranded and branded. In unbranded mar-

kets buyers and sellers contract at random with the full terms of trade speci-

fied in enforceable contracts. Since some costly characteristics cannot be

specified, either they or cooperative commodities6 are not produced. That is,

moral hazard results. In branded markets, either sellers or buyers set a price
                                                                              5



based upon their evaluation of the commodity's qualitative characteristics.

This evaluation is accepted on the basis of reputation. The supplier of the

evaluation earns a return on his reputation sufficient to compensate for its

creation. In the absence of legal intervention, branded markets would be the

predicted market structure for commodities with significant qualitative charac-

teristics.
                                                                                    6


                        II. Monopolistic Competiton


      E. H. Chamberlin's (1965) model of monopolistic competition has never

been absorbed into standard economic theory. As observed in Sir John Hicks's

(1935) review article, the model's applications to location and product differ-

entiation are rather trivial cases of natural monopoly. The remaining inter-

esting application of the monopolistic competition model is the case of many

firms selling an identical product distinguished by brands or trademarks so

that each firm faces a downward—sloping demand curve. Harold Demsetz (1972)

has stated the essential objection to this case ——     the   internal inconsistency

of the postulates of the model if consumers maximize utility.7

        In earlier work (1959, 1964, 1968), Demsetz rightly argued that the down-

ward—sloping demand curve implies omitted selling and information costs which,

if correctly incorporated into the analysis,. would vitiate Chamberlin's famous

excess capacity theorem. Perhaps because he did not go on the identify the

critical factors which provide the essence ——   but   not the conclusions ——   of
Chamberlin's model, Demsetz did not provide an entirely successful formal model.8

This is attempted below by taking account of the essential dynamic element of the

case.

        The first step is to formulate a downward—sloping demand curve for an in-

dividual firm which is consistent with many firms, free entry, and also individual

utility maximization. Suppose that a good has to characteristics Q and X valued

by consumers. Using Q as a numeraire, the quality of the good can be described

by the amount of X sold per unit of Q or .     To say many firms means that the

price ($'s per unit of Q) that a firm receives is a function solely of the

quality of the good —— as measured by X/Q —— and not of the quantity it sells.

So the demand function faced by every firm is9

(1)              P = D(X/Q).

Since X is valued, dP/d(X/Q) is positive.
                                                                              7



       The demand function (1) is interpreted as giving the height of the hori-

 zontal demand curve faced by a firm for any given quality    of output. Alter-

 natively, there is a demand surface in (QX,P) with a constant height P cor-

 responding to the intersection with a plane through the origin perpendicular

 to the (Q,X) plane.

        The essence of monopolistic competition is provided by assuming that the

 total quantity of one of the characteristics, say X, produced by each firm is

 fixed at any instant of time. In this case, a firm cannot directly determine

 the quality of the good provided. If the firm raises its price P by a small

 amount, unit sales will fall (as measured in the nuineraire Q) until quality

 X/Q rises sufficiently to justify the price increase. So at an instant of

 time each firm faces a downward—sloping demand curve because quality varies

 inversely with sales.

        Before showing that this is an adequate description of the downward—sloping

 demand curve faced by the producers of branded goods, it will clarify matters to

 consider a simpler case. Suppose X is the floor space of a restaurant and Q Is

 the number of meals. So X/Q measures the amount of elbow room allowed a diner.

 The restaurant clearly faces a downward—sloping demand curve with respect to Q

 in the usual sense that


 (2)            -=-D' <0.
       The revenue function of the firm is given by

(3)            R = R(Q,X) = QP        = QD(X/Q)

Note the following derivatives:

                 =   P   -       D'
                             Q
(4)
                                                                                        8



Assuming a cost function C = C(Q,X), the net income function is

(5)           it   = R(Q,X) — C(Q,X)

In the long—run, the firm         is   free to select the level of both Q and X and

the first order conditions for the maximization of net income are


(6)
                    ac0
               air_aR
               aQaQ Q
(7)
                aax ax 0
              —=———=
               air

               ax
                             aC



In the short—run, X is fixed at            so only equation (6) is relevant.

       In the received analysis of monopolistic competition with X omitted,


- is called marginal revenue and - is called marginal cost. These are
improper usages however since they refer to variations in revenue and costs

for which quality          is also varying. Proper usage would refer to the mar-

ginal revenue and marginal cost of variations in quantity for which quality
                       *

is held   constant. These long—run concepts are

                      dR                      3R aRdx
(8)
                            d(X/Q) =

                                          =   P —    D + -   D' = P



(9)            MC —
                      dC                      C +CdX
                      dQ     d(X/Q) = 0
                                                    X dQ

                                           — ac   + x ac
                                              aQ ax
Since X is fixed in the short run, short—run marginal revenue and marginal

cost are undefined.

       Consider the long—run equilibrium values of Q and X.                    It will be

true that marginal revenue will equal marginal cost; so


                      ac xac
C 10
                      a'Q+Qax
                                                                                    9



 But substituting from equation (7) and rearranging terms yields


  (11)            (P -   D')   -    = 0,

 which is equation (6). So it is seen that the received analysis treats true

 marginal revenue less the effect of quality variation on revenue as if it

 were marginal revenue. Similarly true marginal cost less the marginal cost

 of maintaining quality is treated as if it were marginal cost.

         The simultaneous determination of Q, X, and P is awkward to depict

 graphically. It can be managed, however for a given quality          =   y.   In long—

 run equilibrium, free entry implies zero profits with price =      marginal    revenue

 marginal cost = average cost. This is illustrated in Figure 1. The typical

 firm will sell      and 5 = yQ at a price of P per unit measured in terms of Q.

 Free entry and exit assures that the price will be neither more nor less than

 P.

         Figure 2 illustrates the long—run equilibrium in terms of the standard

 monopolistic competition model. The demand curve is the short run demand curve

 P = D(X/Q) for the given output of X. The corresponding quasi—marginal—revenue

  curve is QMR   = - evaluated     at (Q,i). The quasi—marginal—cost curve is

  evaluated at (Q,i). The quasi—average—cost curve is drawn for costs exclu-

  sive of the cost of producing 5 and so is given as'°




(12)           QAC(Q)     J
The area (P—p)Q can thus be interpreted as the quasi—rent available to cover

the quasi—fixed cost of prgducing X.

       It was shown above that in long—run equilibrium the quasi—marginal

revenue curve will intersect the quasi—marginal cost curve at        the output

corresponding to the minimum point on the total average cost curve for

y = 5/Q.    This intersection will not generally correspond to the minimum
                                                                                          10


point on the quasi—average cost curve. It will however, as in Figure 2, if

the cost function is separable as


(13)               C(Q,X) = C(Q) + aX,


where cx is a constant. In the figure, P      —
                                                  p = cxy.   This can be interpreted

as the firm "producing" Q and      purchasing X in the market for resale with Q.
If the cost of X were not proportional to the quantity of X, the minimum

point on the quasi—average—cost curve would occur at a lover or higher level

of Q than for the total average cost curve according to whether the marginal

cost of X was above or below the average cost of X. In the general case in

which the cost function is nonseparable, there is no presumption one way or

the other. Nor should there be any particular interest in the question.

Note also that the intersection of the quasi—marginal—revenue curve with the

quasi—marginal—cost curve at Q is an implication of the existence of an

equilibrium, not geometry: Entry will assure that the marginal valuation of

X (aR/ax =   0')    is equated to the (long—run) quasi—marginal—cost of x (ac/ax).

       Chamberlin's error thus consisted of ignoring the cost of the fixed

characteristic which implies the downward sloping demand curve. Ignoring that

cost, he asserted that entry would force price to the quasi—average cost curve

thus eliminating quasi—rents. But the fixed cost element must be covered also,

so this does not occur. If it were costless to produce 5 in the long—run, it

would have 0 marginal value to consumers and D' would be identically zero.

But that is inconsistent with the postulate of downward sloping demand curves.

       The discussion has been motivated so far by the special case in which X

is interpreted as an overhead item such as floor space or staff size which

can be easily viewed as purchased in the market ——           albeit   on long—term con-

tracts. It remains to be shown that a brand or trademark has similar charac-

teristics.
                                                                                11


      If free—entry is to have economic meaning, it must be the case that con-

sumers value not the brand per se -— on which each firm has its own      monopoly ——
but   a stock of information associated with that brand. So any other firm could

choose another brand name for the same product and would face an identical de-

mand curve if an identical stock of information were associated with its brand

name. If the stock of information is measured by X, then it is sensible that

the demand function (1) should apply: In order for a firm to sell more, it

must increase sales to those relatively less familiar with the goods and terms

offered by the firm. That is, X/Q determines the confidence or subjective

probability which the marginal customer places upon the fairness of a firm's

evaluation of premium quality as illustrated in Figure 3. In order for a firm

to expand its sales at a moment of time ——     for   which reputation is fixed ——   it
must sell at the margin to customers less familiar with its brand. The assump-

tion of many firms obviates consideration of oligopolistic effects of the

change in one firm's sales on the market share, of other firms. Thus the fixed

stock of information X associated with a brand at an instant of time implies

that variations in quantity Q imply inverse variations in quality as antici-

pated by the marginal customer, and the previous analysis holds. The cost

conditions of producing X when X is reputation have some interesting interpre-

tations, however.

       First, a consideration of the role of advertising is in order. In so far

as current advertising affects current sales, the problem is simplified by

assuming that there is a constant optimal ratIo of advertising to other charac-

teristics so that advertising ——    like   all other currently variable characteris-

tics ——   is   subsumed in the quantity index. An alternative approach would de-

fine output as a vector (Q1, Q2, Q3, ...,      Q,X)   where X is fixed in the short—

run and the demand function is
                                                                                           12


                        Q2                     x
(14)            PD(—,-,
                   '<1 'l                '<1   'i].




There are no changes in the conclusions, but one should be careful to discuss
average or marginal revenue and average or marginal cost only for variations

in the nümeraire accompanied by proportional variations in Q2, Q3, ..., Q1,X.

       Advertising differs from other characteristics only insofar as it effects

the time derivative          of the stock of information or reputation associated

with a particular brand. Phillip Nelson (1974) has argued that advertising

may be valuable in creating and maintaining a reputation with respect to quali-

tative characteristics. Separate treatment of advertising as a determinant

of      adds nothing substantive to the following interpretation of the effect

of branding on output and so is omitted.11

       Recall from Section I that reputation can be viewed as built up by making

past sales of high-quality products at losses and maintained by making cur-

rent sales. Two functional relationships are valuable in the analysis of

reputation. The first is the equation of motion:


(15)               =   f(Q,X).

It is assumed that the greater the rate of sales, the more new customers are

buying the product so         >   0.   Reputation, on the other hand, depreciates

through death and exit of customers so                <   0.   The second equation gives the

good—will value of the firm as a function of the stock of reputation

(16)           W = W(X).


This is the net present value of the returns to the optimal program of out-

puts over time for a firm with a current reputation stock X.

       Therefore the cost function C(Q,X) can be written as

(17)           c(Q,x) = c(Q) + iW(X) —         w'(x)      f(Q,x).
                                                                                  13


The last term reduces costs by the rate of increase in good—will value. The

conditions (6) and (7) for long—run equilibrium are


(18)
                - = -- C'(Q)    — W'(X)



(19)            -=-W'(X)
                ax ax    (j!)
                            ax


It is seen that the partial derivative of cost with respect to quantity Q is

the marginal production cost'2 leas the value of the induced change in the

value of the firm. Also, the partial derivative of cost with respect to

 reputation X equals the required increase in good—will value times the sum of

 the interest rate I and the depreciation rate —       f. This   allows for the value

 of sales in maintaining reputation and for the natural depreciation of repu-

 tation over time.

        Substitution of equations (18) and (19) into equation (10) yields


 (20)            P =   c(Q) +iW'(X) _(X) (Q-+X).


For this to be a long—term equilibrium with free entry, X must be constant

and net income zero:

(21)           f(q,X) = 0

(22)            PQ — C(Q) — IW(X) = 0


Note that so long as the function f is homothetic, equation (21) implies that

the last right—hand—side term of equation (20) is zero, so that

(23)            P = C'(Q)     i W'(X).


Dividing equation (22) by Q and substituting into equation (23) yields the

condition which determines whether output will be larger or smaller than the

output that minimizes average production cost:

                               X
(24)            c'(Q) - C(Q) =   [iw(x) -   iw'(x)].
                                                                                   14


In order for output to be less than the Q which minimizes average production

costs it must be true that the marginal effect of reputation on the good—will

value of the firm is greater than the average effect. While this might be

the case, it has generally been supposed that the average cost of a reputation

falls over a considerable range. That would imply that minimum total average

costs would generally occur at a level of output greater than the minimum of

average production costs (C'(Q) > C(Q)/Q) contrary to the "excess capacity"

proposition advanced by Chamberlin.

     The graphical interpretation of this equilibrium differs from Figure 2.

This is because a Chainberlinian would not typically consider the quasi—marginal—

cost curve QMC'=           but instead the marginal—production—cost curve

NPC =   c'(X).   The firm will never operate at the output Q* (and price P*) de-

fined by the intersection of the quasi—marginal—revenue curve and the marginal—

production—cost curve, however. Instead as in Figure 4. (drawn on the assumption

that the total average cost curve and average production cost curve happen to

have minima at the same output), output Q will be larger and price      lower.'3

The reason is that the present value of current sales in producing future net

 income affects the output decision of the firm.

        So the Chamberlinian analysis of branded goods fails on two grounds:

 (1) A costly characteristic (reputation) which affects the product price and

 is fixed in the short—run is neglected. (2) As a corollary to the first point,

 the positive effect of current output on future net income is neglected. Cor-

 rection of these omissions implies that the short—run downward sloping demand

 curves which result from branding will not be tangent to the average produc-

 tion cost curve in long—run equilibrium and that short—run marginal revenue

 will not be equated to marginal production costs. Output may be either larger

 or smaller than the output which minimizes average production costs —— though

 there is a mild presumption that it will be larger. Once the information cost
                                                                          15


required for the exchange of commodities with valuable qualitative characteris-

tics is recognized, only the efficient output which minimizes total average

costs would appear to be of either economic or normative interest.
                                                                             16


                       III. Other Applications


    The most straightforward case of reputation as a solution of the quail—

tative information problem is the one of the preceding section: branded pro-

ducers. There are other less obvious but important applications, particularly

the labor market. It is generally argued that reputation will not be a solu-

tion in this market because the sellers (workers) are numerous and only irregu—

larly in the market so that it is not worthwhile for them to establish a reputa-

tion.14 This seems to be the normal situation in the labor market.

     If a firm invests in a reputation for fairness in assessing the quality

of work and paying afterwards a commensurate compensation, potential workers

will be willing to accept a low beginning wage on the understanding that the

quality of his work will be reflected in deferred compensation and make—up pay

increases. Where considerable time and cost is involved in the evaluation

process a substantial forfeitable guarantee in the form of a nonvested pension

may be attractive to both worker and firm)5

     The reward to the firm for investing in reputation arises because there

are exploitable gains from reducing what Aichian and Demsetz (1972) have

called "shirking." Shirking arises because the quality of work by any member

of a productive team cannot be objectively measured. If only enforcable

contracts were relied on each member of the team would be undercompensated

for qualitative characteristics of his labor and so underproduction of those

characteristics or shirking would result. If the qualitative characteristics

could be objectively measured at zero cost, there are clearly gains from trade

in doing so. This is not the case since in order for the employer to compen-

sate qualitative characteristics he must invest in a reputation and expend
                                                                                   17


resources in monitoring. If the potential gains are substantial however,

it will be worthwhile to bear the costs involved. As with the analagous

case of transportation costs in international trade, there will be less pro-

duction of the qualitative characteristics than if transaction costs were

zero but more than if they were infinite.16

      It should be noted that similar reputational analysis can be applied

within the firm. For example, transfer pricing of goods in process between

divisions will generally be possible because of the reputations of the heads

of the divisions involved and the reputation of their superior.

       In Section II, it was remarked that the optimal scale of a reputation ——

in   terms of minimum average cost ——   is   generally thought to be quite large

relative to market size. This may be due to frequency of sale and mobility

of potential customers (or for a buyer's reputation, potential seller's).

Suppose that this is Indeed the case for whatever reason and suppose also that

rapidly rising marginal production costs and rapidly falling demand curves

would imply much smaller sellers and much smaller buyers. In this case, it

would at first appear that the costs of the reputational solution to the

qualitative information problem would be prohibitive and the moral hazard

solutions apply. It might be so, but not necessarily.

       George Stigler (1951) has provided an elegant analysis of almost pre-

cisely this problem in his development of Adam Smith's theorem that "The

Division of Labor Is Limited by the Extent of ther Market." One can consider

the physical production of high quality goods and their selling as two dis-

tinct productive processes. Stigler's analysis would suggest that where the

optimal scale of selling is much larger than physical production, the many

producers would sell to a few selling firms. The problem is that the producing

firms still have to sell to the selling firms. Here however there is a
                                                                               18



difference. The selling firms ——   or   middlemen—— are few in number and so

can acquire a reputation as fair buyers at a reasonable average cost. So

the reputational solution is feasible. Since the costs of two reputations

must be borne in transacting through the middle—man, there is a somewhat

larger range for the moral hazard solutions to apply.17

     Doubly reputable middle—men are quite significant and varied. Consider

franchise operations, art dealers, used car dealers, and department store

chains such as Sears. Since reputation ultimately relates to reliability of

information or evaluation, the large scale of operation may be based on a

number of individually infrequent, small sales of a variety of products to

a regular clientele. Nor is the open sale of different qualities at different

prices inconsistent with maintaining a reputation so long as the differences

are commensurate.
                                                                               19


                               IV. Conclusion


     Qualitative characteristics of commodities imply two general types of

market structures, those involving moral hazard and those involving reputa-

tion. The moral hazard solution involves a divergence of the values of a

characteristic to the producer and to the buyer of that characteristic.

Whenever this divergence would be substantial in the case of random matching

of buyers and sellers, a market structure based on reputation arises. Repu-

tation is a costly capital asset and its creator must be compensated; yet

this cost appears to be generally lower than for the only alternatives ——

markets with moral hazard.
     The downward sloping demand curve of the monopolistically competitive

model is understandable as a short—run phenomenon based on the fixedness at

any instant of a firm'8 reputation. In the long—run, reputation is a decision

variable and so its *costs must be included in determining entry. This implies

that in full ("group") equilibrium the downward sloping short—run demand curve

and horizontal long—run demand curve will be above the average production cost

curve and intersect the average total cost curve at the output level which

minimizes average total costs.

     The basic result is that the qualitative information problem is symmetric:

If buyers and sellers are randomly matched, moral hazard will be implied for

the party ——   whether buyer or seller —— who is unburdened by the explicit con-
tract. If reputations are permitted, moral hazard can be eliminated by reputa-

tion on the part of either buyer or seller. Because of this symmetry, the

cost conditions may even imply middle men who create a reputation to buy from

numerous sellers and another reputation to resell to numerous buyers.
                                                                              20


                                   References


Akerlof, George A. "The Market for 'Lemons': Quality Uncertainty and the

     Market Mechanism." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (August 1979):

     488—500.

Alchian, Artnen A., andD8etZ, Harold. "Production, Information Costs and

     Economic Organization." American Economic Review, 62 (December 1972):

     777—95.

Archibald, G. C. "Chamberlin versus Chicago." Review of Economic Studies, 29

     (October 1961): 2—28.

__________      "Monopolistic   Competition and Returns to Scale." Economic Journal,

     77 (June 1967): 405—412.

Arrow, Kenneth J. "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care."

     American Economic Review, 53 (December 1963): 941—73.

Barzel, Yoram. hlExhcess Capacity in Monopolistic Competition." Journal of

     Political Economy, 78 (September/October 1970): 1142—49.

Chamberlin, Edward H. The Theory of Monopolistic Competition, 8th ed.

     Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1965.

Darby, Michael R. "Entrepreneurship, the Firm, and the General Market Inf or—

     mation Problem." Discussion Paper No. 36, Dept. of Econ., U.C.L.A.,

     April 1973.

Darby, Michael R., and Karni, Edi. "Free Competition and the Optimal Amount

     of Fraud." Journal of Law and Economics, 16 (April 1973): 67—88.

Demsetz, Harold. "The Nature of Equilibrium in Monopolistic Competition."

     Journal of Political Economy, 67 (February 1959): 21—30.

___________     "The Welfare and Empirical Implications of Monopolistic Competi-

     tion." Economic Journal, 74 (September 1964): 623—41.

_________       "Monopolistic   Competition: A Reply." Economic Journal, 77 (June

     1967): 412—20.
                                                                              21


__________•   "Do Competition and Monopolistic Competition Differ?'t Journal of

     Political Economy, 76 (January/February 1968): 146—48.

__________•   "The Inconsistencies in Monopolistic Competition: A Reply."

     Journal of Political Economy, 80 (May/June 1972): 592—97.

Hicks, John R. "Annual Survey of Economic Theory: The Theory of Monopoly,"

     Econometrica, 3 (January 1935): 1—20.

Hirshleifer, Jack. "Where Are We in the Theory of Information?" American       -




     Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 63 (May 1973): 31—39.

Lancaster, Kelvin. Consumer Demand: A New    Approach.   New York: Columbia

     University Press, 1971.

Nelson, Phillip. "Advertising as Information." Journal of Political Economy, 82

     (July/August 1974): 729—54.

Rothschild, Michael. "Models of Market Organization with Imperfect Information:

     A Survey." Journal of Political Economy, 81 (November/December 1973): 1283—

     1308.

Schmalensee, Richard. "A Note on Monopolistic Competition and Excess Capacity."

     Journal of Political Economy, 80 (May/June 1972): 586—91.

Spence, Michael. "Job Market Signalling." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 87

     (August 1973): 355—74.

Stigler, George J. "The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the

     Market." Journal of Political Economy, 59 (June 1951): 185—93.

__________      "The Economics of Information." Journal of Political Economy, 69

     (June 1961): 213—25.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "The Theory of 'Screening,' Education, and the Distribution

     of Income," American Economic Review, 65 (June 1975): 283—300.

Telser, Lester. "The Demand for Branded Goods as Estimated from Consumer

     Panel Data." Review of Economics and Statistics, 44 (August 1962):

     300—324.
                                                                             22



                                FOOTNOTES


     *This paper was written while the author was Harry Scherman Research

Fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research but is not an official

report of the National Bureau. The author would like to acknowledge help-

ful comments on lower quality versions of this paper by Armen Aichian,

Harold Demsetz, Bryan Ellickson, Edi Karni, Benjamin Klein, Jack Hirshleifer,

C. Mather Lindsay, and JUrg Niehans.

     1lnteresting surveys of this literature by Hirshleifer (1973) and

Rothschild (1973) are available.


         is not sufficient that this information be merely costly to produce

because then a guarantee with a high forfeit could be riskiessly offered by

the seller as a guarantee of stated quality.

         unguaranteed claim of high quality would be worthless and a guarantee

would cause all customers to claim that they had been supplied low quality

goods whatever the actual quality.


     4Assuming that reputations are no harder to break than to make.


     5Evaluation would be more precise than information, but the two   concepts
are so closely related that the distinction is not attempted here.

     6Reference is made here to contracts —— such as the unlimited automo-

bile warranty example ——   which measure characteristics in terms of an output

produced in cooperation with commodities supplied by the buyer.


     7This internal inconsistency doubtless explains why attempts to apply

the model start with a demand curve rather than utility functions.


     8See the comments by Barzel (1970) and Schmalensee (1972).
                                                                                  23



     9A more general representation is P = D(Q,X/Q) with 3P/3Q = 0 and

ap/a(X/Q) >   0.   The analysis is related to Lancaster (1971).


     t0There is an obvious relation between the quasi—average—cost curve and

the average variable cost curve of standard price theory.

     It would be included in the following by adding its cost to the cost

borne by the firm and reducing the costs of producing Q (with an implicit

advertising ratio) by an offsetting amount.

     12Recall that production cost is used here in the special sense inclusive

of current selling costs           advertising) which affect current sales.


     13The area (P—S)Q, which is the excess of revenues over production costs,

covers the capital cost iW(X).

     14
       See for example Spence (1973, pp. 355—56).

     15
       The nonvested portion of compensation ——    the   pension payable at the

employers discretion —— assures the employer that he will not lose out if the

worker is eventually found to not provide services commensurate with the total

compensation. See Darby and Karni (1973) for an investigation of models in-

volving such guarantees and probablistic learning over time.

          makes sense to compare the branded case with the case in which

branding is prohibited. This provides a measure of the potential loss from

prohibiting branding. A comparison of the branded case with the zero informa-

tion cost case makes no more sense than comparing it with the zero production

cost case. There is no way to eliminate either element of cost and still pro-

duce the commodity.
                                                                               24



    17The general possibility of mergers and spin—of fs is considered by

Demsetz (1964). In the case of qualitative characteristics it is seen that

production and selling are complementary In the sense that the cost of the

middleman's reputation as a buyer is avoided where the two   processes   are

carried out by a single firm.
                                           25




P



                         =     (C(Q,yQ))


                       AC = C(Q,yQ)




    _____               PD(y)




                I
     $


                                Q
0              Q




            Figure 1
                                               26




                       MC           (C(Q,yQ))



                       AC = C(Q,yQ)/Q

                       QMC =         (C(Q,))

P                      P   = D(y)
                       QAC =
                               [f fj-(C(q,))dqJ/Q
                       P =   D(/Q)
p




               QMR =   =P —         D'(X/Q)




    Figure 2
                                                27




subjective




  1
                                 e of
                        marginal buyer




                                         X /Q



             Figure 3
                                                   28




                       = C'(Q)
                                  AC = C(Q,yQ)/Q

                                  APC = C(Q)/Q




P
                                             P = D(y)

S




                                  P = D(X/Q)
               =




0                                            Q




                   =     =P   —
                                   D'(X/Q)



    Figure 3
