                 NBER Working Paper Series




                    EDUCATION AND SCREENING


                        Kenneth Wolpin*




                    Working Paper No. 102




    CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
                AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305



                          August 1975


                 Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

*1 am greatly indebted to Finis Welch, Robert Willis, and James
 Smith for their comments. This research was in part funded
 through a grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research by
 the Rockefeller Foundation and through a Department of Labor,
 Manpower Administration pre—doctoral fellowship. (This paper
 is a slightly modified version of a December 1974 draft of this
 paper.)
I.     INTRODUCTION


     Since the formulation of the human capital concept, much attention has been

devoted to the relationship between income and schooling. Numerous studies have

demonstrated a substantial positive association between them, a finding which

has not appreciably been altered by standardization for "ability" and family

background. The conventional view is that schooling enhances earnings via

the production of marketable skills, the productivity augmenting view. But,

recent theoretical arguments have demonstrated the possibility that schooling's

private return may be informationally based)         In the polar view schooling

serves only to identify those individuals who are more productive in the market,

the proposition being that an individual's productivity is unaffected by the

schooling experience, i.e •,   the   pure screening view.

     A brief outline of the paper will serve to demonstrate its aims. In section

II a model is developed which explores the impact of input-quality uncertainty

on factor demand from which is derived a rationale for the use of devices which

segment the population into classes differing in their "skill" distribution

parameters.2 The model, however, ignores the motivation of individuals to ac-

quire the characteristics upon which firms screen, in particular, the greater

incentive for the more productive to purchase the screen. This aspect has been

explored by Spence (1973) and Stiglitz (1973) and will not be explicitly con-

sidered here. In section III the social value of schooling's informational

context is derived within   the   preceeding framework. Section IV describes some

empirical attempts to isolate the productivity and identification effects. The

last section suimnarizes the paper.
                                           2

II.      ThE MODEL



      The stiiiiulus for job market screening is derived from imperfect information

about the quality of prospective employees. Workers must be selected from a

population composed of individuals possessing a diverse set of productive attri-

butes, most, or even all, of which cannot be observed by finns prior to employ-

ment and possibly for some time after.

      To begin, consider the set of productive attributes to consist of all those

skills (technical knowledge, motivation, responsibility) which are perceived by

firms as contributing to an individual's productivity. Since schooling can be

viewed as either augmenting some of the elements in an individual's vector of

skills or as a predictor of these elements, or both, it is not considered as be-

longing to the set. Similarly, race, sex, experience, marital status and other

characteristics which (may) serve as possible information sources to the firm

are excluded. To clarify the distinction, the attributes themselves will be

referred to as elements of an individual's human capital stock and the character-

istics as screening devices. Note that a screening device is not necessarily

passive, but, as with experience, may augment an individual's stock of marketable

skills. In this general sense, there is no presumption that screening devices

are only associatively rather than causally related to human capital stocks.

All potential information sources are similarly classified regardless of the

nature of their relationship to actual productivities.

      vbre concretely, let k. =                              be the th individual's
                                  (k.1,   k.2, ...,   kin)
skill vector where the total potential set consists of n different types; thus,

for any single individual some of the elements may be zero. Corresponding to

a job task or "occupation" there is assumed to exist a transformation which maps

each individual's combination of elementary attributes into a unique skill index.     S
                                                    3




The th individual's skill index for the th occupation is given by

      =
          f   (ku, k2 •.., kin)
                                         .     Since the f. 'S are assumed to vary across

job tasks with respect to both the number of elements affecting the skill

index and their marginal contributions to the skill index, individuals

will be assinged a different skill index for each occupation.

        The production process within the firm is assumed to take the following

form:

          (1) Y =
                    F(S1, S2, ...,       S,   K)5

where
                        L.
                         3                                            th
              S. =       E     s. = aggregate       skill for the j        job   task
                        1=1

                    =   the   number of individuals employed in the th tasks
and
              K = a non-labor input.


Notice that in this formulation workers substitute perfectly within occu-

pations but not necessarily between occupations.

          Suppose that firms have no a priori estimates of individual human capital

vectors. Instead, let the th skill index be distributed over the population

with mean            and variance             both of which are known with certainty by the

firm. Each firm is seen as drawing a random sample from the population for

each occupation with                being the obtained sample skill mean for the JtF occu-

pation. The first two moments of the sample mean are                             and    where L
is the size of the sample drawn (the number of workers employed). The firm

receives S =                    aggregate units of the Jth skill index which is itself
distributed with mean                =           and variance cY2L. Upon taking a second-order
                                         PJL
                                                     4



approximation of the production function around the point                                    . . q, , K),
expected output is given by

        (2) =           F
                                     2'' ' K)         +
                                                                a L. F

                                                          j=l                  jj
                   = 4)
                              (S1,            '          P2'•'        R.' K)


where it is assumed that sampling is independent over the v occupations and
                   2
where R. =
              2
                  a./         (the variance-mean ratio for the jth occupation) and



  33 dsj
        =
              4 evaluated at             (S1, s2•••       v'    K).    Thus, expected    output is



that   level of output obtained with certainty if labor were homogeneous plus

a variance correction.

       The basic predictions of the model can be illustrated most easily with

a single aggregate skill input.6 Equation (2) reduces to

        (3)

                    =   4)    (, R, K)

where         =   pL,        R =   a2/p and   i   and a2 are as previously defined.

       The variance-mean ratio (R) can be interpreted as a measure of uncer-

tainty attached to the labor input in the following sense. If individuals

possessed identical skill vectors so that a2 =                         0,   the profit-maximizing

level of aggregate skill could be obtained without error. For example,

denoting S" as the optimal skill input and as the number of skill units

embodied in        each       individual, L* =      S/i would be the           optimal labor input.

However, if human              capital   vectors differ (a2 > 0) the firm can never be

                                                                                                            .
                                                        5


assured       of obtaining L* regardless of its sampling decision. The question

is whether the firm will alter its employment decision in response to the

introduction of skill variance.

       The first effect attributable to the introduction of uncertainty is

a reduction in expected output at the original equilibrium input levels.

Since          =
                   4F          < 0 under the concavity assumption,


        (4)        2 R 2R j:r_l R<°
                         —                          7




Firms will, therefore, always prefer to sample from a population character-

ized by lower variance.8

       The equilibrium conditions for the profit-maximizing competitive firm

are:

        (5) 'i=4             (, R,K)
        (6) 'L =         XL
        (7) K =          AK
        (8)        A =       = NEC (marginal   expected cost),
where          is the wage rate (identical for each individual as they are indis-

tinguishable prior to hiring), K is the rental rate per unit of capital,

and       is the product price.

        Totally differentiating the first-order conditions with respect to

skill variance, allowing inputs to vary but maintaining a constant mean

skill index, and solving for input and marginal cost adjustment, yields

                   dX/A_l
                             [(z  ci?
                                           2
                                               )Ao2L@2 K'   A    A
                                             6




     (10) 2 =                     -
                                             AL La2 ALL               K2 Aa]

                 =                -
                                                             ALK -
     (11)                                    AK -                     Ko2    A]
where A is the usual bordered Hessian determinant and subscripted A's are

the relevant cofactors.9

     The first effect of skill variance has been shown to be a reduction

in expected output at the original input levels. The second effect entails

a movement away from the previous optimal factor ratio at the new lower level

of expected output. This substitution effect can be isolated by setting



d
     -
         2     equal to zero in (9) and (10). This, after some manipulation,


yields
                                                                            10
              1 dL       - 1 dK                  1L Koi
     (12)        —a-        r         = 6u
                                                 \L
                                                             -

                                                                 KJ
where ELK is the elasticity of substitution between K and L, the latter being

evaluated at p.

     Upon expanding (12) it is found that the substitution effect is related

to third partial derivatives.


              ___         K2                        -                 -
                                      (FK F +
                     -                              S            -    S
     (13)                                               FK                F SSK
               L
The signs of             and FK indicate the rate at which the marginal product of

skill declines with increased usage of labor and capital respectively." If

FK >     0,   an. increase in the quantity of capital retards the rate of decline




                                                                                     .
                                            7




in   labor's marginal product (and raises its own marginal expect product for
any   increase in variance, Ko2 >         0),   while a negative value implies an

acceleration in the rate of decline in labor's marginal product (in which

case         <   0)         A similar set of conditions applies to the own third

partial,          .    In   a sense these third partials can be considered as

indexes of similarity with a positive sign implying complementarity and a

negative sign competitiveness.

       Although one might expect finns to substitute away from the risky input

(labor), this is not necessarily the case. It is possible for an increase

in the labor input to reduce the adverse effect of variance on expected out-

put if the rate of decline of labor's marginal product is sufficiently slow,

i.e., if              is sufficiently positive. The sign of the substitution effect

is determined by the relative effect of the two inputs in reducing the impact

of variance on expected output)3

       Figure 1 illustrates the case of a negative substitution effect where A

corresponds to the position prior to the introduction of quality uncertainty

and B corresponds to the new equilibrium factor ratio established at the

lower level of expected output, 'il' after introducing uncertainty. There are,

however, two further effects. First, there is a direct production effect

corresponding to a northward movement along the new expansion path in order

to restore output to its previous levelC0). This, together with the sub-

stitution effect, corresponds to the usual output constant substitution

adjustment. Second, there is an induced production effect in response to

a change in marginal expected cost after regaining the original output level.

In Figure 1 the direct effect is shown as a niwement from B to C and the

induced effect from C to D.
                                                   8


                           L
                                   a2 = 0
                                                 a2 > 0
                                                                                                       S



                                                                                   2 > 0




                   Figure 1. The Effect of Skill Variance on Factor Demand




     Both the direct and induced effects are movements along the same expansion
                                                                                                       5
path and must be in opposite directions. The question concerns the dominant

one. The net scale effect is found by setting dY2 -                              2 = 0 in equation
                                                                  di
(9) and is given by

        (14)
               -   ____   - ____
                          —             EX       +     Ka2 EX
                     2
                               L             L          K         K

where          and         are the elasticities of marginal cost with respect to
          EL    EPK
factor prices. The percentage change in marginal cost is a weighted sum of

percentage changes in marginal expected products, where the sign of the

weights depend upon the normality or inferiority of the factors. Figure 1

illustrates a negative net scale effect                     -
                                                                dXX
                                                                       <   0),   a further reduction
                                                                da
                                              14
in expected output from            to

        Although the results of the previous analysis are somewhat ambiguous as

to the effect of introducing a risky input on factor demand, the important                             S
                                                   9


point   to note is that firms are definitionally "risk" averse; quality uncer-

tainty must lead to a reduction in expected output. The following extension

makes use of this proposition to show how the firm may                            use screening   devices

to reduce uncertainty. Although schooling is used throughout as the device

analyzed, the model is perfectly general for any screen as previously defined.

       Suppose there to be only two schooling classes denoted as E and EH with

the former being the higher level. Let the corresponding parameters of the

skill distributions associated with these classes be i.i,-,                        a2c and   1 H'

respectively. Awareness by the firm of individual schooling levels would

enable it to sample independently from within each schooling class. The firm's

obtained aggregate skill iuld be S =
                                                   SHLH
                                                             +             with   expectation

  =            +         and variance HLH +                  where LH and Lc are the numbers
      'H11-1

of   individuals sampled from each group.
        Expected output is
                    -
                                         2     +           2 L

                          HT11    c C' 'H11{ +
                                                   1ICLC


The marginal rate of substitution between the two worker classes is, with a

fixed stock of capital, given by


        (l6)-—-=
                   dLc       J±    S    -
                                                                  R1
                    11       'C S -          R4R
                                                       +


where RH =                  and    =
                   H/MH
        Suppose that education acts as a perfect screen so that individuals within

schooling classes are homogeneous,                     =          =   0.    The use of schooling as a
                                                            G2C

screen eradicates the uncertainty previously associated with the labor input.

Since R,1 =             = 0, the MRS is independent of the ratio of workers sampled from
                   Rc
the two classes. Workers substitute perfectly at the rate given by the ratio

of their average levels of skill, H'C•
                                           10



       Since in the absence of screening all individuals are equally compensated,    S
any single firm would perceive itself as being in a better position when the

information is utilized. For any given total labor input, L,         the expected

gain from screening is

       (17)   F(cL, K) - [F(iiL, K) + 1/2 RjLF]
and   is composed of two components, the output effect of the increased aggre-

gate skill level (1L as opposed to pL) and the output gain due to variance

reduction (in this case to zero))-5

       Vhen education is an imperfect screen, 02C,a2H        0, and there are many

reasons why this will be the case, workers from the two schooling classes

are no longer perfect substitutes. The MRS will be less than unity at all

                                and    <        Neither condition is, in itself,
input ratios if             >
                                           R.
sufficient. In the example that follows strict preference for the more

schooled, i.e.,
                        -       < 1 for all labor ratios, is assumed)-6 it can

be demonstrated that a necessary condition for isoquants to be convex is

that          <   0,   i.e., the marginal expected product of skill declines)-7

       Figure 2 illustrates the employment decision when schooling is an

imperfect screen and there is strict preference for the more schooled.

With equal wage rates, profit maximization would entail the employment of

individuals froma single schooling class. If AB is a representative

isoquant and AC the unit sloped iso-cost line, a corner solution is obtained

at A, where only the more schooled are employed. For a fixed labor input,

the gain from screening (the loss from ignoring schooling's screening poten-

tial) is given by the difference in revenue associated with any point along
                                      18
AC and that corresponding to AB.

                                                                                     .
                                                11

  Lc




              IY<l
                        -
              dLc




       0                                               N    B
                                               Figure 2.




       The gain from utilizing the screen is a function of the degree to which

skill parameters diverge. For a fixed labor input, L, the return to employing

an additional Ec worker (thus, one fewer EH worker) is given by



                                               +
       (18)
                    ft = 4).      (1.IC -
                                                           (Rç


The marginal return to employing an extra preferred worker is a positive

                    -
function of                 and       -
                                            l9,2O
       Competitive bidding for the more schooled will cause      to rise relative

to WH.2' For example, in Figure 2 the new isocost line, MN, reflects the

increased relative demand for EC workers. As shown, a new equilibrium posi-

tion is established at D where workers from both schooling classes are

employed by the firm.22

       Since schooling's sorting efficiency can be expected to vary with occu-

pation, in general, occupations will be characterized by different proportions

of schooled labor. The factor intensities of occupations with respect to

schooling classes will depend upon comparative advantages. Even if the more
                                              12



schooled have an absolute advantage in many occupations, those occupations

for which skill parameters most diverge (in combination with the output

cost of variance and the level of marginal expected skill products) will be

more schooled-labor intensive.

       To si.immarize, several components of schooling's private return have been

identified. The first is attributable to differences in average skill levels

which may   or   may   not   bear any other than an associative relationship to the

educational process. The second component is a function of skill variances,

the demand for labor of a given class being negatively associated with its

variance - mean ratio. 23,24


III.       IHE SOCIAL RETURN TO SCREENING


       The major point of screening models is that the empirically observed

private return to schooling can be generated within a framework of incom-

plete information without relying on hunan capital augmentation.25 The

importance of this interpretation hinges upon the magnitude of schooling's

social return, ie., the social value of schooling's informational content.

       In a strict sense, in both Spence (1973) and Stiglitz (1973), the

information itself has no social value -           the   social return to schooling is,

in fact, negative. If education imparts no marketable skills, from a social

perspective the resources used in the acquisition of schooling are social

wastes. The reason is simply that in these models constant marginal products

are assumed. To illustrate, if k is the constant marginal product of skill,

p the average skill level and L the labor stock, gross social product is

ki-IL. Net social output is kpL -            where g is the output cost per schooled
                                        gL
individual and LC the number of such individuals. The optimal social invest-

ment in education is zero since gross social output is unaffected by the

number of schooled individuals.
                                                    13



     Consider the following example. Suppose there are two productivity types

of individuals (A and B) and two schooling classes (Ec and EH). Assume that

the distribution of skill within the two schooling groups have as their re-

spective means and variance (UC, a2C) and H' cH) with C >                                 In parti-

cular, consider the case where education is a perfect screen so that cx2H

=       = 0.     Let 5A be the skill endowment of all type A individuals and SB

that of all type B with LA and LB              being   their respective numbers and SA > SB.

                                    =                      and         =             Gross social
With a perfect screen
                                        5A' H = SB, L = LA                 LB.
product with constant marginal products is simply k(pcLc + 1'HLH) = kS where

S is aggregate skill.

     Now suppose that production is characterized by equation (2), Section

II and that there        are N firms each employing L workers. For the 1th firm,
actual   output is
        (19) Y = F(S,          K) =     F(L,   K)

where          is the mean skill level obtained by the 1th firm from a random sample

of L workers. Taking a second-order approxiiation around                         =   jiL(= ), the

expected aggregate skill input, yields

        (20)

Aggregate
                 Y = F(L, K) + ( -i)L F + 4
                output is
                                                          l   ii)2L2   F.

        (21) ZY. =       NF(pL, K) +     4   L2   F (• )2
since    Z( -ii)     =   0,   as   total skill must be exhausted. Since F               < 0, total

product    is maximized where E(. ...)2 = 0, i.e. where each firm obtains the

identical mean skill level. Maintaining the assumption of a perfect screen,

it can easily be demonstrated that
                                                14




     (22) EY = NF +          4 F(ic   -
                                                     il (Lci L )2

                                                     N
                = NF     +            -                         -   Lc )2
                             4 F(sA       SB)
                                                     i=1
                                                         (La.

where Lc1 is the 1th firm's labor input obtained from the Ec schooling class

and La/N is the number of Ec workers the th firm would obtain if the Lc

workers were equally distributed over firms. But, it was demonstrated in

Section II that in utilizing the screen each firm samples the same number

of workers from within a schooling class so that Lc1 =                      Lc   for all i and
                                                                            N
aggregate output is, therefore maximized.

     It can further be deninstrated that as education becomes a less perfect

screen (a2C, H > 0), its social benefit declines. In this case, even as
firms employ the same factor proportions (L /LH), variations in aggregate

skill will persist since within-group skill variances are not zero. The return

to screening is due to the elimination of between-group variance; it is as if

each firm samples from a population with smaller skill variance. Regardless

of screening efficiency, the output loss from ignoring the information is a

rising function of the difference in skill endowments, i.e., a positive

                    -
function of

     In   the above analysis, schooling's only function is as an identification

device given fixed skill endowments. But, suppose that schooling creates pro-

ductivity differences. This effect can be demonstrated by differentiating

equation (21) with respect to p, yielding

             d Y.                  1 L2                  -    2        1 L2
                                                                                     d(E(s. -    )2)
     (23) '             = NL F +                       (s - p) +                 F        dii


The first term reflects the direct output effect of the increase in aggregate

skill. The second term shows the impact of the rise in aggregate skill on
                                          15



schooling's informational return for a given screening efficiency. If

       >   0, the output cost of skill dispersion between firms falls while
the opposite is true if          <   0. When schooling is a perfect screen this

term is zero; the more imperfect the screen initially, the more important

is   this effect. The last term reflects the change in screening efficiency
accompanying the rise in average skill. In general, a rise in within-group
variances will increase variation in aggregate skill between firms and, thus,
reduce   aggregate output. Therefore, schooling induced    increases in the
average    skill level of a population will have its greatest positive impact

on aggregate output the higher is the marginal product of skill, the more

slowly it declines and the more homogeneous schooling groups become.27

      With the introduction of a second "occupation" or type of skill,

schooling's informational return may be further enhanced. As before, the

social return to identification is related to reductions in aggregate skill

variation between finns. However, there is also a social gain to allocating

individuals to their most productive uses which will be operative if schooling's

sorting efficiency differs by occupation or if the output cost of uncertainty

varies by occupation.28


IV.        EMPIRICAL TESTS OF ThE SCREENING HYPOTHESIS

      Although a wide range of studies exist on the schooling-income relationship

few npirica1 attempts have been directed toward discovering the generating

mechanism. Much of the work has been concerned with assessing the bias in

schooling's private return which results from ignoring measures of ability.

The results have consistently found a minimal reduction in schooling's incre-

mental effect on earnings.29 However, it would be erroneous to conclude from
                                            16



this that schooling directly produces human capital rather than serving an

identification function. The reason is that screening arises solely as a

consequence of imperfect inforination.Schooling is simply a proxy for earnings

producing skills. Even if ability measures were perfectly correlated with

productive skills, but firms were unaware of each individual's ability

(measure), schooling might still have a larger impact on earnings over the life

cycle. That      these   ability measures only imperfectly correlate with   job   success

may   actually   be only a peripheral consideration for the applicability of these

studies   to the screening hypothesis •30
      Consider    some of the previous attempts to isolate the identification and

productivity effects. There is only one published empirical study of which

I am aware, that by Taubman and Wales (1973), which purports to isolate a

significant identification role. i\ccording to the authors, screening is said

to occur when individuals, due to their lack of education, are restricted                   S
from entering occupations in which their marginal products are greatest. In

other words, if individuals could freely choose their occupations, a greater

proportion of those with lower schooling levels would be found in higher
                         31
paying occupations.

      Their screening test involves a comparison of the actual and expected

fractions of people with different educational attainment in various occu-

pations. To derive the expected distribution under free entry, within-

occupation earnings regressions were estimated from which the potential

incomes of individuals in other occupations were obtained.32 Their occupa-

tional regressions included schooling, ability, age, and several other socio-

economic variables. Occupations were grouped into three categories with

separate dummies for individual occupations. The groupings were (1) profes-

sional, sales, and technical; (2) blue-collar, white-collar, and service;
                                       17




(3) managerial. No interactions were used so that earnings merely shift up

or down for occupations within each broad classification.

     The problem with this method, ignoring the assumptions made in calcu-

lating the expected distribution, is that individuals with the same observed

characteristics are, by definition, equally productive; yet, observed character-

istics account for only part of the variance in earnings. If these unmeasured

skills are correlated with schooling and more important in some occupations

than others, potential earnings will be overestimated for the less schooled

in those occupations.33 Although Taubmari and Wales realize that this problem

exists, they state that they cannot determine its importance. However, one

can see from their results that the effect is swamping all others. Table 1

duplicates their findings although it is rearranged in a nre revealing

manner.

     The authors conclude from this table that: "In general, then, under the

assumption of free entry and income maximization, very few people at any

educational level uld choose the blue collar, white collar, or service

occupations       The fact that the high school and some college groups pre-

dominate   in these occupations is taken as evidence of educational creden-
tialism. Notice that when the occupations are grouped as they were in the
regressions, the expected fractions in the three broad occupational cate-
gories are aliiost identical for the three schooling classes. Taubnian and
Wales have merely made people look iire alike than they really are. Thus,
 the problem they have in explaining the result that the expected proportion

 of college graduates in the highest paying occupations exceeds the actual

 proportion(after all, they are the preferred group), is easily resolved.
 The interpretation of their results as due to entry barriers is not war-
 ranted. breover, even if the actual distributions are those which would
 •                                                             .                                                          .
                                                                      *
                                                          TABLE   1
                                     ACTUAL PJ'J1) EXPECTED OCCUPATIONAL DISTRIBUTIONS
                         High School                          Some College                      College Graduate
                   Actual              Expected            Actual            Expected         Actual           Expected
Prof                   1.5                9.5               5.8                 14.8            25.Ot             17.8
Tech               11.5       20.6       21.0               96        24.8      19.1             2.8 36.6         14.1
                                                52.5
Sales                  7.6               22.0 1             9.4                 21.8             3.8              25.5
Blue Collar        28.6                   1.3              lO.2\                  .8             l.8\               .9\
                                                                                        2.6            L,4.0              2.2
                              38 7                3 2                                                               .9
Service                6.8                1.4               3.8 26.5             1.2
                                                                                                 1.l'
White Collar           3.3                 .5               2.5   .               .6             1.11               .4
nageria1           40.6                  42.4              58.8                 39.8            59.4              38.3
*
 Brackets   are   my   own.
Source: Taubman and Wales (1973), Table            5.
                                          19




obtain under strict income maximization, the question would still remain as

to whether schooling produced those occupational skills or merely signalled

their endowment.

     The   empirical   work presented here is confined to two issues approximating

the mean and variance components of schooling's return previously discussed.

In all cases, an attempt is made to discern the existence of a significant

identification component to schooling's return.

     A general description of the data base employed follows. The NBER-

Thorndike sample cons4sts of approximately 5000 men who were air force pilot,

navigator and bombadier candidates in 1943. The population was obtained from

a subsample of 17,000 men from whom Thorndike collected information in 1955

on earnings, job experience and other socioeconomic variables including

numerical scores on seventeen tests administered by the air force in 1943

which purport to measure various capabilities ranging from manual dexterity

to abstract problem solving capabilities. The NBER resampled a subset of

these men in 1969 and again in 1971 updating data on job histories and socio-

economic characteristics. Specifically, the data includes information on

jobs held in five separate time intervals: 1945-1952, 1953-1957, 1958-1962,

1963-1966, and l967-l970. Information on jobs held in years other than

those corresponding to the interview years are retrospective. All indivi-

duals are at least high school graduates and a majority have an undergraduate

degree or some graduate training. Ages, as of 1969, range from 42 to 55.

     Since, for many, employment was interrupted by the war, accurate esti-

mates of market experience were obtained by restricting attention to those

individuals whose initial job occurred after military service and, in parti-

cular, within the 1945-1952 interval. Experience is calculated simply as the

difference between a reported job year lying within any of the five periods
                                    20




and the initial job year; it is thus, by definition, zero for the initial

job. Further exclusions were those individuals with extended military ser-

vice, those who were civilian pilots, the disabled and the unemployed. The

constructed longitudinal sample consists of 9,799 separate experience-

earnings points.

     Earnings profiles were estimated for both private wage workers and for

the self-employed.36   Table 2 reports the results for several specifications.

The dependent variable in this and all other tables is the natural logarithm

of earnings (in 1958 dollars), S is schooling completion level, P is experi-

ence, and A is an IQ-type ability measure.37 Since it will be argued that

the relevant hypotheses are concerned with coefficient equality as between

the two groups, the regressions in Table 2 (and all others except where noted)

are from a pooled sample in which each coefficient represents the partial

effect of a given variable for one or the other group.      Descriptive statis-

tics for selected variables are found in Table 1 of Appendix B.

     If a major portion of schooling's private return is merely informational,

it should manifest itself in a smaller earnings increment to the self-employed

and/or a lower average schooling level. Clearly, there is less incentive for

the more productive among the self-employed to use schooling as an identifi-

cation device.39 vbreover, lacking Spence's self-selection mechanism, the

sorting of more productive types by schooling should be less clear and since

the self-employed can earn at most only the market's valuation of their

marginal product, the incremental effect of schooling on earnings should be

lower for this group. However, when one looks at the schooling effect in

Table 2, equations 1 and 2, it is seen that schooling has a differentially

larger impact on earnings among the self-employed.40     lvbreover, average
                                                 TABLE 2
                   EAR.INGS REGRESSIONS R)R PRIVATE   WAGE AND   SELF-EMPLOYED WORKERS
                                  Coefficients (t-values in parentheses)
                                 WSe1f                               Self-                                Self-
                    Private       Employed         Private       Employed                Private      Employed
                    0.029         0.040            0.023         0.040                   -0.023        -0.014
S
                    (12.7)            (9.5)        (9.9)             (9.2)               (6.4)         (2.2)
P                   0.078             0.074        0.078         0.074                    0.008        -0.01
                    (38.5)            (18.2)       (38.6)            (18.2)               (1.7)           (1.2)
                                      -0.0010      -0.0014           -0.0010             -0.0012          -0.0008
                    -0.0014
                                      (5.5)        (15.9)            (5.5)               (14.0)           (4.3)
                    (15.8)
                                                                                          0.0043           0.0053
SP
                                                                                         (16.1)           (10.8)
                                                    0.027             0.004               0.006           -0.008
A
                                                    (9.8)            (0.7)               (1.3)            (.09)
                                        -                              -                  0.002            0.001
AP
                                                                                         (6.1)            (1.7)
                      7.9             -0.01         7.99             -0.09                8.71              .029
Intercept   (a)
                                                                                         (153.9)          (0.2)
                       (221.1)        (0.1)          (218.4)         (1.1)
                              .4927                          .4977                                .5225
R2
                                                              actual self-employed intercept and the private
(a)e    self-employed intercept is the difference between the                          of the constant tenn
1ge   intercept given to the left. Insignificance of the coefficient implies equality
in   the to saniples.
                                      22



schooling   levels are very similar with private wage workers obtaining 15.6

years of schooling and the self-employed 15.3.41 A major screening role is

not indicated by- these results.

      One obvious modification is to delete the professional class (doctors,

lawyers, teachers, etc.) since it is, in many instances, subject to public

screening through occupational licensure. Table 3 reports the results for

all individuals who were not professional on either their first or their

last reported job.42 As seen, the overall schooling coefficient is, in

magnitude, somewhat smaller for the self-employed. These differences are

not "significant" in a statistical sense.43 Moreover, when "ability" is

controlled for, as one should if this measure is known by the firm, the

difference is less pronounced. Further average schooling levels again do

not   diverge significantly (see Table 3 of Appendix B).
     Similar reasoning applies to the effect of college quality on earnings
as between the two groups. If the quality of college attended is used as a
screen and   merely serves a classificatory function, its effect should be less

pronounced on the earnings of the self-employed. To facilitate the comparison,

the subsample of college graduate non-professionals (only those with exactly

16 years of schooling) was chosen. The regression equations are presented

in Table 4 where Q represents the college quality variable and other symbols

are as previously defined.44 It is seen that the overall quality effect is

larger for the self-employed. If the quality variable can be interpreted as

a measure of accrued knowledge, it appears that these acquired skills are

indeed productive in the market. Furthermore, the incentive for the self-

employed to obtain higher quality schooling seems not to be dampened as

average qualities are almost identical (see Table 5, Appendix B).
                                                 TABLE   3
               EARNINGS REGRESSIONS FOR PRIVATE WAGE AND SELF-EMPLOYED NON-PROFESSIONALS
                                    Coefficients (t-values in parentheses)
                                                                 (2)                           (3)
                                      Self-                              Self-                         Self-
                    Private         Bnployed         Private           F2nployed   Private           Fmployed
S                   0.050           0.042            0.048              0.043      -0.011            -0.018
                    (13.2)           (5.6)           (12.3)             (5.5)       (1.3)             (1.6)
P                   0.065            0.063           0.065              0.063      0.017             -0.020
                    (22.1)           (11.5)          (22.1)             (11.5)      (2.3)             (1.4)
                   -0.0011          -0.0007         -0.0011            -0.0007     -0.0009           -0.0005
                    (8.2)            (2.8)           (8.2)              (2.8)       (6.9)             (2.2)
SP                                                                                 0.0055             0.0056
                                                                                    (12.2)            (6.6)
A                                                    0.008             -0.004      -0.017            -0.016
                                                     (1.9)              (0.5)       (2.5)             (1.3)
AP                                                                                 0.0023             0.0011
                                                                                    (4.6)             (1.2)
Intercept          -0.28             7.95           -0.24               7.94       -0.25              8.82
                    (2.2)            (72.0)          (1.8)              (701)       (1.3)             (51.0)
R2                           .426                             .427                           .454
         private intercept given in the table is the difference between the actual private intercept and
ti
(a) The
    self-employed intercept to the right. Insignificance of the coefficient implies equaliy of the
constant term in the tii samples.
.                                                      .                                                        .
                                                    TABLE   4
      COLLEGE QUALIIY REGPESSIONS FOR NON-PROFESSIONAL PRIVATE WAGE AND SELF-EMPLOYED WORKERS
                                     Coefficients   (t-values in parentheses)
                               (1)                                 (2)                          (3)
                                       Se1f-                               Self-                        Self-
                  Private            loyed             Private           Fmployed   Private           Fmployed
P                  0.083              0.092            0.083              0.092     0.072             0.068
                   (15.0)             (9.2)             (15.0)            (9.2)      (7.9)             (3.8)
                  -0.0014            -0.0013           -0.0014           -0.0013    -0.0014           -0.0013
                   (5.5)              (2.9)             (5.5)             (2.9)      (5.5)             (2.9)
                   0.051              0.053            0.051              0.055      0.025             0.004
Q
                   (4.3)              (2.2)             (4.3)             (2.2)      (1.3)             (0.09)
                                                                                     0.0023            0.0049
QP
                                                                                     (1.6)             (1.6)
A                                                       0.002            -0.006     -0.011             0.006
                                                        (0.3)             (0.4)      (0.9)             (0.3)
                                                            -                        0.0013           -0.0012
AP
                                                                                     (1.3)             (0.8)
Intercept         -0.05               8.16             -0.04              8.15      -0.17              8.40
                   (0.38)             (64.4)            (0.3)             (63.5)     (0.8)             (42.1)
R2                          .505                                 .506                         .508
                                             25



      A comparison of average incomes of rural farm workers and            urban
workers      at alternative schooling levels found in Welch (1971) also        supports

the   human capital view. The argument is basically the same as that with
respect to the self-employed and       private    wage comparison made above, since
the   rural farm class is predominantly composed of self-employed individuals.

As Table 5 illustrates, the percentage increase in earnings with: increased

schooling is larger for the rural farm class. The absence of a screening

motive would preclude such a result if schooling did not augment producti-

vities. There is no reason for the more able among rural farmers to be

more prone to obtain schooling unless they perceive some benefit which,

for them, must result from skill augmentation rather than identification.



                                     TABLE 5(a)

               INCOME IN 1959 FOR URBAN AN]) RJJRAL FARM MALES, 45-54

                         YEARS OLD, BY YEARS OF SGIOOLING




       Comparison for the         1-4 Years        12 Years      16 Years

       (1)    Urban Average          4,370          6,900         10,130

       (2) Rural    Average          2,780          4,900          7,600

       (3) 2 ÷ 1                      0.64           0.71           0.75


       (a) Source: Welch      (1971), Table 2; computed     from U.S. Census
       of Population.


       Further    independent evidence is supplied by Pencavel (1974) in a

 study    of   piece rate and time   rate   payment schemes. The male (fnale)

 segment of the sample consisted of 183 (120) punch press operators in
                                      26




12 (8) firms, 84 (51) of whom worked on time-rates and 99 (69) on piece-

rates. According to our previous discussion, a dominant identification

function of schooling would imply substantially lower schooling levels

for piece-rate workers.45 In fact, Pencavel finds for males that the

average level of schooling is 9.16 for those in piece-rate and 9.71 for

those on an hourly rate and for females 9.57 and 9.22 respectively, re-

suits which are not supportive of a major screening role.

    A test for the variance component of the screening return postulated

in section II can be made explicit under the assumption that post-schooling

investments are zero. If the variance effects are operative, the private

return to schooling may   be   larger than   that   which   is   warranted   by actual
productivity   differences. However, as firms learn about productivities,

wage rates will adjust to reflect performance. Wages should, thus,

regress to their certainty levels over time.                                             S
    Recall that ambiguous theoretical results were obtained with respect

to the effect of uncertainty on labor demand. Initial wages might be

above or below that which would prevail under uncertainty. With perfect

information and the absence of human capital accumulation after the

schooling period, mean wage profiles for the two schooling classes would

be horizontal as depicted in Figure 3. Those with more schooling would

earn AC more at all levels of experience. However, with variance effects

favoring the more educated and assuming a negative impact of uncertainty

on labor demand, wage profiles would be given by A'B and C'D where full

learning is assumed to occur T years after initial work experience. Wage

profiles would, thus, converge with experience.46


                                                                                         S
                                        27




                                  FIGURE 3


           Wage
           rate

              A                                                       B
                                                             (more   schooled)
              A'


              C                                                       D
                                                             (less   schooled)


              C'




                   a        T                                  Experience


      Complications arise when there are opportunities for on-the-job

training. If post-school investment behavior is systematically related

to   educational attainment, any degree      of convergence or   divergence can
be elicited. If there is a positive association, earnings profiles will
fan out over time. In this case, variance effects will be discernable

only if they outweigh training effects.
         convergence implies declining earnings differentials between
      Since

schooling classes with experience, a negative coefficient on a schooling-
experience    interaction term (SP) would     be   consistent with a positive bias

in    schooling's private return due to imperfect information. However, a
positive interaction term results (Equation 3, Tables 2 and 3)            for private

wage workers, those who would be subject to uncertainty effects. If such

a    bias exists, it is swamped   by further training investments. For the
self-employed, there should     be   no relative certainty return so that        earnings
                                         28



profiles should diverge to a greater extent for this group if investment

patterns are identical for the two groups. There is no strong confirmation

of this effect.

     It could be argued that the positive ability-experience interaction

observed for the private class of workers is confirmation of schoolingts

informational role. If the ability measure reflects productivity endow-

ments, its impact should rise with experience as firm learning occurs.

Mreoever, tie fact that      this   interaction is insiguificaiit for self-

employed workers should strengthen the argunent. However, the ability

measure is never relevant for the self-employed; indeed, a larger ability

effect   would be expected for this group at initial experience (P = 0)
than for those privately employed since, if the latter are subject to a
screening    process, individuals of different ability would be more equally

compensated. This, however, is not the case.


V.     SIJMvIARY



     Recently,     questions have been raised concerning the underlying nature

of the observed relationship between income and schooling. The issue

revolves around the extent to which formal schooling serves to augment

worker productivity and, thus, social product, as opposed to conveying

information to employers about the probable productive capabilities of

prospective workers without, in itself, affecting those capabilities.

     This   paper    first explored a theoretical model of this latter "screening"

role and then attempted an empirical investigation of its relative impor-

tance. The basis for the model was that individual productivities are

unknown     to   the firm prior to hiring and   are   neither instantaneously nor
                                    29



costlessly determinable from direct observation of on-the-job performance.

The information available to the firm was restricted to knowledge (a sub-

jective notion was also treated) of the first two moments of the population's

skill distribution with output a function of occupation-specific aggregate

skill levels and capital. Within an expected profit maximization framework,

uncertainty in the form of skill variance was shown to lead to a reduction in

expected profits at the previous input scales and to substitution and pro-

duction effects on factor employment. It was further demonstrated that the

demand for workers associated with a given schooling group depended upon both

the average skill level and the variance —mean skill ratio of the group. Thus,

schooling's private return could be viewed as a reflection of its informational

content, i.e., its sorting function. Further, eliminating between group skill

variance through the use of identification or screening devices was shown to

lead to a more efficient allocation of workers both within and across firms.

Therefore, even if the higher average skill levels associated with the more

schooled were not produced in the schooling process, schooling's social benefit

would be positive.

     Several tests aimed at distinguishing between the two views were conducted.

A comparison of self-employed and private wage workers with respect to their

schooling decision and the life-cycle effects of schooling on earnings yielded

results which are not consistent with the existence of a substantial identi-
                               I
fication or screening function. Other independent evidence was also reported

which support this view.
     APPENDIX A
                                                   30


                                                                                                     .
             Consider the production function given by equation Cl) in the text.

     First-order conditions for                  profit maximization are:

                (A.1) V          = q(, S2 "'               R, R2, ...,   R,     K)



                (A.2) L =          AL
                                       J


                (A.3) K            A4K

                          A =     MC =
                (A.4)                      P,.


             Totally differentiating (A.l) to (A.4) with respect to

     in matrix fonn yields
                                                                                     and rewriting
                                                                                                     .
                        • . ..
                  1                V



     /0          L1L1             L1L        L1K

5)

         L
          V
                  LL
                   vi             LL
                                   VV        LK                          v
                                                                      L a2


                                                                     -
                                                                                 I
                        •••                                                 2
                  KL1             KL                                     Ka
                                                     K/daj




                                                                                                     S
                                                                                 31



                   Solving                for    dLIK/dt1, the effect of                      skill variance in the 2,th labor

          input   on the employment of the kth labor input, yields


(A. 6)     =
                [(            -                         -
                                                            r1            cTL Lk -                  1ui2



          where           is the determinant of                     the left-hand square m.trix and                  the   sub-'.


          scripted 'S                 are       the relevant co-factors.

          The substitution effect is

                                        2                   LT
 (A. 7)
           1 dLk
                      =
                                  v "L.c1               j jffk        -        K           K KL
          Lk dc               j=l         4LJ
                                                                               K
                  3       3K
          But
                                                33k ,
                                          = cx.a.       where cx. is the cost share of L. and cx. is the
                  LL                                                                            jk
          Allen-Uzawa partial elasticity of substitution. Therefore,

                                                            4'L 2
            1 d.L                           v                    ji                           Ka2
                              -       -                                   -

           'k dc                           j=l   cx jk q                         cxKcYKk




          where, iaso,


               LJcY
                          =
                                  -                                                  =
                                                                                         -                  +
                                                                                                                F-
                          =
                              -                              and              E(x.
                                                                                      k
                                                                                          +          = 0.

                  The substitution effect due to an increase in variance associated

          with the £th labor input is, therefore, a weighted sum of percentage

          changes in marginal expected factor products, where the weights are pro-

          ducts of factor cost shares and partial elasticities of substitution.

          The th term in (A.8) will be negative, where this implies a positive

          effect on the employment of Lk if the increase in variance either reduces
                                                                          32



              the marginal expected product of the th input and the 1th input is

              a substitute for the kth ((:1                        > 0) or the th input's marginal expected

              product is enhanced and the 1th input is complementary to the kth jk <                                    0)
              The marginal expected product of the th input will decline if                                        < 0

              and will rise if F- -                  - > 0.            Opposite conditions hold for the i       term
                                             L))9,LJ.
              to be positive.

                     Note that in the two-factor case (A.8) reduces to


                                                 4    2                        2
                           -      -                            -
                                          L LL                     K


              BUt
                    °LLL
                           =
                                  cXKaKL
                                                 so   that



              1 '                          La2 - Ko2
(A. 10)               =
                           aKaKL
                                                                   L
                da                                            'K


              Similarly


 (        )           = - cXLGKL                          -                so
                                                              —i-1


 (A.12)
              1 dl   - 1   cJJ(
                                      =              ___ -                     which   is the expression in the text.




                                                                                                                             .
APPENDIX B
                                                      TABLE   1
                        MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF SELECTED VARIABLES FOR
                                 PRIVATE   WAGE AND   SELF-EMPLOYED WORKERS*
                               Private                                                   Self-Fmployed
                       Mean         Standard Deviation                          Mean               Standard   Deviation
                                                                                11,860                   10,420
Earnings               8,832               5,897
                                                                                 9.116                    0.7027
Ln Earnings            8.921               0.5696
                                                                                 15.31                    2.345
Scholing               15.61               2.181
                                                                                 0.117                    1.769
                       0.1555              1.809
Ability
                                                                                 10.60                    8.692
                       10.62               8.332
Experience
                                                                                           1,906
No. of Observations             7,893
*
 All tables   of descriptive statistics pertain to all     life-cycle points.
S                                                                                                                S
                                                       TABLE 2
                                                                             FOR
                         MEANS AND STANDAPD DEVIATIONS OF SELECIED VARIABLES
                      PPJVATE   WAGE AND   SELF-EMPLOYED WORKERS ON BOTh FIRST AND   FIFTh JOB
                                Private                                                Self-Employed
                                      Standard Deviation                    Mean                 Standard Deviation
                        Mean
                                                                             12,920                    10,670
Earnings                8,833                5,840
                                                                              9.209                     0.7088
Ln Earnings             8.921                0.5712
                                             2.169                            15.18                     2.794
Schooling               15.64
                                              1.822                           -0.0091                   1.688
Ability                 0.1596
                                              8.321                           10.86                     9.072
Experience              10.59
                                                                                          690
No. of ObservationS              7,570
                                                         TABLE   3
                            MEANS AND STANDARD DEIVATIONS OF SELECTEDVARIABLES FOR
                               PRIVATE   WAGE AND   SELF-EMPLOYED NON-PROFESSIONALS
                                    Private                                            Self-Employed
                            Mean         Standard Deviation                   Mean                 Standard Deviation
                            8,832             6,700                           11,837                    10,411
      Earnings
      Ln Earnings           8.92              0.559                            9.117                     0.695
                            14.54             1.909                            14.44                     1.791
      Schooling
Lfl
                                                                                                         1.748
      Ability               -0.184            1.709                             -0.111
                            10.99             8.518                            10.98                     8.888
      Experience
      No. of Observations             4,038                                                1,182
    .                                                .                                                              .
                                                   TABLE   4
                      MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF SELECTED VARIABLES FOR PRIVATE
                      WAGE AND   SELF-EMPLOYED NON-PROFESSIONALS ON FIRST   AND   FIFifi   JOB
                              Private                                                 Self-Finployed
                      Mean          Standard Deviation                      Mean                       Standard Deviation
Earnings              8,869              6,157                               12,355                        10,507
Lii Ear-ings          8.923              0.573                                9.165                          0.698
                      14.55              1.921                                13.95                        1.809
Schooling
Ability               -0.190             1.720                                -0.234                        1.676
                      10.976             8.517                                11.227                        9.314
Experience
No. of Observations              3,920                                                           463
                                                          TABLE 5
                                    MEANS AN]) STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR COLLEGE GRADUATE
                              PRIVATE    WAGE AND   SELF-ENPLOYED NON-PROFESSIONALS WORKERS
                                    Private                                               Self-Employed
                            Mean          Standard Deviation                     Mean               Standard Deviation
      Ln Earnings           8.987              0.646                             9.148                    0.750
                                               1.105                             4.915                    0.972
      Quality               4.964
                            0.165              1.686                              0.140                   1.786
      Ability
I.-
                                               8.124                             10.399                   8.414
      Experience            10.421
      No. of Observations                                                                     398
                                     1,336
S                                                          S                                               S
                                                          TABLE 6
            EARNINGS REGRESSIONS FOR ALL INDIVIDUALS WITH THE SAME WORKER CLASS
                                                 ON 1st   AND 5th JOB
                                 Coeffici ents (t-val ues in parentheses)
                                 (1)                                     (2)                        (3)
                                       Self-                                 Self-                       Self-
                Private                Employed             Private          Employed   Private          Employed
S               -0.0233                -0.0016              0.0262           0.0460     0.0203           0.0476
                (6.55)                 (0.18)               (11.79)          (8.02)     (8.01)           (8.08)
P               0.0129                 -0.0059              0.0803           0.0725     0.0800           0.0726
                (2.76)                 (0.48)               (39.93)          (10.97)    (40.08)          (11.06)
                -O.OO13                -0.0010              -0.0018          -0.0012    -0.0015          -0.0012
                (14.94)                (3.35)               (16.73)          (4.25)     (16.74)          (4.29)
SP              0.0041                 0.0048
                (15.58)                (7.36)
A               0.0043                 0.0001                                           0.0279            -0.0104
                (1.01)                 (0.004)                                          (10.34)           (1.08)
AP              0.0022                 -0.009
                (6.85)                 (0.89)
Intercept       0.0134                 8.6993               —0.037           7.9705     0.0757            7.9462
                (0.09)                 (63.51)              (0.38)           (87.62)    (0.76)            (85.32)
R2                       .5335                                       .5029                       .5094
                                                       TABLE 7
                EARNINGS REGRESSION FOR NON—PROFESSIONALS WITH SAME WORKER CLASS
                                              ON 1st   AND 5th JOB
                                  Coefficients (t-values in parentheses)
                                  (1)                                 (2)                      (3)
                                    Self-                                Self-                      Self-
                  Private           Employed             Private         Employed   Private         Employed
    S             0.0491            0.0384               0.0473          0.0455     -0.0118         0.0012
                  (12.9)            (3.3)                (12.0)          (3.7)      (1.9)           (0.1)
    P             0.066             0.054                0.066           0.054      -0.016          -0.004
                  (22.5)            (6.3)                (22.5)          (6.3)      (2.1)           (0.2)
                  -0.0011           -0.0006              -0.0011         -0.0006    -0.0009         -0.0006
                  (8.4)             (1.7)                (8.4)           (1.7)      (7.2)           (1.5)
    SP                                                                              0.0055          0.0040
                                                                                    (12.2)          (3.1)
    A                                                    0.008           -0.027     -0.019          -0.004
                                                         (1.8)           (2.1)      (2.7)           (0.2)
    AP                                                                              0.0024          -0.002
                                                                                    (4.8)           (1.5)
    Intercept     -0.47             8.16                 -0.34           8.05       -0.10           8.68
                  (2.7)             (49.2)               (1.8)           (46.4)     (0.37)          (33.0)
    R2                     .418                                   .419                       .447
a
                                         40

                                  FOOTNOTES


                                                                                  .
'For   a formal presentation of the argument see Spence (1973), (1974).

2Spence's model is also concerned with input-quality uncertainty, but the
model is constructed in such a way that expected output is unaffected by
productivity variation except insofar as firms must decide on which jobs to
assign to which individuals. Although this latter consideration is impor-
tant and is explored here as well, it will be demonstrated that even in the
absence of this specific allocation problem expected output (and social
product) will be affected by the existence of a heterogenous labor pool.
Moreover, the model presented in this paper explores the implications of
skill variance on factor employment and develops criteria for the direction
of substitution and output responses akin to those found in usual derived
demand theory.


31n Spence's earlier published work (Spence (1973)) no explicit presentation
of the information's social value was given and in a strict interpretation
of the model the social benefit to schooling would, in a pure screening
world, be zero. In his later work (Spence (1974)), the introduction of job
assignment elicits a positive social product to schooling's sorting role,
a possibility previously established under very restrictive assumptions by
Arrow (1973). A more general specification of this proposition is advanced
here which remains even in the absence of alternative occupational assignment.


 These transformation functions are assumed to be technologically given and, as
such, fully determine occupational categories. For a linear specification, the
weighting factors can be considered as fixed utilization rates (proportions of
each skill utilized per unit time);         n
                                     s.. =     U. k.
                                          '    £=l jl II
where       is the utilization rate for the th productive attribute. If all
such transfonTlations are linear, occupations are characterized by the fixed
manner in which attributes are utilized. In the more general case, utilization
rates vary with the proportionate usage of attributes.


               >   0;
                              F    < 0    all i.
                        52
6Appendix A provides a full treatment of the general case along with explicit
proofs of the propositions which follow.


       subscripts refer to partial derivatives, e.g.,   $R =


    reality, since only a second-order approximation is taken, this statement
is only accurate if all moments of the skill distribution which positively
affect the firm's expected output are unchanged in the comparison.
                                         41




9
               0


               L LL KL >0.
               K LK KK
10This formula is independent of the approximation and merely states that
the percentage alteration in factor ratios depends on the variance induced
percentage change in the marginal rate of substitution between the factors.


The notion that convexities of marginal curves are important for dispersion
effects is not new. In fact, it forms the basis for the Rothschild and
Stiglitz (1971) criticism of the mean-variance approach in expected utility
analysis.

12From   (3)

               Kc2
                     =   4 L FK,   and        =
                                                  4 (F +
l3   examples, for the quadratic production function all third partials
vanish and the sign of the substitution effect must be negative; less of
the uncertain factor is utilized. However, for a Cobb-Douglas production
function,       > 0 and       < 0 s that the substitution effect works in

favor of the labor input.

14For the competitive finn scale effects are depicted in the accompanying
figure. Labelled points correspond to those in Figure 1 of the text. Given
product price, P, output is Y0 prior to the introduction of uncertainty.
With the intrcduction of skill variance, marginal expected cost rises.

         MEC
                                     3/I




                         Y%<:?
                                                          42




There are three possibilities for the net scale effett. If the initial impact                                 S
of uncertainty is to reduce expected output to =        the net scale effect is
                                                                                  e'
zero; the direct production effect is a movement from B1 to C and the induced
effect from C back to B1. If expected output initially falls only to     >
                                                                  the induced
(B, as in Figure 1) the direct production effect is outweighed by          to
effect and the net scale effect is negative; output falls further from
     Likewise, B2 illustrates a positive net scale effect.


'5By our previous analysis, L, the no-screening optimal labor input, is not
invariant to the use of the infomiation. The perceived potential gain from
screening is, therefore, larger than that depicted in equation (17).


16The exact relationship between the group                         parameters       in order to have a
preference for the more educated is that
                       2           2         -
                     cC
                           -                                       (-'c -
                                                                            ii)
                                                                       -
                                                          -
Note that since                < 0     and       >   0,        (     ,,       ) must be positive and
                                                                     .vI.



greater than unity. In some sense, mean differences dominate. Preference
for the more schooled at equal wages will be exhibited when the above inequality
                                                                                                              5
holds at Lc =
                      L.
17Actually, the necessary and sufficient condition is


                               <   S
Since            <   0, the statement in the text is only valid if
                                                                                                >   0.   If

        <   0,             < 0 is sufficient but not necessary for convexity.



         is again an understatement of the gain since L will, in turn, be
altered. See Fn. 11.

 19Under    the      strict preference assumption _ft                             must be positive for all

 Lc <       L.       If strict preference is not assumed it will be positive to the
point where the optimal LC/LH ratio is realized and negative thereafter.
 Note also that the size of the return is also related to the level of marginal
 skill product () and the output cost of uncertainty 'R•
                                     43




     can further be demonstrated that, assuming convexity, the revenue incre-
ment declines as preferred workers are added, i.e., d2Y
                                                             <   0.
                                                    dL
                                                         c

21Actually, they may both rise relative to the certainty case if the intro-
duction of uncertainty increases the overall demand for labor relative to
capital.

22(Xitput responses are again ignored.

23There is a third component not discussed here which concerns the finn's
uncertainty about the true value of average skill levels. Assuming that
finms have a subjective notion as to the level of average skill one can
derive similar expressions for factor demand as those in the text. See
Wolpin (1974).

24The preceeding analysis has several obvious extensions. First, non-zero
cost devices (to the firm) can be treated and optimal patterns of screening
techniques can be traced. The intensity with which firms interview or test
prospective employees will depend on the level of the marginal expected
revenue function (equation 18) and its rate of decline in conjunction with
the marginal expected cost of identifyingmore productive types. Second,
since aggregate skill is simply the product of average skill and the number
of workers one can just as easily apply the model to uncertainty about hours
of work associated with different subpopulations. Thus, even if women, for
example, on average can be expected to work the same number of hours per year,
the fact that , as a group, there is more variability in their labor supply
will lead to a reduction in the demand for their services relative to men.

25 mechanism has been discussed so far which would motivate the more "able"
individuals to obtain schooling and, thus, make it a viable screen if there
are no productivity augmenting effects. In fact, the less productive, if
they perceive the same benefits, would have the same schooling incentive.
One way in which to generate a positive correlation between ability and schooling
is to assume that schools are themselves capable of sorting out the less pro-
ductive. In essence, the less able face lower schooling success probabilities
and, thus, have higher expected schooling acquisition costs. This is, in
essence, Spence's major assumption.

26This assumes that i,the population mean, is unchanged for otherwise aggregate
skill would be altered, changing the magnitude of F


27Throughout this analysis factor employment was fixed. The social benefit
to screening will also include a component which allows firms to alter their
factor proportions in response to the information.
                                           44



28This   is the case treated by Arrow (1973) and Spence (1974).


29See Gintis (1971) and Griliches and Mason (1973).

30See [ayard and Psacharopoulos (1974) for a fuller treatment of this
point. Note, however, that this test concerns the use of schooling as an
                      information that would be imparted regardless of schoolings
31Taubman and Wales (1973) have no theoretical justification for this defini-
tion of screening. It is indeed possible that the informational content of
schooling is such that there is little, if any, occupational misallocation
even with occupational restrictions.

32The data set utilized is the same as the one used by this author, the
NBER-Thorndike sample, so that its discussion will be deferred until later.


33Layard and Psacharopoulos make basically the same argument. However, they
fail to note that the problem is strongly reflected in Th's results.

34P. Taubman and 1. Wales. "Education, Ability and Screening." Journal of
Political Economy (81). p.46.

35lnitial job, which may have occurred prior to i'M II, is also reported.

36For this table, individuals were categorized on the basis of their last
reported job. Thus, an individual who, in 1969, was self-employed was
entered as such regardless of his previous status, i.e., all of the experience
points corresponding to the individual were assigned to the self-employed
class. Clearly, it would have been nre accurate to make the assignment on
the basis of all jobs between the first and last but, since many individuals did
not report intermediate jobs, this method would have severely restricted the
sample size, particularly within the self-employed class. However, regressions
were also estimated for individuals reporting the same employment status on
both the first and last job alone. The results are qualitatively unaltered as
seen by a comparison of Table 2 in the text to Table 6 in Appendix B.

37The ability measure is a composite of the seventeen tests and was constructed
by Al Beaton of the Educational Testing Service to approximate an IQ type
measure.


38Letting Y1 = x1    +
                       U.1
                           and     =
                                     x2 2 + U2 refer
                                                       to the separate
regressions for the two worker classes, the pooled regression is of the
form

          =           =   [x1 oJ i1         +[uj        =   +

               LYZJ       L°   X2J   $2J        L.u2J
This construction facilitates hypothesis testing between samples since, for
example, simple t-tests require knowledge only of the variance-covariance
coefficient matrix.
                                        45



39We are assuming that customer screening by education is not so strong as
to create a large incentive for the self-employed to acquire the signal. However,
we also perform the analysis deleting professionals (doctors, lawyers, etc.),
40 thou or wom.cus.omer.creening might be most relevant
  The null nypotnesis ot coetticient equaiity is rejected as the associated
t-values are 2.4 and 3.4 for the respective equations.


41The corresponding figures for those within the same worker class on the
first and fifth jobs are 15.6 and 15.2 respectively. See Table 2 of
Appendix B.

42The resultswhen employment status (private vs self-employed) is also
matched are reported in Table 7, Appendix B. The corresponding schooling
levels are found in Table    4, Appendix   B.

43The t-values     for the tests of coefficient equality are 1.0 and   0.6   in
equations 1   and 2 respectively.

44The quality variable is a Gourman    rating. See J.   Gourman,   The Gourman
Report, The continuing Education Institute, 1967.

451n fact,    if
              schooling did not augment productivities then why would anyone
choosing an occupation in which performance     is
                                               easily measured incur the
cost of schooling.

46 conclusion is not independent of the learning process. All that is
being said is that the more educated may earn more relative to the less
educated than is warranted by true productivity differences and that over
time relative wages will begin to reflect this initial bias. The incor-
poration of learning into a human capital production framework is clearly
relevant to the shape of earnings profiles. Firm learning may in fact be
endogenous and may also interact with individual decisions about human
capital accumulation.

47There are several qualifications to this statement. If schools them-
selves sort individuals by establishing entry barriers, but are rigidly
and correctly applied, the less able among the self-employed can not err
by choosing more than their optimal schooling level. Thus, the only way
to obtain our results would be for the more productive to obtain less
schooling than their privately employed counterpart. However, for this
to occur the decision as to whether one is to be self-employed or not
must be made prior to the termination of schooling. If it is not, then
there is no reason for the self-employed to act differently than salaried
workers. Moreover, even if individuals have some notion that they will
be self-employed, they can hedge against uncertainty by obtaining more
schooling than they otherwise would so as to be able to signal employers
about their capabilities if necessary.
                                            46


                                                                                      S
                                      REFERENCES



Arrow, Kenneth J. "Higher Education as a Filter." Journal of Public

       Economics 2, 1973.

Gintis, H. "Education and the Characteristics of Worker Productivity."

       A.E.R.,      May 1971.

Griliches,    Z.,    and Mason, W. "Education, Income, and Ability." J.P.E. 80,
       No. 3, suppi. May/June 1972.
Layard, R. and Psacharopoulos, G. "The Screening Hypothesis and the Returns
       to Education." J.P.E. 82, No. 5, September/October 1974.

Mincer, J. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: National Bureau of

       Economic Research, 1974.

Pencavel, J. "An Essay on the Economics of Work Effort and Wage Payment

       Systems." Unpublished paper, Stanford University, 1974.

Rothschild, M. and Stiglitz J. "Increasing Risk II: Its Economic Consequences."

       J.E.T., March 1971.

Spence, M. "Job Market Signalling." Q.J.E. 87, No. 3, August 1973.

__________       "Competitive and Optimal Responses to Signals: An Analysis of
       Efficiency and Distribution." J.E.T. March 1974.

Stiglitz,Joseph."The Theory of 'Screening', Education and the Distribution of

        Income." Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 354, Yale University, 1973.

Taubman, P. and Wales, T. "Higher Education, Mental Ability, and, Screening."

       J.P.E., January/February 1973.



                                                                                      .
                                  47




Welch, Finis "Formal Education and the Distributional Effects of Agricultural

      Research and Extension." in W. Fishel, Resource Allocation in Agricultural

      Research. University of Minnesota Press, 1971.

Wolpin, K. Education, Screening and the Demand for Labor of Uncertain Quality.

      Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The City University of New York, 1974.
