                   NBER Working Paper Series




          TINE-UTILIZATION OF A POPULATION OF GENERAL
              SURGEONS IN A PREPAID GROUP PRACTICE

                                 by
                     Richard N. Watkins, M.D.
                 Edward F. X. Hughes, M.D., M.P.H.
                       Eugene M. Lewit, B.A.


                     Working Paper No. 105




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                           October 1975



                  Preliminary;   not for quotation.
NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

ADDRESS   REQUESTS TO: Dr. Edward F. X.  Hughes, Department of
          Community Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
          Fifth Avenue and 100th Street, New York, NY 10029
                             Acknowledgments


     We would like to thank Drs. Victor Fuchs, Kurt Deuschle, and

Michael   Grossman for their help in completing this paper. We would

also lilce to thank Mssrs. Donald Wright and John Wolfe and Ms. Barbara

Chamberlain for research assistance. We are also indebted to the members

of the Health Advisory Committee of the National Bureau of Economic

Research for their helpful comments. We would also like to thank

most sincerely both populations..of general surgeons for their cooperation

throughout these studies.




SUPPORT: This research was supported by a United States Public Health
          Service research grant (5 P01 HS 00451) from the National
          Center of Health Services esearch; Health Career Scientist
          Award No. 1786 from the Health Research Council of the City
          of New York; and by a training grant (3 A08 AR 00090 02) from
          the Division of Allied Health Manpower, U.S. Publich Health
                                                                    -
           Service.




AFFILIATIONS:   Department of Community Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
                Medicine, City University of New York; the National Bureau
                of Economic Research, New York City; and The Group Health
                Cooperative of Puget Sound, Seattle, Washington.
                                Abstract


      A population of seven general surgeons in a prepaid group practice

 previously shown to have a mean   operative   work load' of 9.2 HE per week

 were found to have a mean standardized seven day working week of 56.2

 hours exclusive of evening activities. The surgeons also devoted a

 mean of 6.7 evening hours to professional activities for a total working

 week of 62.9 hours. Comparisons of the time utilization of this population of

         surgeons with a population of previously studied counity

 surgeons revealed that the prepaid group surgeons were able to maintain

 a surgical output more thaxt double that of the community surgeons

 without having to devote twice as much time to professional activities.

• Economies in the utilization of surgical manpower in the prepaid group

 appear to stem from geographic and specialty restrictions on the       -


 scope of work of the surgeons, from a reduction of waiting time in the
 office, and .from the utilization of paraprofessional personnel for

 operative assisting.
                          Introduction


     The mean operative work load of a population of seven general

surgeons in a prepaid group practice was found to be 9.2 hernia equivalents

(HE) per week. 1* This mean weekly work load approximated an informal

consensus standard elaborated in a previous study for an active yet not

overburdening surgical work load (10 HE/week) and was more than twice

the mean work load found in a population of 19 general surgeons in

suburban community practice in the New York metropolitan area (4.3

HE/week)."2 A time—motion study of this latter population of community

surgeons revealed a mean total seven day working week, including evening

activities, of 44.3 hours, of which 38.5 hours were devoted to professional
            3
activities.   This latter study also demonstrated a statistically significant

relationship between the operative work loads of the individual surgeons

and the time they devoted to surgical care. To investigate the allocation

of professional time associated with a two—fold increase in operative

work loads in the prepaid group setting, the time utilization of the

seven general surgeons there was measured through both time—motion and

self—reported time—log techniques arid the results compared with those of

the time—motion study of the community surgeons.


    *
        One hernia equivalent (HE) is defined as the amount of surgical

work involved in the operative, pre—, and post—operative care of an

adult patieni 'indergoing a unilateral inguinal herniorrhaphy.1'2
                                   —2—



                                  Methods


Characteristics    of the General Surgeons and Their Working Environment:

        The characteristics of the seven general surgeons and the prepaid

group practice have been previously described.' The surgeons ranged in

age from 40 to 56; were all board certified; and, at the time of the

study, delivered all the general surgery to the 158,000 subscribers of

the prepaid plan. The general surgeon to population ratio in the prepaid

group practice was 4.4/100,000, roughly one half that both of the U.S.

as a whole at the time of the study (9.8/100,000) and of the suburban

community previously studied (lO.lIiOO,O0O).


Their Working Schedule:

        The seven general surgeons had a highly structured daily rotation

to enable them to share the burdens of office work, operating, surgical

assisting, and consultation as evenly as possible each week. The

schedule functioned in such a way that each day of the 49 surgeon—day

week was designated by a specific principal task and the task days were

then allocated to each surgeon in numbers consistent with an even

distribution of tasks. The days were divided into operating days,

assisting days, office days, weekday consulting days, weekend consulting

days and regular weekend days.

        Operating days were days on which a surgeon performed primary

elective surgery. No elective surgery was scheduled for a surgeon on a

day other than one of his operating days. On an operating day, in

addition to performing his elective surgery, a surgeon made rounds but

had no scheduled office work. Each surgeon was assigned two operating

days per week, for a total of 14 operating days in the 49 surgeon—day

week.                :
                                 —3—



     The bulk of surgical assisting on these operating days was performed

by operating room technicians trained within the prepaid group practice

to specialize in surgical assisting. The skill of these technicians was

highly valued by the general surgeons. It was felt, however, that

assisting on complex cases as bypass grafts required the judgement and

skills of a surgeon. Accordingly, one of the general surgeons was

scheduled to assist his colleagues each Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday

morning when all the general surgeons tried to schedule their more

complex surgery. On such an assisting day, the assisting surgeon had a

regular afternoon office work load. Thus, there were three assisting

days per week.

     Each surgeon was scheduled to be the general surgical consultant to

the prepaid group practice one day per week. On a consult day, the

surgeon was responsible for answering all   requests   for urgent general

surgical consultation from any of the approximately 190 other physicians

in the prepaid group practice. The bulk of this consultation was on

hospitalized patients with occasional consults to the Emergency Department

or to a physician in an outpatient setting. The consultant surgeon

performed all surgery generated by these consults. The surgeons were

assigned as consultants not only on weekdays but also on weekends. On

a consult weekday, the surgeon made his usual rounds, had a light load

of office patients scheduled for the morning and no scheduled work

thereafter aside from attending to the consultation needs of the prepaid

group. Consult weekend days differed from week days only in that there

were no scheduled office visits on these days. Thus, there were five

consult weekdays and two consult weekend days per week. On weekends,
                                 —4—



when not assigned as consultant, it was not unusual for the surgeons to

make rounds each day and to see a few office patients on Saturday morning.

There were twelve such unassigned weekend days per week.

     Any day during the week not aflocated to one of the above categories

was an office day. On an office day, a surgeon had scheduled office

sessions in both the morning and the afternoon and made his usual rounds.

Be had no scheduled surgery, assisting or consulting. There were

thirteen such office days per week. Table I lists the type of days by

their frequency in and share of the 49 surgeon—day week.

Mechanisms of the Study:

     Data were gathered on the time—utilization of the surgeons by both

observed, tIme—motion and self—reported, time—log techniques. Resourcs

allowed two and a half weeks for the time—motion analysis in the fall of

a recent year. In view of the fact that thirteen week days were thus

available for observation, it was decided to sample heavily from the

most frequently occuring week days, i.e. six operating and six office

days and to fill out the sample with one observation of the next most

frequently occuring week day, a consulting day. Specific days for

observation were selected randomly not repeating the same surgeon for

the same type of day. After the sample of six operating and six office

days was selected, the thirteenth available study day was expended in

studying the consultant surgeon for that day.

     Permission for participation in the study was obtained from each of

the surgeons well in advance of the period of observation. Each surgeon

was notified of his specific day for observation, however, only 24 hours

before that observation was to begin. Each surgeon was met by the observer
                                      —4a—



                                  TABLE   I

                  TYPE OF DAY BY FREQUENCY IN AND SHARE OF
                             49 SURGEON—DAY WEEK



                          Frequency  in 49                 Share of 49
Type   of   Day            Surgeon-Day Week              Surgeon-Day Week

Operating day                    14                           .286

Office day                       13                           .265

Consult day                       5                           .102

Assisting day                     3                           .061

Weekend consult day               2                           .041

Weekend day                      12                           .245


Total                            49                          1.00
(R.N.W.) at the very beginning of his professional day, queried as to

the nature and duration of any professional activities during the previous

evening, and then accompanied by the observer until the end of all

scheduled professional activities on that day.

     The observer recorded the individual activities of the surgeons to

the nearest minute, utilizing pretested codes and forms, similar to

those used in the previous time—motion study of the community surgeons.

In addition, he recorded the location of each activity and its relevance

to patient care. Activities involving patient care were defined as

"direct" patient care if they were performed in the presence of a patient

(e.g. performing a physical examination or a surgical procedure) and as

"indirect" patient care if they were performed in the absence of a

patient (e.g. writing orders or reviewing an X—ray.

     Direct patient care activities were further classified as either

surgical or non—surgical, depending on both their nature and the complaint

of the patient involved. Surgical problems were broadly defined to

include not only those that might be expected to lead to or be the

result of an operation, e.g. evaluation of a hernia or post—operative

wound care, but also diagnostic problems as abdominal pain that might,

at some point, reasonably be expected to involve a surgeon, if only on a

consulting basis. The treating of illnesses neither resulting from nor

attendant to surgical therapy, as upper re:piratory infections or skin

disorders, was classified as non—surgical patient care. The activities

involved in each patient encounter were recorded as were the characteristics

of each patient seen. Each surgical patier.t was further classified by

operative status: pre—operative, post—operative, operative, or non—

operative.
                                 —6—

     In addition to recording these and the other professional activities

o'f the surgeons, the observer also recorded time devoted to personal

activities, including meals, during the working day. Both the observer

and the surgeons were carefully instructed to refrain from any interaction

during the course of this study. When such interaction occurred, it was

recorded as observer time.

     At the end of the first day of observation, each surgeon was given

a structured log form to record his professional activities during both

the daytime and evening hours for the next six consecutive days. To

facilitate both the ease and the accuracy of this self—recording, the

log forms requested information on time utilization in pre—defined broad

categories as operating, office activities, and rounds in units of

fifteen minutes. The degree of detail elicited in the time—motion

portion of the study, e.g. direct vs. indirect patient care time on

rounds, etc. was not requested here. Thus, through both time—motion

techniques and the self—reported logs, data were collected on all the

professional activities of the surgeons for a seven day week.

     To validate the accuracy of the self—recorded data, evening activities

and daytime activities were aggregated separately and the time reported

for specific daytime activities compared with the time observed for the

same activities on the observed days. On the basis of this validation,

the data were pooled and a standardized seven day mean working week was

calculated for this population of surgeons. The components of this mean

working week were then analysed as were the data reflecting patient

encounters. Ttal evening time at professional activities was also

calculated and added to the mean standardized seven day week to yield a

total seven day working week. The results were compared to those of the

time—motion study of the general surgeons in community practice.3
                                      —.7—




                                     Results


         The six observed operating days ranged in length from 6.2 to 12.1

    hours, with a mean of 9.4 hours and a coefficient of variation of 0.24.

    The six observed office days had a smaller range, 7.2 to 11.2 hours; a

    mean of 9.5 hours; and a coefficient of variation of 0.16. The one

    observed consult day lasted 9.2 hours. Though the amount of time spent

    in specific activities on office and operating days varied because of

    the difference in the major activity on the two types of days, time

    spent in activities which occurred regularly regardless of the type of

    day, such as rounds and meals, was, on the whole, remarkably similar on

    both types of days (Table II).

         Six of the surgeons self—recorded their activities on all six of

    their designated days while the seventh surgeon recorded his activities

    on only one day, for a total of 37 self—recorded days. To test the

    validity of this'self—recorded data, the self—recorded days were aggregated
•



    by type of day; evening activities were separated out; and, for office

    and operating days, the mean times reported for the entire day and for

    various activities during the day were compared with the mean times

    observed for these same activities on observed days. The results of
•



    this comparison are given in Table II.

         For office days, the mean duration of the ten self—recorded days

    differed from the mean of the six observed days by only 14 minutes. For

    operating day;, the difference in means was only 31 minutes. These

    differences, of two per cent and of six per cent of the observed days

    respectively, are not statistically significant. It is interesting
                                 —8—


to note that, for each type of day, the mean self—reported day exceeded

the observed. This observation is consistent with other comparisons of

observed and self—reported physician working hours, though the differences

noted here are less than those previously reported.3

     A comparison of the duration of the. individual activities on the

self—reported days and on the observed days revealed that for all the

major components of the working day, e.g. office activities, rounds,

operating room time, administrative activities, and meals, not only was

there no statistically significant difference between the mean times

reported and the mean times observed but often these times differed only

by a matter of minutes. (Table II). On each type of day the activity

most over—reported in the self—recorded data was rounds, for which,

across both types of days, self—recorded time exceeded observed time by

22 per cent.

     Table II aggregates in "other personal time" only that personal.

time that occurred at locations other than in the office or on rounds.

Personal time observed at those locations is included in the appropriate

categories. This category was the most under—reported of regularly

occurring activities in that, for both types of days, observed time was

three to four times that recorded. Although this category consists of

only a small proportion of the working day, 3.8 and 6.7 per cent of

observed operating and office days respectively, total personal time is

of some interest insofar as we would like an estimate of net professional

time on the job. Much of the difference between the observed and self—

reported personal time is probably due to the fact that because the log

forms requested information in units of fifteen minutes, much greater

than the median duration of observed personal activitIes (3.5 minutes),
                                                                         —8a—


                                                                      Tabis II


                                                        COMPARISON OF MEAN TINES AT SPECIFIC
                                                ACTIVITIES FOR SELF—REPORTED AND OBSERVED OFFICE AND
                                                                  OPERATING DAYS



                                Mean time              Mean time per      Ratio of mean             Mean     time      Mean tine per    Ratio of mean
                               per observed            self—reported     time per day of           per observed        self—reported   time per day
                                   office day           office day        self—reported            operating day       operating day    self—repor:e:
                                     (N—6)                (N].O)          to oberved                  (N.6)               (N.8)          to observe:
   Activity                        (hr. :nin.)          (hr. :min.)       office day                (hr. :min.)         (hr. :min.)     operating
Of fice:
                                     2:53                                                              :07
   Direct patient care:                  1:52                                                          :08
   Indirect patient care:

 Nonpatlent care:
   Administration:                       :18                                                           :08
   Internal travel:                      :05                                                           :03
   Waiting:                              :09                                                           :01
   Personal:                             :07            ________          ________                    :06
                                     5:24                 5:20                                                 .
                                                                             .99                      :32                   :30             .94
RoundS:

   Direct patient care:                  :53                                                          :53
   Indirect patient care:                :40                                                          :41

 Nonpatint care:
   Internal travel:                      :16                                                          :22
   Personal:                             :05            ________          ________                    :00               ________
                               -     1:55                 2:15              1.17                     1:57                 2:29             1.27
Operative Time:                      .




   •s primary surgeon:                   :00                                                         4:14
   As assisting surgeon:                 :00                                               .          :00
   Ambulatory:                           :00                                                          :17
   Indirect    patient care:             :00                                                          :20
                                                                                                                   -



  Nonpatient Care:
   Waiting:                              :00                                                          :21
   Internal trave1                       :00          ________           ________                     :07              ________         ________
                                         :00              :00              0.0                       5:19                5:34              1.05
Other Administration:

   Hospital:                             :14              :24                                         :01                  :15
   Medical group:                        :17              :00                                         :18                  :00
   Insurance:                            :00              :03            _______                      :00                  :04           _______
                                         :31              :27               .87                       :19                  :19            1.00


Meals:                                   :28              :28              1.00                       :30                  :31            1.03
                                                                                               -


Other Personal Time:                     :26              :09               .34                       :15                  :04             .27

Continuing Education:                    :25              :18               .72                       :00                  :15              NA
Miscellaneous:                           :20              :03               .15                      :30                   :11             .37     —
Mean day:                           9:30                9:44               1.02                     9:22                 9:53             1.06
                                -.9—


the surgeons did not report separately their briefer personal activities

but included them in the most proximate professional activity. The

similarity of the self—reported and the observed time in the office

supports such an inclusion of personal time in reported professional

activities. To account for this reporting of some personal time as

professional time, an estimate of the upper limits of all personal time

on the job is calculated below in discussing the standardized seven day

working week.

     With the validity of the self—reported data thus demonstrated, both

the self—reported and the observed days were pooled by type of day and a

composite mean for each type of day calculated. A mean standardized

seven day working week for this population of general surgeons was then

calculated by multiplying the composite mean for each type of day by the

share of that type of day in the 49 day surgeon—week, thereby weighting

the day by its relative frequency in the weekly schedule. The validity

of this calculation of the mean standardized working week was substantiated

by calculating a mean week from the weeks constructed from the six

surgeons' six self—reported days plus their observed day. This calculation

yielded a mean week differing from the mean standardized seven day

working week by only 38 minutes, a difference of only 1%.

   .Thé mean standardized seven day working week, excluding evenings,

was 56.2 hours (Table III). This working week was spent entirely in the

hospital of the prepaid plan. Over 85 per centof this mean week was

spent either in office activities, on rounds or in the operating room.

Other administrative activities (out—of—office) comprised five per cent

of the week. If the small amount of additional administrative activity
                                              TABLE III


                         COMPARISON OF T1E OISTRIBUTION OF TIME IN
                           MEAN WEEK BY TYPE OF ACTIVITY OF SEVEN
                       GENERAL SURGEONS IN A PREPAID GROUP PRACTICE
                      WITH 19 GENERAL SURGEONS IN COMMUNITY PRACTICE


                                 (1)                             (2)
                           Mean time per       Per cent    Mean time per      Per cent
                          activity per week    of mean    activity per week   of mean     Ratio
                             for pre—paid      working      for community     working    between
kctivity                    group practice      week          practice         week    (1) and (2)

Office:                       14:50              26.3           11:38          32.4      1.28

Rounds:                       17:56              31.9            3:49          10.6      4.70

Operative time:               14:25              25.6            8:17          23.1      1.74

  As primary surgeon:          12:54             22.9            6 iS          17.4      2.06
   As assisting surgeon:        1:31              2. 7           2:02           5. 7       75

)ther Administration:          2:34               4.5            1:02           2.9      2.48

Other direct patient
   care:                         :10               .3            1:19           3.4       .13
Other indirect patient
   care:                         :52              1.5            1:12           3.3       .72
4ea1s:                         2:44               4.9            1:28           4.8      1.86
)ther Personal:                  :57              1.7            1:59           5.5        .48

Continuing   Education:        1:17               2.2             :21           1.0      3.57
External Travel:                 :00              0.9            3:13           9.0      0.0
4iscellaneous:                  :32                .9           1:38            4.6       .33
iean Working Week:            56:13            100.0           35:55          100.0      1.57
                                                                        •

ota1 Evening Activity:         6:43              ....           3:33           ....       .79
ota1 Working Week:            62:56              ....          44:28           ....      1.42
Personal and Meal Time:        5:30              ....           5:50           ....       .94

Lotal Professional Week:      57:26              ....          38:38                     1.49
                                    —10—


observed in the surgeons' offices (Table II)    were   to occur regularly,

all administrative activities would approximate 3.6 hours, six per cent

of the mean week. Another three per cent of the week was devoted to a

variety of miscellaneous activities, including continuing education.

     As indicated above, the 57 minutes of "other personal time" aggregated

in Table III entails a possible under—reporting of total personal time

on the job. Support for this contention is found in the fact that a

mean of 31.4 minutes of total personal time was observed on the thirteen

days of observation while a mean of only 6.0 minutes was reported for

similar types of self—reported days. In an attempt to correct for such

under—reporting, it would appear reasonable to assume that the mean

amount   of   personal time observed on the days of observation (31.4 minutes)

could be a property common to all working days. Accordingly, since each

week contains 5.3 working days (e.g. all days except unassigned weekend

days), a total of 2.8 hours of personal time could be said to occur on

the job in a working week. In addition, 2.7 hours a week on the job

were devoted to meals. With the 5.5 hours devoted to these two activities

subtracted from the 56.2 hours spent on the job, 50.7 hours, 90 per cent

of the standardized week, could be said to be devoted to professional

activities.

     Data on evening activities were collected both from personal interviews

with the surgeons on their days of observation and from the self—reported

log forms. Information was gathered on 13 previous evenings through the

interviews and on 37 evenings through the log forms. There was no

systematic variation in the amount of evening activity by day of the

week, with the exception that no professional activity was reported
                                —11—


for Saturdays. Friday and Sunday evenings contained professional activities

comparable in duration to other evenings. Data on evening activities

collected by both methods were aggregated and a mean evening and its

components calculated (Table IV).*

     The mean duration of professional activities in an evening was 57.6

minutes (Table IV). Sixty—one per cent of this time was devoted to

reading journals and 21 per cent to administrative activities. The

remaining 18 per cent of evening activities (10.5 minutes) consisted of

direct and indirect patient care. The bulk of this time was spent

seeing hospitalized patients or operating on them. All the time in

these two categories stemmed from two evenings' activity by the surgeon

assigned as. consultant for that day. The median time devoted to each

activity in the evenings was zero minutes, indicating that on at least

half of the studied evenings, each of .the activities did not occur.

     Were seven evenings per week of such activity to have occurred in

the prepaid group practice, a total of 6.7 evening hours per week would

have been devoted to professional activities. Adding this professional

evening time to the mean standardized seven day working week results in

a total working week of 62.9 hours. Deleting personal and meal time on

the job from this total week leaves a mean total professional week for

this population of general surgeons of 57.4 hours.

    Comparison of the mean standardized seven day working week with

that observed for the community surgeons previously studied reveals



    *Even though all reported Saturday evenings (N=6) contained no

professional activities, we have based our calculation of the mean

evening time on a seven day week.
                                                  — i. ia—




                                     TABLE IV


                       COMPARISON OF THE DISTRIBUTION OF
          MEA}I REPORTED PROFESSIONAL TINE IN EVENINGS BY TYPE OP ACTIVITY
              FOR SEVEN GENERAL SURGEONS IN PREPAID GROUP PRACTICE
                  AND 19 GENERAL SURGEONS IN COMMUNITY PRACTICE



                                                                                                       S
                                Mean Reported                           Mean Reported
                                  Time for                   Per Cent     Time for          Per Cent
                                Prepaid Group                 of Mean     Community          of Mean
                                  Practice                    Evening     Practice          Evening
                                    (mitt.)                                  (mm.)

Reading Journals:                    35.1                       60.6         21.0            24.6

Seeing hospitalized patients:         5.4                        9.4         15.7            18.4
Emergency room patient care:            0                          0         U.1             13.0
Operating and assisting:              3.0                        5.2          8.9            10.4
Other patient care:                     0                          0
                                                                         •

                                                                              3.9             4.6
                                              .
Communicating with:
   Patients and families:              .3                         .5          7.2             8.4
   Hospital staff and colleagues:     1.8
—                                                                3.1         10.4            12.2

Administration:                      12.0                      20.8           7.4       -     8.7

Mean Evening Time:                   57.6           .         100.0          85.5           100.0
                                   —12—


   some interesting contrasts (Table III).3* Most noticeable is the fact

   that the mean standardized working week of the general surgeons in the

   prepaid group practice exceeded that of the community surgeons by twenty

   hours, a difference of 57 per cent.

       The surgeons in the prepaid group practice spent 28 per cent more

   time in office activities, 74 per cent more time in operative activities

   and 370 per cent more time on rounds. This latter finding is due in

  part to the fact that not only did the surgeons in the prepaid group see

  more individual patients per day on rounds than the surgeons in the

  community, 8.0 vs. 5.0, consistent with their higher operative work

  loads, but, in addition to making morning rounds, they also made afternoon

  rounds on almost half their patients. In the community, however, the

  surgeons almost exclusively made only morning rounds. Thus, the surgeons

-in the prepaid group averaged 11.9 patient visits per day on rounds as

  compared to 5.0 such patient visits per day in the community. Not only

  did the surgeons in the prepaid group average more rounds patient visits

  per day In the community, but they also spent more time per

  patient ViSIt. The prepaid group surgeons averaged 4.5 minutes per

  patient visit on rounds as opposed to 3.6 minutes per similar patient

  visit ir the community, a statistically significant difference. As a

  result, the surgeons in the prepaid group practice averaged a total of

  6.6 minutes per individual patient seen On rounds over the course of a

  day, 74 per cent longer than the rounds time per individual patient



       *The mean observed working week reported for the community surgeons

  in the previous study was based on observations of a six day week. This

  mean has been augmented to reflect a seven day week by the addition of

  85.5 minutes, consistent with the allowance made for Sunday activities

  in the previous study.3
                                    —13•


per day for the community surgeons (3.7 minutes). In each setting, the

proportion of pre—, post— and nonoperative patients seen on rounds was

comparable. The mean HE value of post—operative patients seen on rounds

in the group was 1.69 HE, eight per cent greater than the mean HE value

of post—operative rounds patients in the community, 1.59 HE. The comparability

of HE values of post—operative rounds patients is interesting in view of

the previously reported finding that the mean HE value per inpatient

operation for the prepaid surgeons was about 25 per cent greater than

that in the community, 1.21 HE vs. 0.95 HE.1 The finding of higher mean

HE values for rounds patients than for all inpatient operations in both

settings is consistent with the positive relationship between length of

stay and HE previously demonstrated.2 Since patients with more comp1x

procedures have longer hospital stays, the proportion of such patients

-seen on rounds per day will be greater than their proportion in the

total operative patient population. The above noted increased time both

per rounds patient per day and per rounds patient visit in the prepaid

group take on added interest in terms of the comparison of time per

office patient visit in the two settings to be discussed below.

       Although the overall amount of operative time in the prepaid

setting was 74 per cent greater than in the community, the amount of

time   devoted   to primary surgery, including ambulatory surgery, in the

prepaid group was 106 per cent greater than the amount of time devoted

to such primary surgery in the community.* The magnitude of the ratio

of the mean time devoted to primary surgery in the two settings, 2.06,



       *These reported operative times include all operative support

activities as dressing, scrubbing, etc.
                                     —14—


     Is almost equal to the ratio of the mean HE/week in the two settings,

     2.14. Thus, the surgeons in the prepaid group doubled their operative

     output by doubling their primary operative time.

          Though performing over twice as much primary surgery per week, the

     surgeons in the prepaid group spent 25 per cent less time assisting each

     other per week than the surgeons in community practice. In fact, only
•



     10 per cent of their total operative time was spent assisting as compared

     with 25 per cent in the community. This trade off of assisting time for

     primary operative time was accomplished through the use of operating

     room technicians as surgical assistants. This practice could represent

     an efficiency in the delivery of general surgical services in this

     prepaid group practice. Our previous study of the operative work loads

     in the prepaid group demonstrated that 24 per cent of the operations

    were performed on an ambulatory basis. Twenty—one per cent of the

     operations observed in the course of the present study were performed on
                          1
     an ambulatory basis.

          The surgeons in the prepaid group were devoting over twice as much

     time to administrative duties outside the office as the general surgeons

     in community practice, 2.5 hours vs. 1.0 hours. Direct observation of

     the duration of office administrative activities in each setting suggests

    • that the prepaid group surgeons spent a comparable amount of office time

     in this activity as the community surgeons, 1.1 vs. 1.3 hours. Thus,

     the overall mean time f or administration in the prepaid group was 56

    per cent higher than in the community. This finding is consistent with

     that in the previous study of a positive relationship between a surgeon's

     operative work load and the time he devoted to administrative work.
     A major qualitative and quantitative difference between the mean

working weeks in the two settings is the absence of a number of activities

in the weeks of prepaid group surgeons which appear in the weeks of the

community surgeons. Most salient of these is 3.2 hours of "external

travel" in the week of the community surgeons. This external travel in

the community practice was, for the most part, consumed during the

working day in driving from hospital to hospital, from hospital to

office and on the few house calls and other ambulatory care activities

in which the community surgeons engaged. Over the course of a 48—week

working year, this time devoted to external travel would consume over 4

working weeks. This travel did not occur within the practices of the

prepaid group surgeons as: (1) their offices were located within the

hospital in which they practiced and (2) the scope of their practice was

limited to patients either hospitalized in or presenting for ambulatory

care to that facility. Associated with the 3.2 hours of external travel

in the week of the community surgeons was an additional 1.3 hours of

"other direct patient care" that was delivered in a variety of non—

hospital and non—office locations. Much of this care was not surgical

in nature. These travel and external patient care activities accounted

for almost 13 per cent of the working week of the counnunity surgeons.

The lack of occurence of these activities in the weeks of the prepaid

group surgeons would appear to represent additional economies in the use

of time in the delivery of general surgical services in the prepaid

group.

     An additional economy in the use of time in the prepaid group

emerges from an inspection of the relative amount of observed office

time spent waiting for patients in the two settings. In the community,
                                —16—



the surgeons averaged almost two hours a week in this activity.3 In the

prepaid group, however, the surgeons approximated less than 25 minutes

in that activity, thereby saving an hour and a half of otherwise dead

and non—productive time per man per week.

     The total amount of personal and meal time on the job was roughly
                                                       *
comparablein the two settIngs, 5.5 hours vs. 5.8 hours.    Thus, it

would appear that the prepaid group surgeons not only worked longer

hours, but within those hours devoted proportionately greater amounts of

time to professional activities. There was also no teaching activity in

the weeks of the prepaid group surgeons, while one of the community

surgeons spent an afternoon per week teaching in a hospital out of the

community.

     The 1.3 hours of continuing education in the mean week of the

prepaid group surgeons consisted of a weekly conference. Such conferences

were scheduled in the community hospitals but none appeared in the data

gathered in the time—motion study. The 21 minutes of continuing education

in the community during the seven day working week, exclusive of evenings,

consisted of journal reading on Sunday. In the evenings, the surgeons

in the prepaid group devoted almost two thirds more time per mean evening

to journal reading than did surgeons in the community and averaged 4.1

hours per week of that activity as opposed to 2.5 hours in the latter

setting.

     The prep.id group surgeons, however, spent 21 per cent less time

overall in evening activities than the surgeons in the community practice



     *Include(i for both settings are personal and meal time in the

office and on rounds and, In the community, personal time at other, out—of—

hospital settings, none of which is disaggregated in Table III.
                                           —17—




       (Table IV). The most pronounced difference in evening activities

      between the two settings concerned patient care activities, in which the

      community surgeons spent almost six times as much time. Some of this

      decreased patient care time in the evenings of the prepaid group surgeons

      may   be   due to the fact that in that prepaid setting, emergency room

      coverage was handled by full—time emergency room physicians, while in

      the community, the surgeons were responsible for all emergency care of

      their patients. For the prepaid surgeons, the duration of the total

      seven day working week and the total professional week exceeded that of

      the coimnunity surgeons by 42 per cent and 49 per cent respectively

      • (Table III).

             On the 13 days of observation, the surgeons in the prepaid group

      saw 112 patients in their offices (Table V). All     but   two   of   these
-——   patients     (98.2 per cent) were judged to be presenting with a surgical

      problem. This proportion of surgical patients is higher than that

      presenting to the offices of the general surgeons in community practice.
  •



      There, 77 per cent of the presenting patients were judged to be presenting

      with a surgical problem. The surgeons in the prepaid group spent almost

      50 per cent more time per pre—operative patient visit as per post-

      operative patient visit and the greatest amount of time per nonoperative

      visit. In each of the two settings, the proportion of surgical office

      patients who were post—operative was exactly the same (56 per cent) and

      the proportion of pre—operative and nonoperative also virtually identical
                                             —17a—




                                     TABLE V


                    COMPARISON OF TIME PER OFFICE PATIENT VISIT
                            OF SEVEN GENERAL SURGEONS
                         IN A PREPAID GROUP PRACTICE WITH
                    19 GENERAL SURGEONS IN CONMUNITY PRACTICE


                        Prepaid Surgeons                       Community Surgeons
                            Mean Time                               Mean Time
                           Per Patient     PerCent                 Per Patient      Per Cent
               Number of      Visit           of      Number of       Visit            of
                Patients     (mm.)         Category    Patients      (mm.)          Category

All Office
  Patients        112         9.7           100          173           7.5           100


Non—surgical        2         7.0              1.8        39           7.4            22.5

Surgical         110          9.8            98.2        134           7.5            17.5

   Pre—operative  14         12.7            12.7         14          12.4            10.4
   Post—operative 62                         56.4         75           5.8            55.9
   Non—operative  34         12.9            30.9         45           9.0            33.6
                                —18—



(13 per cent vs. '10 per cent and 31 per cent vs. 34 per cent, respectively).*

The surgeons in the prepaid group averaged 9.7 minutes per office patient

visit, 29 per cent longer than the mean office patient visit in the

community, 7.5 minutes, a statistically significant difference. Thus,

for both rounds and office visits in the aggregate, and for every type

of patient except pre—operative office visits, general surgeons in the

prepaid group spent substantially more time per patient visit than the

surgeons in the community. This increased time per patient visit is an

interesting finding in view of the frequently encou!ttered contention

that patient care in prepaid group practice is often impersonal.5 It

would be interesting to know whether the increased time per rounds and

office patient visits in the prepaid group practice was associated with

either shorter hospital stays or a shorter period of post—operative

surgical care than in the community. Further analysis of office patient

visits by source of referral, nature of disposition, etc., between and

within the two settings, is underway. Preliminary results suggest

differences in the sources and dispositions of office visits between the

two settings and raise interesting questions concerning the validity of

the use of the concept of a homogeneous "office visit" as an output

measure in health services research.



     *The actual time one community surgeon spent in one office session

with 18 patients was not observed. While all 18 of these patients were

judged to be surgical in nature, neither the individual time with them

nor their source of referral was determined. Accordingly, these patients

are not included in the comparisons made in this study. Data on community

patient visits are based on 173 observed patient visits.
                                 —19—


                               Discussion


     The surgeons in the prepaid group practice were able to maintain a

mean operative work load twice that of the community surgeons previously

studied without having to spend twice as much time on the job. They

were able to achieve this economy in the delivery of surgical services

through: (1) both geographic and specialty restrictions in the scope of

their work to minimize utilization of professional time both in less

productive activities as travel and in the care of non—surgical patients,

(2) reduction of otherwise dead "waiting time" in their offices and (3)

•the utilization, of paraprofessional personnel for selected operative

assisting.

     The lack of external travel in the activities of the prepaid group

surgeons freed up, relative to the community surgeons, 3.2 hours per

week for the care of patients in the prepaid plan's hospital. The

importance of this observation is underscored by the finding in the

previous study that the amount of time spent by the community surgeons

in external travel increased with the size of their operative work

loads.3 The geographical unity of the activities of the surgeons in the

prepaid group engendered an additional benefit insofar as it enabled the

surgeons there to more easily make afternoon rounds on their patients

since they were still in the hospital following their afternoon office

hours.

     In the community, the surgeons practiced at. three to four hospitals

and had their offices spread throughout the suburban area at locations

often some distance from the hospitals. This dispersion was probably,
                               —20—



in part, the result of an attempt by individual surgeons to attract

patients from local areas within the larger community. As such, its

purpose was to save the prospective patient travel time and inconvenience

and, hence, to lower the total cost of a visit to the patient. Similarly,

the decision to hospitalize a patient at one of the several hospitals

available to a surgeon may have been in response to patient preferences

for a particular hospital or for a particular scheduling of elective

surgery (as queues of varying length existed at all hospitals in the

community at the time of the study). This type of surgeon behavior,

designed to attract patients at the expense of the most technically

efficient use of a surgeon's time, is not unexpected in a community

where the supply of surgeons' services is relatively plentiful. Thus,

the geographical dispersion of the Various tasks performed by individual

surgeons may have been a rational response to the nature of the market

for surgical services in their community and therein an effort to increase

their individual work loads. This hypothesis is supported by previously

reported findings within the community of significant, positive relationships

between a surgeon's operative work load and both the number of his

hospital affiliations and amount of time he devoted to external travel.3

    The tendency of the prepaid group surgeons to restrict their practices

to surgical care is evidenced by the fact that less than two per cent of

the patients seen in their offices were judged to be non—surgical in

nature as opposed to the fact that 23 per cent of office patients

seen in the community were judged to be non—surgical. Some of this diff€rence

in the proportion of non—surgical patients in the two practice settings

is due to the referral systems operating in each setting. In the
                                 —21--




prepaid group, the proportion of patients referred for their first

visit by another physician was larger, and the proportion of patients

self—referred smaller than in the community. Though the proportion of

non—surgical patients among self—referred patients was comparable in the

two settings (40 vs. 38 per cent), the proportion of self—referred

patients overall in the community was twice as great as in the prepaid

group and the proportion of non—surgical patients entering the

surgeons' practices was twice as great. The two self—referred non—

surgical patients seen by the surgeons in the prepaid group were referred

to other physicians for follow up care. Evidence of a tendency for non—

surgical patients, once entered into the patient load of one of the

community surgeons, to stay in that load, however, is found in the fact

that 24 of the 39 non—surgical office patients observed in the study (62

per cent) were scheduled by the community surgeons for return appointments.

This selectivity in the treatment of patients in the group enables the

surgeons in the prepaid group to utilize more efficiently their surgical

skills and therein to free up time for the care of more surgical patients.

This practice also delegates the care of non—surgical patients in the

prepaid group to those physicians trained to do so.

    The reduction of office waiting time in the prepaid group would

appear to be a result of scheduling efficiencies resulting from a larger

patient load. A similar reduction in office waiting time in the community

was found to be associated with increased operative work loads.3

    The utilization of operating room technicians in the prepaid

group to assist on most cases would appear to represent an important
                                           —' h




       economy in the utilization of surgical manpower. The surgeons in the
I      prepaid   group spent one half hour less time per week assisting than the

       surgeons in the community. If they assisted at the same rate as in

       the community relative to the size of their primary work loads, however,

       they would have devoted more than two and one half additional hours per

       man per week to this activity. It should be noted that the
                                                                      operating
       room technicians first assisted on only those cases judged not to need

       the assistance of a surgeon. When such cases arose, a surgeon was

       available to assist on them. Further studies
                                                        are currently underway on
       the overall utilization of these operating room technicians within the

      prepaid group. Were such substitution to be implemented on a broad

      scale, it could represent an important economy in the utilization of

      surgical manpower.6

-   _ - An       additional source of efficiency in the delivery of surgical

      services in the prepaid group might possibly be the highly structured,

      daily working schedule of the general surgeons. Not only does this

      schedule allow an orderly allocation of the talents of the population of

      surgeons to the variety of surgical responsibilities
                                                              facing the prepaid
      group, but also, by consistently scheduling coverage for emergency work

      during the day, on nights, and on weekends, it introduces an element of

      regularity into the work pattern of the
                                                  surgeons possibly enabling them
      to shoulder a long working week in full knoiledge that free evening and

      weekend time can regularly be counted on. This element of regularity,

      evidenced by the fact that the
                                       surgeons in the prepaid group spent less
      than twenty per cent of the time that
                                              the community surgeons spent in
      evening patient care activities may be an important fringe benefit helping
                                  -23—


 to explair why the prepaid group surgeons are willing to work a total

professional week 49 per cent longer than the community surgeons.

     Anecdotal evidence from each setting suggests that mean earnings in

each setting were comparable. In view of working weeks 49 per cent

longer in the prepaid group practice than in the community, the question

arises as to why the general surgeons. continue to work in that environment.

The findings of increased journal reading in the evening, increased

afternoon rounds, and longer rounds patient visits and longer office

patient visits, both in the presence of already increased working weeks

and in the absence of a renumeration system that rewards increased work

loads, suggest a fairly highly motivated group of surgeons in this

prepaid group practice and an environment in which peer pressure may be

an important motivating factor. In addition, the surgeon—to—population

ratio within the prepaid plan essentially guarantees the surgeon a full

and varied operative work load.' Such work loads would appear to entail

a degree of professional satisfaction often implied to be lacking in

the "bread and butter" surgery of some community practices.

     Aside from the possibility that the prepaid group surgeons might

desire longer work weeks per se, the group must offer adequate inducements

to keep itself staffed. One such inducement might be greater certainty

of annual income. The wide dispersion of surgical work loads in the

community and the formula for setting salar:ies in the group would imply

that there is much greater variability in the incomes of the fee—for—

service community surgeons. Choice of the repaid setting may thus

reflect risk adverse behavior, particularly as a surgeon choosing

community practice has no guarantee that he will be able to earn the
                                     —24—


mean income by working the mean numbers of hours. These speculations

are reminiscent of those of Reinhardt that supposed efficiencies in

prepaid group practice may be as much a function of the type of physician

attracted to those settings as of any particular organizational aspect.7

     It should be noted that none of the economies in the use of time

and resources noted in this prepaid group are a function of a prepaid

setting per se. Indeed, it does not seem unreasonable that such economies

might be found in any   group   or fee—for—service setting facing a similar

demand for surgery. We have previously hypothesized that the surgeon—

to—population ratio facing •a population of surgeons might be the most

important determinant of the size of their work loads.1 In this prepaid

group practice, the surgeon—to—population ratio was one half that in the

..coinmunity and the mean operative work load was double that of

the community. Thus, the economies in the use of time noted in this paper

might in fact be viewed as attempts by the surgeons in the prepaid group

to produce a doubled surgical work load necessitated by a halving of the

surgeon—to—population ratio without having to double their overall time

input. As also noted in the previous paper, the general surgeon—to—

population ratio in this prepaid practice was low compared to other

prepaid groups.1'4 This observation should serve to contraindicate

generalizations of the findings of this study per se to other prepaid

group practices.

     Additional findings of some interest In this study arethe increased

times per patient visit on both rounds and in the office as compared to

the community. Thus, within their working weeks, not only were the

surgeons in the prepaid group spending mor3 time on the job and seeing
                                 —25--



more patients but they t.ere also spending more time per patient visit

than the surgeons in th community. These findings warrant further

investigation. For the moment, however, they stand in contrast to the

findings of Mechanic who, in studying visit times for primary care

practicioners in prepaid and fee—for—service settings by questionnaire,

suggests that increased patient work loads for these physicians in

prepaid group settings are characterized by decreased times per patient

visit and assembly line amenities.5
                             References


1. Hughes EFX, Lewit EM, Watkins RN, and Handschin R: Utilization of surgical
     manpower in a prepaid group practice. N Engi J Med 291:759—763,
     1974

2. Hughes EFX, Fuchs VR, Jacoby JE, and Lewit EM: Surgical work loads in a
     community practice. Surgery 71:315—327, 1972

3. Hughes EFX, Lewit EM and Lorenzo FV: Time utilization of '
     population of general surgeons in community practice. Surgery
     77:371—383, 1975

4. Mason HR: Manpower needs by specialty. JAMA 219:1621—1626,
    1972

5. Mechanic D: The organization of medical practice and practice
     orientations among physicians in prepaid and non—prepaid primary
     care settings. Med Care 13:189—204, 1975

6. Lohrenz FN: The Marshfield Clinic physician—assistant concept.
     N Engi 3 Med 284:301—304, 1971

7. Reinhardt UE: Proposed changes in the organization of health—care
     delivery: an overview and critique. Milbank Mem Fund Q 51:169-
     222, 1973
