               NBER Working Paper Series




          SOCIAL SECURITY AND RETIREMENT DECISIONS


                      Michael   J. Boskin




                   Working Paper No. 107




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305



                    Revised October 1975


                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

This research was partially supported by a grant from the
Rockefeller Foundation.
      SOCIAL SECURITY AND RETIREMENT DECISIONS: ABSTRACT


                      Michael J. Boskin
                   Stanford University and
            National Bureau of Economic Research



     One of the most striking features of the postwar U.S. economy has

been the rapid decrease in the labor force participation of the elderly

at a time when the health of this group has been improving. In spite

of this, previous research, based on retrospective interviews with the

retired population, usually concludes that poor health accornts for the

overwhelming majority of retirements.

     The current results suggest that nothing could be further from the

truth. Using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, we follow

a cohort of white married males through their sixties to estimate a

model of retirement behavior. Using several definitions of retirement

suggesced in the literature, the results suggest that the two key policy

parameters of the social security system —     the   income guarantee and the

implicit tax on earnings —   exert   an enormous influence on retirement

decisions. For example, our results suggest that a decrease in the

implicit tax rate on earnings from one—half to one—third would reduce

the annual probability of retirement by almost sixty percent!

     Applying the coefficient estimates to time series data on the labor

force participation of the elderly implies that the social security sys-

tem has been the major factor in the explosion in earlier retirement.
                SOCIAL SECURITY AND RETIREMENT DECISIONS*

                                   by

                          Michael J. Boskin**



         The rapid growth of the social security system in recent

years has been one of the most important developments in the United

States' economy: social security benefits and taxes are each the

second largest——and fastest growing——item on their respective

side of the federal government budget and will soon exceed

$100 billion. For a large fraction of all U.S. families, social

security taxes exceed their income taxes and expected social

security benefits are the major item in their retirement portfolio.

The system has become so large that even modest changes in benefits

or their method of finance may have important impacts on the entire

economy. While the social security system is widely heralded by

politicians and the public as a vital element of our income security

system, it recently has come under increased criticism from econo-

mists. For example, Pechman, Aaron and Taussig [19] and Brittain

[3 ]   object   to payroll tax finance as inequitable; Buchanan [4

and Campbell [5 ] would like to see the transfer, or anti—poverty,



        *1 am indebted to William Barsky, Louis Garrison and Henry
Moore for research assistance, and participants at various seminars
plus T. Connor, L. Lillard, F. Nold, J. Pechman, J. Ross, L. Thompson
and P. Van de Water for useful suggestions.

       **Stanford University and National Bureau of Economic Research.
This paper should not be considered an official NBER publication,
as it has not undergone the full NBER review.
                                     2




goal of the system separated from the income replacement, or annuity,

goal; and Feldstein [ 7   ]   estimates   a huge substitution of expected

social security benefits for private savings, which in turn leads

him to question whether the system should be financed on a pay—as—

you—go basis [ 9   ].

        The primary objective of social security is to replace

income during retirement (or disability); in so doing, social

security benefits supplement——and potentially substitute for——prior

savings (including private pensions, equity in a home, savings

accounts, stocks and bonds, etc.), intrafamily transfers of income

and, perhaps most importantly, continued earnings. The purpose of

the present paper is to focus on the potential inducement to retire

earlier in the presence of social security than in its absence, and

the corresponding substitution of social security benefits for

potential earnings. Toward this end, section 1 reviews some previous

attempts to study retirement behavior. Section 2 presents a simple

theoretical model which explains the ways in which the current

social security system affects labor supply and retirement decisions.

Section 3 details the data used in the analysis. Section 4 reports

the empirical results——primarily probability of retirement equa-

tions which relate retirement decisions to parameters of the social

security system and other financial and demographic variables.

Section 5 concludes with a discussion of some of the implications

of the results for social security policy, as well as some sugges-

tions for future research.


                                                                            .
                                  3




     1. A Cursory Review of the Literature on Retirement



        Social security guarantees elderly retired persons a certain

income based upon their previous covered earnings and taxes some of

these benefits back if earnings exceed a modest amount. Hence,

both the income and wage effects of the system operate to reduce

labor supply. Since some workers achieve a preferred consumption

bundle by working enough so that they receive no benefits (i.e. they

elect not to be covered currently by the system), others would

retire independently of their social security benefits, and the sizes

of the income——or benefit guarantee——and wage——or earnings test——

effects are unknown, the overall effect of social security on

retirement is primarily an empirical question.

        Previous research on retirement decisions may be divided

into three types corresponding to the type of data used: retro-

spective studies of retired workers, prospective studies of workers

approaching retirement age, and studies of the labor force par-

ticipation rate of the elderly.

        In an early and frequently cited study, Steiner and Dorfman

[20] report the results of a special 1952 Follow—Up Survey of the

Aged to the Current Population Survey. In particular, all men not

in the labor force were asked why they stopped working. They

conclude that "...only a small proportion of the older population

had been driven out of the labor force by retirement systems.ttl



        1Steiner and Dorfman [20], p. 49.
                                     4



Thus, the overwhelming majority retired "voluntarily"; further,

".   .   . in   79 per cent of all voluntary retirements poor health was

the major reason for retirement,"1 While it is undoubtedly correct

that some people retire because of poor health, accepting the con-

clusion that most do so from retrospective surveys of retired workers

is hazardous: poor health is certainly the most socially acceptable

reason for retirement and, on average, the health of those inter-

viewed had probably deteriorated since retirement. Yet retrospective

studies invariably conclude that poor health is the primary reason

for retirement.

           For example, Wentworth [23] summarizes a series of Social

Security Administration surveys of the aged in the years 1941—1963

by noting that ".      .   approximately   88 percent of the beneficiaries

queried in the 1941—51 surveys and 74 percent of those in the 1963

survey had their jobs terminated by their employer or were forced

to quit because of ill health."2 Thus, the conclusion usually

reached in these studies is that social security benefits cushion

income declines beyond the control of the individual worker and

that relatively few workers are induced to retire to receive benefits.

On the other hand, the 1963 Social Security Survey of the Aged [22] also

found that a substantial fraction of those nonbeneficiaries report-

ing an inclination to retire soon intended to do so to obtain

retirement (public and/or private) benefits. Further, a considerable



           'Steiner and Dorfman, op. cit., p. 49.

           2Wentworth [23], p. 5.
                                     5




I   shift   into partial retirement——reduced hours of work and changes

    in occupation——was noted. Finally, Epstein and Murray [6] note

    an increase in the number of aged men ". .         . who might get some

    kind of job if they were interested, but prefer the leisure of

    retirement."1

              Barfield and Morgan [1 ] conducted an interesting study of

    prospective retirement plans; in particular, they focused on the

    decision to retire before age 65. Analyzing data from a national

    sample collected in 1966, they report ordinary least squares regres-

    sions of whether or not early retirement was planned on a variety

    of variables. The most important result was that planned early

    retirement was strongly and positively related to expected pension

    income (government and private) and negatively associated with a

    subjective evaluation of health. While these results are both

    intriguing and suggestive, relying on reported plans for retirement

    ——in an uncertain world where expectations may not be realized——is

    hazardous at best. A preferable alternative is to analyze actual

    retirement decisions.

              In his classic study, Long [151 notes the decline in the

     labor force participation rate of older workers in the U.S. and

     elsewhere since 1890. He examines a variety of types of data, and

     concludes that neither the growth of pension programs——public and

     private——nor the general increase in personal disposable income

     accounts for the sharp decline. Indeed, Long's major conclusion



               1Epstein and Murray [6 ],   p.   105.
                                6




is   that jobs have been competed away from older workers by younger
                                                                        .
women.

      Pechman, Aaron and Taussig [.19] were the first to present evi-

dence that social security accelerates retirement; they report the

results of an international cross—sectional regression on aggregate

data for 1960 from 19 countries of the labor force participation rate

of the population over age 65 on the ratio of per capita benefits to

the average wage in manufacturing and other variables. Their results

suggest that the higher this replacement ratio, the lower the labor

force participation rate of the elderly, i.e., the more generous

the social security system, the lower the labor supply of the

elderly. Whether this is caused by the income effect of high bene-

fit guarantees, the wage effect of rigid earnings tests in countries

with generous benefits or even the wage effect of higher social

insurance taxes to finance the higher benefits is impossible to

tell from their results. Feldstein [8] reports a similar result,

also based on an international cross section, on his way to esti-

mating private savings functions. He also notes a negative effect

on labor force participation of men over 65 of retirement tests.

While these studies are open to the usual criticisms of international

cross sections, the results do suggest that higher social security

benefits do induce a withdrawal from the labor force.

      Thus, there are two competing conjectures concerning the

effects of social security on retirement. On the one hand, a group

of studies suggest that the social security system plays a relative-

ly passive and minor role, the major reason for retirement being
                                   7




poor health. On the other, evidence from international cross—sections

—   albeit   hardly the type of data upon which one would like to place

exclusive reliance — suggests that social security induces —    or   enables

—   elderly   men to withdraw from the labor force.

      Aggregate time series data for the United States reveal that the

labor force participation rates of elderly males have fallen dramatically

in the postwar period. These data are presented in Table 1.1. The rate

for both whites and nonwhites is currently less than half of the rate

in the late nineteen forties. In the 55—64 age bracket, the rates have

fallen thirteen and twenty—one percent for whites and nonwhites, respec-

tively. The decline in this age group, of course, is heavily concentrat-

ed in the rates for men in their early sixties; more men now claim ini-

tial social security benefits age age sixty—two than at age sixty—five.

       This sharp secular decline in the labor force participation caine

during a period when the economy was relatively healthy and the health

of the elderly on average improved; it also came during a period of

broad extention of social security :overage and sharp increases in bene-

fits. While these correlations may be merely a coincidence, they should

make us skeptical of the survey data alleging social security had no effect

and poor health was the prime mover in retirement decisions.

We shall present and analyze below evidence from an entirely

different——and in many ways superior——type of data: a panel study

of a cohort of elderly men. Before doing so, it is worthwhile to

examine in somewhat more detail the ways in which social security

affects labor supply.
                                 Table 1.1
                  Labor Force Participation Rates for
                         Elderly Males, 1948-74


                         White                             Nonwhite
                55-64 yrs.       65 and over      55-64 yrs.    65 and over
1948              89.6             46.5            88.6           50.3
1949              87.6             46.6             86,0          51.4
1950              87.3             45.8            81.9           45.5
1951              87.4             44.5            84.6           49.5
1952              87.7             42.5            85.7           43.3
1953              87.7             41.3            86.7           41.1
1954              89.2             40.4            83.0           41.2
1955              88.4             39.5            83.1           40.0
1956              88.9             40.0            83.9           39.8
1957              88.0             37.7            82.4           35.9
1958              88.2             35.7            83.3           34.5
1959              87.9             34.3            82.5           33.5
1960              87.2             33.3            82.5           31.2
1961              87.8             31.9            81.6           29.4
1962              86.7             30.6            81.5           27.2
1963              86.6             28.4            82.5           27.6
1964              86.1             27.9            80.6           29.6
1965              85.2             27.9            78.8           27.9
1966              84.9             27.2            81.1           25.6
1967              84.9             27.1            79.3           27.2
1968              84.7             27.3            79.6           26.6
1969              83.9             27.3            77.9           26.1
1970              83.3             26.7            79.2           27.4
1971              82.6             25.6            77.8           24.5
1972              81.2             24.4            73.6           23.6
1973              79.0             22.8            70.7           22.6
1974              78.1             22.5            70.2           21.7


Source: Manpower Report of the President, 1975.



                                                                              S
                                 8




               2.   Social Security and Labor Supply



          The social security system has three basic features which

affect life—cycle labor supply and saving decisions: the benefits,

the social insurance contributions, and the earnings test. The

social security system imposes a tax for old age (and disability)

insurance of approximately 6 percent each on employees and employers1

on the first $14,100 of earnings; it provides benefits during

retirement based in part on previous taxes; and potential benefits

are reduced if earnings exceed a certain modest amount. Thus,

throughout one's working life the social security tax reduces the

after—tax wage rate. Once one retires, the system provides an

income flow, but imposes an implicit tax on earnings beyond a certain

amount.

     Focusing on a year during which a worker eligible for social

security benefits is contemplating retirement, and ignoring life cycle

phenomena we may characterize the effect of the system on labor supply

and retirement decisions in the usual way. Before accounting for the

social security system, the budget constraint of the individual is



                               PX    + K.                        (2.1)
           (l+r)K + W(T-L) =




       'It is usually argued that employees bear both parts of the
tax (see Brittain [21); however, Feldstein [101 has called this
assertion into question, when the system affects saving. If we
argue that the benefits would be financed by some other tax (which
may itself affect saving and/or labor supply), the employee burden
argument is probably a good approximation.

          simple discussion of life—cycle effects is presented in
Appendix B.
                                  9




Assets plus earnings equals consumption of goods plus saving

          With a tax rate of t, benefits of B when no earnings are made,

and an implicit tax under the earnings test of ,      the   budget constraint

becomes



          B + K(l+r) + W(l-t—c*)(T—L) =    PX + LK.                 (2.2)




Graphically (ignoring saving ),   the   budget constraint changes as in

Figure 1, where we see that the worker, in attempting to maximize

utility, must choose which arm of the budget constraint he wishes to

be on. Since for the period we will be studying, the earnings test

had two components (a 50 cent reduction per dollar of earnings over

a certain range, then increasing to a dollar), the effective budget

constraint has three arms: the parts AB, BC and CD. Hence social

security creates a situation where workers face a kinky budget

constraint. In some cases social security will not affect labor

supply during part of old age. In Figure la, the worker works full

time regardless of the social security system; in Figure lb, the

worker retires completely regardless of the social security system.

However, many workers may be in the situation depicted in Figures lc

and id: in the former, the worker works a substantial amount of

time in the absence of the social security system, but retires

completely in its presence; in the latter, social security induces




                                                                                .
                                10




Income                             Income




              la           Leisure                     lb    Leisure
                                                               tD: 1,




Income                               Income




     A




                               b




     0                      Leisure                     ld   Leisure
              ic
         L0




               Figure 1. Social Security and Labor Supply
                                  11




partial retirement.'

     These effects——providing an income support and taxing earnings

with the earnings test——both operate to reduce the labor supply of

some elderly workers. Before turning to an attempt to estimate them,

we remind the reader of two points made above: asset holdings are

endogenous and determined simultaneously with life—cycle labor supply

decisions; social security benefits may drive down income from assets2

and the one—period analysis is then conditional upon the value of

assets held; and the system may well affect labor supply prior to

old age through the taxes and through the effects of benefits on the

shadow price of saving.

     Since we do not have data following individuals over their

entire lifetime——or even a substantial fraction thereof——we can say

very little about the life—cycle phenomena described above. Hence,

we turn to a discussion focusing on one important part of of the hf e—

cycle——old age——and the retirement decision.




        1This multi—armed budget constraint produces certain econo-
metric problems in estimating labor supply functions. The density
of labor supply piles up at several discrete values; hence we must
estimate the probability the worker will choose to be on one of the
three arms of the budget constraint simultaneously with hours worked
conditional upon being on a particular arm. I am currently working
on a generalization of Tobit analysis to deal with this problem.
The estimates presented below, in part, skirt this issue. See Hall
[111 for a discussion of this problem in the two—armed case.

        2See Feldstein [ 7   1   for   evidence this indeed occurs.
                                 12




                             3. The Data



        The data for this study are taken from the Panel Study of

Income Dynamics, a national sample of five thousand households.1

The important feature of these data from our viewpoint is that the

households were reinterviewed annually for the five years 1968

through 1972.2 Hence, for each year of the survey period, a substan-

tial amount of information is available on each household. Especially

relevant are the data pertaining to earnings, assets, age, occupation,

hours of work, length of time on the current job, etc.

        From this body of data, I have extracted information on 131

households which were headed by the same white married male, aged

61 through 65, for the five years of the survey. Hence, by the end

of the five years, these heads of households are aged 66 through 70.

We follow the labor market status of these heads of households

through the crucial years of retirement decisions. The variables

used in the analysis are described below.

        Retirement. A study by the Social Security Administration

[211 notes no less than six definitions of retirement in common use.

Among these are zero hours of work per year, less than 35 hours per

week of work, saying that one is retiree, etc. The common perception

of retirement is a stepping—down from normal career patterns——leaving

the main job or occupation, working less and earning less. A


        1These data are described in detail in Survey Research
Center [21].
        2
            The annual reinterviewing is still in progress.
                               13




substantial number of people say they are retired while working

several hundred hours per year for several years. Several defini-

tions of retirement were tried in the estimation of the probability

of retirement equations: less than quarter—time work, less than

half—time work, less than one—tenth time work, and the individual

worker's statement that he was retired. The result using all four

definitions are similar, and only those for quarter—time work

are presented below.1 This definition corresponds roughly to

the point where most of the sample becomes subject to the earnings

test. A state of quasi—retirement was also defined for use in

following a pattern of gradual stepping—down from full—time work.

Again, similar results were obtained for several definitions map-

ping hours of work, wages, and occupation into quasi—retirement.

The definition used in the results presented below was less than

half—time work (or earnings less than half of full—time earnings

on the job previously held).

        The distribution of actual hours and earnings——as we would

suspect from the discussion above——tends to pile up in certain ranges,

roughly corresponding to full—time work, work not subject to the

earnings test, etc. Further, about 40 percent of the sample retired

before age 65, while slightly under 40 percent were still working

at age 66 and beyond. Of the latter, two—fifths were working very

few hours.




        1The other results are available upon equest.

                                                                         .
                              14




        Social security benefits. The maximum social security

benefits obtainable for the couple are based on the primary insur-

ance amount from estimated average monthly earnings. Average

monthly earnings are estimated as the social security maximum for

those earning the maximum or receiving the maximum benefit during

the survey period and imputed either from a regression of earnings

on education, occupation, and other personal characteristics or from

actual benefits received and information on age, earnings, etc. The

benefits formula for each year is used and benefits are adjusted

downward for each year from age 62 to 64, and, of course, are zero

for age 61. It is worth pointing out that the group under study

receives social security benefits which are a large multiple of

their taxes paid in plus interest. This occurs both because of the

blanketing in of all existing workers each time benefits are increased

and the large increase in legislated benefits, which bear little relation

to taxes paid in plus interest (see Campbell [5] and Brittain [3]).

        Income from assets. Income from assets include the usual

rents, pensions, dividends, interest and asset part of business income.

Also included are the imputed income to home ownership (at 6 percent of

equity) and to automobiles (at 12 percent of value). Experiments with

a two—year average yielded results virtually identical to use of current

income from assets.

        Net earninzs. Net earnings refers to earnings net of earnings—

tested decreases in social security benefits. They are calculated in

two ways——using actual earnings and using expected earnings at full—time

or part—time work, i.e. for different measures of a standardized number
                               15




of hours.' While the former is potentially endogenous, it reflects the

actual point chosen on a particular arm of the budget constraint. In

any event, the results are quite similar regardless of the definition

used. We standardize at 1750 hours for those not working in defining

potential net e rnings for full—time work, and at 875 hours for quasi—

retirement. Changing these indexes of a standard number of hours by
                                           2
modest amounts does not affect the results.

        Age dummies. A variable taking the value one when the worker

is 65, zero otherwise; and likewise when the worker is 62.

        Education. Years of schooling.

        Spouse's earnings. Only infrequently does the spouse's earn-

ings amount to a substantial share of total earnings. The actual fig-

ures are used. Were our data set much larger, we would have attempted

to build a simultaneous husband—wife retirement model. Since only a

small fraction of these wives worked any appreciable amount, we eschew

any such attempt here.

        Hours ill. Total hours of illness estimated for the year. In

light of the conjecture reported above that poor health is the primary

cause of retirement, it is interesting to note that for those people

in the sample who retired, the average hours of illness the year prior

to retirement was 59.2; for the entire sample of work years, the average

was 84.5!

       All dollar values are adjusted for inflation by deflating by the
consumer price index.


        1Potential full—time earnings are imputed on the basis of a
regression of earnings on education, occupation, location, union mem-
bership, health, etc.

        2Again, results are available upon request. Variables referring
to the specific year were also included (year dummies, unemployment rate,
                                                                            I
etc.), but their coefficients were small and not statistically different
from zero.
                               16




                     4. Empirical Results



        As mentioned above, there are many different definitions of

retirement which have been used by various researchers. Generally,

retirement entails a stepping down from a normal career and employment

pattern. The stepping down may entail an abrupt reduction of hours of

work to zero, a change of job or occupation, a gradual reduction of

hours of work, etc. We may conceive of the worker as being in one of

N labor market states (e.g., state 1 may be full—time work on the career

job, state 2 part—time work on the same job, state 3 full—time work on

a different job,. ..,state N zero hours of market work, etc.). Observing

individual workers for a sequence of years, we may characterize this

stepping down process by a matrix of transition probabilities:




                         ll ••     lN
                             ..:




where P1 is the probability that the worker moves from state i (e.g.,

full—time work) to state j (e.g., part—time). These probabilities, in

turn, depend on a vector of variables such as earnings, social security

benefits, age, health and education, some of which depend upon which

state the worker chooses to occupy.

        As a simple example, consider a two—way partition of labor mar-

ket states into working and retired. Then P12 is the probability a
                              17



worker retires in a given period. P12 may depend upon social security
                                                                             .
benefits and earnings, which differ dramatically if he works or retires.

Of course, once we know P12, we also know P11, the probability the worker

keeps working. Finally, there is a duality between the transitions among

states1and the distribution of the elderly population among the various

labor market states.

        A full derivation of this model as the multinomial logistic para—

meterization of a multi—state Markov chain is presented in Appendix A.

        As mentioned above, we have experimented with different numbers

of states defining employment status as well as different definitions of

the states. The results are rather robust against modest changes in the

definition of the states. Our data limit us to a two—state (working/re-

tired) and a three—state (close to full—time work, quasi—retirement, re-

tirement) parameterization. We examine the effect on the probability of

retirement of several types of variables: health (hours ill), wage effects

(net earnings), income effects (social security benefits and income from

assets), cross—wage effects (spouse's earnings), and institutional retire-

ment tests (represented by a dummy variable for age 65). Conjectures on

the signs and magnitudes of these effects were discussed above in the

review of the literature. Briefly, one school of thought would expect

the effects of the age dummy and hours ill to be large and positive, and

most other effects to be small. As we shall see, nothing could be further

from the truth.



        'Note that some transitions may have probabilities of zero or
close to zero, i.e., it may be rare to observe certain transitions.
                              18



       Table 4.1 presents our basic probability of retirement

equation. We note first that the sign of the health effect is

opposite to that conjectured in numerous previous studies. This

effect, however, is not estimated very precisely. While some workers

undoubtedly do retire for reasons of poor health and the measure of

health is open to question, these data provide no support for the

conjecture that poor health is the prime mover in retirement decisions.

        The effects of all of the other variables are measured quite

precisely, and operate in the expected direction. The probability

of retirement in a given year at mean values of the right hand

variables is about eight percent.

        There is clearly a large increase in the probability of

retirement at age 65. Whether this is due to social custom or

institutionalized retirement rules within firms is difficult to

judge. It is not uncommon for workers to change occupations in

their sixties——stepping down from their normal career to a lower

wage part—time job.

         There is a small negative effect of the spouse's earnings

 on the probability of retirement.1 Thus, leisure of husbands and

 wives appear to be complements in old age.

         Turning attention to income from assets, we note that the

 effect of an increase in asset income is a modest increase in the

 probability of retirement. At mean values of the othir variables,




        'Were our data set larger, we would have attempted to
examine the retirement decisions of husbands and wives simultaneously.
                            19



                                                    S
                          Table 4.1

            Probability of Retirement Equation



    Variable                       Coefficient (x


Social security benefits                 0.917
                                        (0.288)

Income from assets                      0.135
                                        (0.051)

Net earnings                           —1.49
                                        (0.39)

Age = 65 dummy


Spouse's earnings
                                       1248.7
                                       (307.6)

                                       —0.218
                                       (0.093)
                                                    .
Hours ill                              —1.38
                                       (1.21)


log likelihood = —141.026


a
 Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses.




                                                    S
                               20




a $1,000 annual increase in income from assets increases the proba-

bility of retirement by 15 percent.

        The effect of the income guarantee in social security on

the probability of retirement is large and, as expected, positive.

Indeed, it is seven times as large as the effect of income from

assets. An increase in social security benefits from $3,000 to

$4,000 per year per couple raises the probability of retirement

from 7.5 percent to 16 percent. Why is the effect of social security

benefits so much more important than the effect of income from

assets? Social security benefits are guaranteed for the remainder

of one's life and are indexed against inflation) Further, to the

extent bequests are planned, personal wealth may be transferred to

one's heirs, whereas social security benefits cannot. Also, income

from assets includes the imputed income to owner—occupied housing;

the elderly may be reluctant to borrow against their equity for fear

of living so long as to have to vacate the house and pay capital

gains taxes.

        Finally, net (after tax and earnings test) earnings has the

predicted negative effect; indeed, it is large and measured quite

precisely. The negative effect of net earnings Is roughly half again

as large as the positive effect of the income guarantee. A $1,000

Increase in net earnings reduces the probability of retirement by

about 60 percent. Since the earnings test reduces net earnings

substantially for some fraction of elderly workers, it clearly



        1Benefits are now indexed directly; previously, they were
implicitly indexed——with a lag——by periodic Congressional review.
                                21


                                                                         .
dramatically   increases the probability of retirement.1 A reduction

of the implicit tax on earnings from one—half to one—third cuts the

annual probability of retirement in half for typical workers. The

relationship between benefits and the earnings test is also important.

In the example given above, a $1,000 increase in social security bene-

fits which exposed more earnings to the earnings test would have only

about one—fourth the impact on retirement as a pure increase in bene-

fits (i.e., a $1,000 increase combined with a $1,000 increase in earn-

ings exempted from the earnings test).

        Thus, the overall impact of the social security system,

through the income guarantee and the earnings test, is clearly to

induce retirement.

        We noted above that the coefficient for social security

benefits was much larger than the coefficient for income from assets.

We may make a formal test of the equality of these two coefficients

by the likelihood ratio method. Table 4.2 reports the results of

a regression in which the coefficients of social security benefits

and income from assets are constrained to be equal. The quantity

—2 ln A, where A is the ratio of the constrained to the unconstrained

maximum of the likelihood function is a     variable. In this case,

our    statistic of 7.23 exceeds the critical value at conventional

levels and we reject the hypothesis that the effects of social

security benefits and income from assets are equal. This conclusion

has a startling implication if Feldstein's II 7 1 result is correct

that private savings substitute virtually dollar for dollar with



        1See the discussion in section 5 below.
                          22




                       Table 4.2

            Probability of Retirement Equation



    Variable
                                                    3a
                                   Coefficient (x 10 )



Social security benefits +              0.160
    income from assets                 (0.049)

Net earnings                           —1.203
                                       (0.169)

Age = 65 dummy                          1415
                                       (300)

Spouse's earnings                      —0.178
                                       (0.090)

Hours ill                              —1.595
                                       (1.273)


log likelihood =    —144.742


x21 =       7.23



aAsptotic standard errors in parentheses.
                               23




social security savings. Even in an actuarily sound program, the net
                                                                       S
impact of this substitution is an inducement to retire!'




         'Even once account is taken of the using up of social
 security capital.
                                 24



          In Table 4.3, we present results from a logistic regression

expanded to include education and age sixty—two, and year dummies.

Mincer [17] notes the positive correlation between education and retire-

ment age. This simple correlation may disguise the influences of other

variables associated with increases in education (such as higher earn-

ings). The estimated coefficient has the expected negative sign, but

is quite small and not measured very precisely.

          Since the worker may retire and commence receiving social

security benefits at age sixty—two, we include a dummy variable for

age equals sixty—two. The estimated coefficient is negative, and not

measured at all precisely.

          To see if there is a general age effect on retirement (in addi-

tion to the age equals sixty—five effect) over this age range, dummy

variables for each year were included. If there is a general age

effect, the coefficients should increase year by year. In fact, this

is not the case) Hence, in this age range, age does not appear to

affect retirement probabilities except indirectly through its effect

on the other variables. At later ages there well may be a pure age

effect.

          The coefficients of the original variables change only slightly

with the introduction of these additional variables. The most notable

change is the slight increase in the absolute value of the coefficient

on net earnings. These results suggest that our results are not at all

due to a spurious correlation through time among age, retirement and

social security benefits.



           formal likelihood ratio test of the equality of these coef-
ficients passes easily at conventional levels.
                           25


                                                   .
                     Table 4.3

         Probability of Retirement Equation



    Variable                     Coefficient (x


Social security benefits                  0.893
                                         (0.353)

Income from assets                        0.132
                                         (0.051)

Net earnings                            —2.048
                                         (1.028)

Age = 65 dummy                        1189.5
                                       (313.1)

Spouse's earnings                       —0.225
                                         (0.099)

Education                               —0.036
                                         (0.053)

Age = 62 dummy                        —774.3
                                      (2202.3)

Year 1                               -1962.0
                                      (709.8>

Year 2                               —2534.3
                                       (760.5)

Year 3                               —1985.1
                                       (783.9)

Year 4                               —1502.9
                                       (862.0)

Log likelihood                        —136.02


aA5PO1C standard errors in parentheses.
                               26




        Finally, we present in Table 4.4 the results of a slightly

more general model——one with three labor market states:   regular

work, quasi—retirement, and retirement, as defined above in section 3?

The estimated coefficients are quite similar to those in Table 4.1,

all coefficients having the same sign as in the simpler model, and

most are measured relatively precisely.

        Again, we note the positive inducement to retire at age 65

and the negative effect of spouse's earnings.

        The effect of income from assets on the probability of

either retiring or quasi—retiring is positive, but modest.

        The effect of social security benefits on the probability

of either retiring or quasi—retiring is positive and much larger

than that of income from assets. At mean values of the independent

variables, a $1,000 increase in social security benefits is associ-

 ated with an increase of 40 percent in the probability of quasi—

 retirement and of 60 percent in the probability of retirement.

         Again, the negative effect of net earnings——modest in the

 case of quasi—retirement and large in the case of retirement——is

 measured quite precisely. The earnings test induces both quasi—

 retirement and complete retirement.

         Of course, there are also movements out of quasi—retire-

 ment (part—time work), usually into complete retirement. We present

  in Table 4.5 estimates of the probability of such movements.2



          1We noted a small amount of "unretirement" in the date and
                                                                  The
  tried to estimate probability of unretirement (P21) equations.
  small sample size prevented us from noting any general tendencies.

          2lnfrequent movements from quasi—retirement back to full—
  time work also occur; our estimates for this movement were very
  imprecise and are not reported here.
                                27




                                Table 4.4
                                                                   .
                 Probability of Retirement Equations


                                                          3a
                                        Coefficient (x 10 )
     Variable                                .       .       .
                                      Quasi—Retire        Retire

Social security benefits                     0.470        0.497
                                            (0.250)      (0.204)

Income from assets                           0.107        0.125
                                            (0.064)      (0.060)

Net earnings                                —1.95        —1.37
                                            (0.47)       (0.49)

Age = 65 dummy



                                                                   .
                                             1720         617
                                             (408)       (317)

Spouse's earnings                           —0.121       —0.390
                                            (0.101)      (0.194)


log likelihood =     —200.136




aASPO1C standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                   .
                              28




                           Table 4.5

       Probability of Movement from Quasi—Retirement
                  to Complete Retirement



                                                        3a
        Variable                       Coefficient (x 10 )



    Social   security benefits               0.355
                                            (0.188)

    Income from assets                       0.150
                                            (0.095)

    Net earnings                            —1.66
                                            (0.45)

    Age = 65 dummy                           806
                                            (359)

    Spouse's earnings                       —0.255
                                            (0.153)


    log likelihood =     —103.57




    aAsptotic standard errors in parentheses.




I
                                 29




Combined with the results from Table 4.4 they reveal a picture of

gradual (perhaps stepwise is more accurate) retirement; movements

from full—time to part—time work (perhaps in a different occupation)

to complete retirement over a number of years are not uncommon.

        Again, the effects are those we have come to expect——strong

negative net earnings effects, strong positive social security

income and age equal to 65 effects) and modest income from asset

effects. Because of the smaller number of potential observations,

the individual coefficients are not measured as precisely as those

reported above. Hence, we have somewhat more confidence in the

empirical results reported above. It is worth noting that for many

elderly persons working part—time, social security benefit increases

may not be earnings tested over a modest range.

        Thus, the results reported above describe a complete sto-

chastic structure of retirement decisions——including the stepping—

down gradually phenomenon described above. The estimates may be

used to estimate the effects of alternative policies on retirement

decisions and their time path.

        What do these results imply for the time series decline in

the labor force participation rates of elderly males? Of the var-

iables affecting retirement, the effect of the growth in spouse's

earnings would be to reduce the probability of retirement; so, perhaps,

would the improved health of the elderly (despite our unreliable

negative coefficient!). Certainly the growth of after—tax real earn-

ings would do so. Of these three effects, the effect of net earnings
                               30



is the only one which would be very important given our coefficients.

Hence, we must seek an explanation for the decline in the labor force

participation in the tremendous increase in social security benefits'

and the negating of part of the effect of net earnings increases by

the earnings test and expansion of social security coverage. Indeed,

assuming on average that one—half of the real increase in earnings

has been offset by reduced social security benefits and allowing for

the growth in real "full" social security benefits, using the coef-

ficients in Table 4.1 suggests that the social security system has

increased the annual probability of retirement by some forty percent!

Since the actual reduction in labor force participation (refer back

to Table 1.1) appears to be about fifty percent for the over sixty—

five group and perhaps half of that for the 61—65 age cohort, we see

that social security has been the prime mover in the acceleration of

retirement !2

        We turn next to a discussion of some overall implications of

these results and some suggestions for future research.




       1The modest growth in income from assets combined with the small
coefficient account for only a very small Increase in the annual prob-
ability of retirement.

       20f course, with much more data we could try to track retire-
ment by age, marital status, occupation, etc. The aggregate figures
may cover up important differences among different groups!
                                31




                        5.   Conclusion
                                                                          .
         If the results reported above are at all accurate, they

suggest that recent increases in social security benefits and cov-

erage, combined with the earnings test are a significant contributor

to the rapid decline of the labor force participation of the elderly

in the United States. The social security system Is inducing (or

enabling) a substantial fraction of the elderly population to retire

earlier than they would have in the absence of the system. While a

general analysis of the welfare economics of such movements is beyond

the scope of this paper, a few comments are worth making.

         First, the earnings test creates a huge distortion in the

labor supply decisions of a large number of elderly workers. The

distortion of this work—leisure choice produces the usual dead—weight

loss of the analysis of the effects of taxes on labor supply (see

Harberger [12]). Liberalization of the earnings test would dramatically

reduce the probability of retirement and improve the allocation of re-

sources.1 However, the flow of funds through the social security sys-

tem probably would have to be increased. This has led many researchers

(e.g., Pechman, et. al. [19]) to argue that reduction of the implicit

tax in the earnings test is too costly. Two provisos need to be added

to this allegation.



        1One can also imagine a wide variety of external economies
and diseconomies associated with driving the elderly out of the labor
force.

                                                                          .
                              32




        First, the only real resource cost would be any additional

distortions resulting from increased taxes to finance the change in

the earnings test (and these are likely to fall well short of the

marginal gain in welfare of reducing the earnings test tax both because

the labor supply of the elderly is much more elastic than that of the

general population and because the marginal welfare cost is a function

of the marginal tax rate on earnings, which for many elderly persons

substantially exceeds the rate for the non—elderly).

        Second, the large labor supply elasticity itself would sub-

stantially reduce the net Impact on the flow of funds required to

finance the additional benefits for two reasons: the increased labor

supply of the elderly would increase the direct social security taxes

paid by the elderly and the decreased earnings tested rate would apply

to a larger earnings base.

        Second, while we have produced no direct evidence relating to

the effects of social security on saving or labor supply prior to old

age, our results are certainly consistent with the induced retirement

effect discussed by Feldstein [71 in his analysis of social security

and saving. Thus, any substitution of social security for private

saving is in spite of induced retirement working to increase saving.1

        Finally, let me conclude by noting that the conclusions above

are based on a single source of data and a modest sample size. Further



        'Indeed, the results of Munnell [18] suggest that the induced
retirement effect thus far has offset the asset substitution effect.
She suggests the net effect eventually will be a decrease in saving.
                               33




analysis of panel studies is certainly in order to help confirm or
                                                                           S
reject these conclusions; indeed, I hope that the entire subject of

social insurance will begin to receive the attention it deserves.




                                                                           .




        1Once the mature males sampie of the Parnes data reaches retire-
ment age and once the Retirement History Survey records several more
years of information, we will have two large samples with which to ad—
dress the questions raised in the current paper.
                                         34




                                     REFERENCES



        1   ]   Barfield, Richard, and James Morgan. Early Retirement: The
                      Decision and the Experience, Survey Research Center,
                      University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1969.

    [2 ]        Brittain, John A. "The Incidence of Social Security Payroll
                      Taxes," American Economic Review, 61(1), March 1971.

    [   3   ]   ____________. The Payroll Tax for Social Security, The Brook—
                      ings Institution, Washington, D.C., 1972.

    [4 ]        Buchanan, James M. "Social Insurance in a Growing Economy:
                      A Proposal for Radical Reform," National Tax Journal,
                      XXI(4), December 1968.

    [5 ]        Campbell, Cohn. "Social Insurance in the United States: A
                      Program in Search of an Explanation," Journal of Law
                      and Economics, XII(2), October 1969.

    [6 1        Epstein, Lenore A., and Janet H. Murray. The Aged Population
                      of the United States, U.S. Government Printing Office,
                      Washington, D.C., 1967.

        7 ]     Feldstein, Martin S.  "Social Security, Induced Retirement and
                      Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political
                      Economy, 82(5), September 1974.

    [8 ]        _____________. "Social Security and Private Capital Accumula-
                      tion: International Evidence in an Extended Life—Cycle
                      Model," Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion
                      Paper, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1974.

    [   9   ]   ____________. "Optimal  Financing of Social Security,"
                      unpublished mimeograph, 1974.

    [10] _____________.        "The Incidence of the Social Security Payroll
                      Tax: Comment," American Economic Review, LXII(4),
                      September 1972.

    [11] Hall, R. "An Analysis of the Labor Supply Results," in
               M. Timpane (ed.), An Evaluation of the New Jersey—
               Pennsylvania Negative Income Tax Experiment,
               The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C., forthcoming.



I
                                 35




[12]   Harberger, Arnold C. "Taxation, Resource Allocation, and
                                                                        .
             Welfare," in The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes in
             the Federal Revenue System, Princeton University Press,
             Princeton, N.J., 1964.

[13] Kemeny, John G., and J. Laurie Snell. Finite Markov Chains,
           Van Nostrand, Princeton, N.J., 1963.

[14] Kendall, Maurice G., and Alan Stuart. The Advanced Theory of
           Statistics, 2nd ed. (3 vol.), Hafner, New York, 1963—68;
             3rd ed., 1969—73.

[15] Long, Clarence. The Labor Force under Changing Income and
           Employment, Princeton University press, Princeton, N.J.,
            1958.

[16] McFadden, Daniel. "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative
           Choice Behavior," in Paul Zarembka (ed.), Frontiers in
           Econometrics, Academic Press, New York, 1973.

[17] Mincer, J.     Schooling, Experience and Earnings, NBER, 1974

[18] Munnell, A. "The Impact of Social Security on Personal Savings,"
           in National Tax Journal, December 1974.

[19] Pechman, Joseph A., Henry J. Aaron, and Michael K. Taussig.
            Social Security: Perspectives for Reform, The Brookings
            Institution, Washington, D.C., 1968.

[20] Steiner, Peter, and Robert Dorfman. The Economic Status of
           the Aged, University of California Press, Berkeley, 1959.

[21] Survey Research Center. A Panel Study of Income Dynamics,
           Institute for Social Research, The University of
           Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1972.

[22] U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. The 1963
           Social Security Survey of the Aged, Social Security
           Administration, Washington, D.C.

[23] Wentworth, Edna C. Employment after Retirement, U.S. Department
           of Health, Education, and Welfare, Social Security
           Administration, Office of Research and Statistics,
           Research Report 21, 1968.
                                    36




                 Appendix A: The Statistical Model




         We observe an individual's labor market behavior for five

consecutive years. Let the individual be in one of N states (e.g.

full—time work, quasi—retirement, retirement), choose the condi-

tional logit parametrization of the probabilities of movements among

states,1 and focus for the moment on transitions out of a single

state, say state 1; we have the following Markov model of retirement

behavior:



                              1
         P
            ll,st
                        1+ e      n nst
                          N
                                                                  (A.l)



                    —    e2
         lL,st —
                        l+e , x
                          N
                                    nst




where          is the probability individual s will move from state 1

(e.g. full—time work) to state 9. (e.g. retirement) in period t,

X      is a vector of variables for individual s in time t   in   staten,
 nst
and the 's are unknown parameters to be estimated. The 's may

be interpreted as relative shadow weights or prices attached to the

variables in choosing which state to move to each period. We choose



          1Conditional logit estimation is developed in McFadden [16].
                                           37




the maximum likelihood method of estimating                 The part of the

likelihood function referring to a single state i may be written as:


                     S
                     Ti       TI     p.                v [l,N]         (A.2)
                    s=i tT.is         iv,st




where T.
       is
          is the set of times individual s is in state i. The

entire likelihood function, of course, is ii%. To maximize the

likelihood of observing our sample in the sequence of states they

occupy, given their right—hand variables in each state in each

period, we take logarithms



          in         =
                                  tT. in                               (A.3)
                                                                               •
and differentiate with respect to the unknown ,



          BlnoC.1                          inP.iv,st
                          =                                            (A.4)
                              L     L
                              s    teT.
                                      is


where     denotes possible states and q indexes right hand variables.

Hence, we have as many first—order derivatives as the product of

the number of right hand variables and one less than the number of

states. Now



        TiSee Kendall and Stuart [14] for a discussion of the
properties of maximum likelihood estimators and Kemeny and Snell
[13] for an introduction to Markov chains.

                                                                               .
                                          38




        3 in P.
        ______
             a
              ivst        = —x
                                  q,st
                                          P
                                              ij,,st
                                                                      ifv
and                                                                           (A.5)

        3 in P.
                  li,St   =
                                  Xqst    (1 —                       if v =

Equations (4.5) may be substituted into (4.4). To maximize the
likelihood function, these first derivatives must be set equal to

zero and the resulting system of equations solved. We use Newton's

method, which requires information on the second partial derivatives

of the likelihood function. The iterative procedure is defined by



        t+i =             — [B}      A                                        (A.6)




where T refers to iteration number, B is the matrix of second partial

derivatives, and A is the vector of first partial derivatives,

each evaluated at the             vector obtained in iteration r. Typical

elements of the matrix of second partial derivatives are



             2int1            =
                                                  32lnP iv,st
                                                                              (    7)
             un     2q             S tET                   a




where
                                      x          x     P
                                       iqst unSt i2,st lust
                                                               P.                     u5&i
         2
         3 lnP.
         a aiv,st =
             un      2q
                                                                                  A8

                                     —x          x     P.      (1—P i9,st )
                                       9qst       unst i9,St
                              39



The iterative process is said to converge when successive itera-       .
tions yield sufficiently similar estimates of .   Further,   the

square roots of the negative of the diagonal elements of B may be

used as estimated standard errors of the estimated coefficient

vector .

        The important thing to note about the model is that it

enables us to capture the stochastic structure of retirement deci-

sions——retirement may take place gradually as potential retirees

pass through a series of labor market states (full—time work,

part—time work, complete retirement, etc.), perhaps even moving

back and forth among several. Our model potentially enables us to

capture such movements through their dependence on a series of

variables which may in turn depend upon time. Thus, if accurate

estimates of the coefficients are found, the effects of alterna-

tive policies, such as the provision of social security benefits and

the earnings test under social security, which affect the variables

influencing retirement decisions, on the time structure and extent

of retirement may be estimated.




                                                                       .
                                      40




I            Appendix B: A Life Cycle Labor Supply Model




           Consider an individual planning his lifetime consumption of

    goods, X, and leisure, L. We assume the individual acts to maximize

    discounted lifetime utility subject to a budget constraint, i.e. he


                          T
            maximizes           ert U(X, L)dt                                     (B.l)

                          t=0


    subject to



            K = rK    + W(t)(T —    L(t))     —   P(t)X(t),                       (B.2)




    where T is time available, K is assets, K saving, and W(t) and

    P(t) are the wage rate (after—tax) and price of consumption goods.

            Form the Hamiltonian



                 =   e   U(X,L) + PK(t)[rK + W(t)(T—L(t)) —                P(t)X(t)I (B.3)


    where PK(t) is the shadow price of saving. Necessary conditions for

    an optimum are then



            PK(t) =      - = —r

                                =   e    -- — PK(t)P(t)
                                                                  =   0            (B.4)




                                = e_ót   2W       —               =   0.
    and
                          -                           PK(t)P(t)
                                     41


Rearranging, and dividing, we see that

            bU
            ax      —
                    —    P(t)                                   (B. )
            au           W(t)
            aL


i.e. the consumer workers equate the instantaneous marginal rate of

substitution between goods and leisure to their relative prices.

Further




          P(t)    —
                        et ax
                           -
                                 —
                                     et -                       B
          K               P(t)        W(t)


the shadow price of saving is equal to each of the time discounted

marginal utilities of consumption and leisure, divided by their

respective prices. From this set of optimum conditions, we may derive

the consumer—worker's optimal lifetime pattern of consumption of          S
leisure and goods, as well as the comparative dynamic effects on the

consumption of goods and leisure of changes in wages, prices and

assets. Since explicit solutions require specific functional forms

for utility functions, we present here only a heuristic discussion

of these effects. The general labor supply function may be written as

          LS =   f(P,   W, K0)                                (B.7)

where the coefficients on the price, wages and assets depend upon age,

the interest rate and the initial shadow price of saving as well as

upon parameters of the utility function.

          Fist, compared to the usual comparative static result that

labor supply may be an increasing or decreasing function of wage rates,

depending upon whether the income or substitution effect dominates,

                                                                          .
                                42



the wage elasticity of labor supply now also depends upon the sensi-

tivity of the shadow price of saving to wage changes. A permanent

increase in wage rates makes   the   individual wealthier and is most

likely to decrease the shadow price of saving.

        Second, the time pattern of labor supply also depends upon

the shadow price of saving. An increase in this initial shadow price

will accelerate the time rate of change of leisure consumption.

        Thus, any program which alters the wage rates or assets of

individuals potentially affects labor supply and saving over the en-

tire life cycle.
