NBER Working Paper Series

THE INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY IN AN
INTEREST—GROUP PERSPECTIVE

William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner

Working Paper No. 110

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305

October 1975

Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.
They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.
The research reported herein was performed pursuant to a grant
from the National Science Foundation to the NBER for research
in the area of law and economics. The opinions expressed herein
are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Science Foundation.

THE INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY IN AN INTEREST-GROUP PERSPECTIVE*

William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner

The University of Chicago Law School
and
National Bureau of Economic Research

Introduction

Economists, even those who are deeply interested in government and

politics have not examined critically the idea of a nonpolitical, or
"independent," judiciary)-/ Most economists would doubtless agree with
Professor Buchanan that the judiciary is, and should remain, a thing

apart from the political process. The basic structure of constitutional
democracy, in his words,

invo'ves a conceptual separation between (1) the constitution,

which defines the rights of persons and

groups to do things and defines the rules under which

collective decisions are to be made, (2) the institutions

of

"the law," which adjudicate the conflicting claims

made within this set of rights and rules, and (3) the
collective decision-making process of the ordinary
legislative variety, which presumably.promotes "public
good," but again within the rules laid down in the constitution.

This conception of the law in general, and the Supreme Court in constitutional adjudication in particular, as standing apart from and

2.

limiting the scope and intrusiveness of the political process has
been shared by most legal commentators
of Alexander Hamilton.

since at least the time

A quite different conception has been

proposed by political scientists writing in the tradition of interest—
group analysis, notably Martin Shapiro.

He argues that, like other

organs of government, the Supreme Court is the agent of interest groups-in Shapiro's view, interest groups not represented adequately by

other governmental organs. We are not convinced by Shapiro's effort
to transform the Court into a political body. In particular, his conception leaves unexplained why it is that the Supreme Court, viewed
as a political organ1should be systematically responsive to the least
politically influential segments of the society.

We believe that economic analysis may hold the key to reconciling

the notion of a independent judiciary with a conception of the political-governmental process that emphasizes the importance of interest

groups in the formation of public policy. The reconciliation that we
propose may seem at first paradoxical, for we grant that the judiciary
is in an important sense independent of and dissimilar to the political
branches of the. government yet at the same time maintain that it is a

necessary element in the successful functioning even of a government
of interests and powers, as distinguished from a government that seeks
to maximize some general notion of welfare or the public interest.

Article III of the U.S. Constitution provides for the appointment
(rather than election) of federal judges, provides that they are to

have life tenure, and forbids Congress to reduce their salaries while

3.

they are in office. These provisions, while they are as we shall see
not airtight, were designed and have operated in practice to endow the
federal judiciary with a substantial measure of independence from the

wishes of Congress and the President. To a lesser degree, the same
thing may be said of state and municipal judges, of judges in many
other countries, and, for that matter, of judges at all levels, in
America and elsewhere, long before Article III was conceived.
The existence of an independent judiciary seems inconsistent
with--in fact profoundly threatening to-—a political system in which
public policy emerges from the struggle of interest groups to redistribute the wealth of the society in their favor, the view of the
political process that underlies much of the recent economic work,
as well as an older political-science literature, on the political

system. The outcomes of the struggle can readily be nullified by
unsympathetic judges--and why should judges be sympathetic to a process
that simply ratifies political power rather than expresses principle?
The Supreme Court's policy toward economic legislation during a period
of roughly 50 years ending in the late 1930's

illustrates the power

and proclivity of an independent judiciary to nullify the legislative
results of interest-group politics.
We believe, however, that at a deeper level the independent
judiciary is not only consistent with, but essential to, the interest—

group theory of government. Part I of this paper explains our theory
of the independent judiciary. Part II discusses several implications
of the theory, relating to administrative regulation, the form of
interest-group legislation, the tenure of judges, and constitutional

4.

adjudication. The appendix to this paper presents an empirical analysis
of judicial independence using data on Acts of Congress that have been
held unconstitutional by the Supreme Court.

I. An Economic Theory of the Independent Judiciary

A. Legislative "Deals" and Judicial Independence
In the economists' version of the interest-group theory of government, legislation is supplied to groups or coalitions that outbid rival
seekers of favorable legislation. i-"

The price that the winning group

bids is 4etermined both by the value of

legislative

protection to the

group's members and the groups ability to overcome the free-rider problems that plague coalitions. Payment takes the form of campaign contributions, votes, implicit promises of future favors, and sometimes out-

right bribes. In short, legislation is "sold" by the legislature and
"bought" by the.beneficiaries of the legislation.

Private sales, and other private contracts, carry legal sanctions

for nonperformance. Where the performances of the buyer and seller are

not simultaneous, and tharties are not constrained to act in good
faith by a desire to obtain similar business in the future, the legal
sanctions are likely to be an important factor in the decision to enter

into the transaction. But there are no legal sanctions for the failure
of a legislature to carry out its "bargain" withan interest group.
Suppose the airline industry obtains from Congress (as it did in 1938)
legislation designed to foster monopoly pricing while preventing the
entry of new competitors that such pricing would ordinarily attract.
There is no legal mechanism analogous to a binding long-term contract

5.

by which the enacting Congress can prevent a subsequent Congress from
amending the legislation in a,way unfavorable to the airlines, or

indeed from repealing it altogether. Yet both the enacting Congress
and the airlines, in procuring the legislation, may have incurred sub-

stantial expenses that would not prove worthwhile if the legislation
were to be altered unfavorably or repealed within a few months or years.
To be sure, congressional bad faith of this sort would reduce the
present value of legislative protection to interest groups in the future,

and hence the enacting Congressmen's welfare. Such a manifestation of
congressional bad faith would, by reducing the value of legislative
protection to interest groups, impose costs on the faithless Congressmen:

the "price" they could demand for enacting such legislation would be

lower. For many individual Congressmen, however, especially those who
did not expect to remain in Congress for long, the benefits from re-

pudiating a previous Congress' "deal" might outweigh the costs. And
even if the good faith of the majority of Congressmen were assured, it
would be insufficient to guarantee legislative stability in any case

where the initial vote enacting the legislation was not one-sided. If
the vote was close, the defection of only a few Congressmen, as a result
of retirement or defeat at the polls, from the winning coalition might
lead to a repeal in the next session of Congress, since the newly elected

Congressmen would have no comitments to honor the "deals" of their
predecessors. §1

The element of stability or continuity necessary to enable
interest—group politics to operate in the legislative arena is supplied,

6.

in the first instance, bytheprocedural rules of the legislature, and
in the second instance by the existence of an independent judiciary.
The most significant of the procedural rules is the requirement that
legislation (including amending or repealing legislation) must be

enacted by a majority of the legislators voting. This requirement
makes legislative enactment a difficult and time—consuming process
because of the transaction costs involved in getting agreement among
a larger number of individuals. -"

Consequently, once a statute is

passed, it is unlikely, given the press of other legislative business,
to be substantially altered or repealed in the immediate future.

Other characteristics of the legislative process also create resistance
to both the speedy enactrient of new laws and the repeal of old ones:

bicameralism, the committee system, and fillibusters are important

examples. Consider the tradition (now beginning to erode)of appointing
committee chairmen on the basis of seniority. The use of seniority
tends to channel chairmanships to holders of safe" congressional seats——
Congressmen whose tenure can be expected to be long and who are therefore
more likely to honor the commitments made by Congress.
The impediments to legislation have the effect of endowing legisla-

tion, once it is enacted, with a measure of durability. The result is
to increase the value of and hence the demand for legislation. But there
is an offsetting effect: by increasing negotiation costs and uncertainty
the impediments reduce the productivity of expenditures on obtaining

legislation in the first place. However, under plausible assumptions
the increase in the value of legislation will exceed the increase in its

7.

cost, since a modest increase in the cost of enacting legislation
could multiply many—fold the length of the period in which the legislation was expected to remain in force.
Legislation is not self-enforcing, however.

If the people subject

to a law refuse to obey it, recourse to the courts is necessary to

enforce the law. A judiciary that was subservient to the current
membership of the legislature could nullify legislation enacted in a

previous session of the legislature. Suppose that Congress in year one
sells" the diary industry a heavy tax on margarine, but the next year
the producers of marciarine offer Congress generour inducements to remove

the tax. Congress is unlikely to respond to this demand by enacting
repealing legislation, due to the impediments to swift legislative action

that we have discussed. But if the judges are the perfect agents of
the current Congress, they will refuse to enforce the margarine tax,

and the effect will be the same as legislative repeal. Although outright
refusal to enforce a law is an extreme example, the limits of human
foresight, the ambiguities of language, and the high cost of legislative
deliberation combine to assure that most legislation will be enacted in
a seriously incomplete form, with many areas of uncertainty left to be

resolved by the courts. Insofar as judges are merely agents of the
current legislature, they will utilize their considerable interpretive
leeway to rewrite the legislation in conformity with the views of the
current rather than the enacting legislature and they will thereby impair
the "contract" between the enacting legislature and the group that
procured the legislation.

8.

If we assume that an independent judiciary would, in contrast,
interpret and apply legislation in accordance with the original legislative understanding

3__!'

(an assumption examined shortly) it follows

that an independent judiciary facilitates rather than, as conventionally

believed, limits the practice of interest-group politics. To be sure,
like the constitutive rules of the legislative process, the independent
judiciary increases the cost of enacting legislation in the first place.
Being independent, the judges may (directly or indirectly) refuse to
enforce legislation that they do not like and this possibility reduces

the value of legislation to the group seeking it. But that is a necessary price to pay for a system in which interest groups will have incen-

tives to invest in legislation that yields them benefits over an
extended period of time.

B. A Formal Model
Before examining certain objections to the analysis, it will be

helpful to present a more formal version of it. Let d0d1 in Figure I
represent the demand curve of various groups for special-interest
legislation (such as protective tariffs, import quotas, or minimum rate
regulation) under the assumption that the benefits from such legislation

will be limited to a single period, namely the term of the enacting

legislature. The demand curve is negatively sloped because some
groups will obtain greater benefits from protective legislation and
accordingly will offer a higher price.

S0S1 is the marginal cost

curve of the legislature, viewed as the seller of special-interest

legislation. The legislature's costs include the costs of drafting
legislation (primarily the opportunity costs of the time spent by

9.

legislators in attending committee meetings, roll calls, etc.) and
other expenses. 1?_," The market for special—interest legislation

will clear at point E0 in Figure I, where L0 units of legislation are

produced. At E0 all the gains from trade between interest groups and
legislators will be fully exploited under the (restrictive) assumption

that legislation is sold only for a single period. The dollar benefits
after

deducting the costs of writing the legislation will equal the

area d0E0S0, and are distributed between legislators and groups obtaining

legislation,

the simplest assumption being that the benefits received

by legislators are proportional to the area dØE0S0.

[Insert

Figure I about here]

Now let the gains from special-interest legislation extend beyond

the period of the enacting legislature. To simplify, assume that the
legislation will never be repealed and that the group benefited by its
expects to obtain constant profits per period from the legislation.
Then the maximum price the group will pay to obtain the legislation will

equal the present value of those profits. In terms of Figure I, the
relevant demand curve is now D0d1, which is a vertical multiple of the
single—period demand curve.

Assuming for the moment that it costs

no more to enact permanent than single-period legislation and that
legislative hldealsu can be permanently enforced at zero cost, the new

equilibrium position will be at E2. This differs from the single-period
model in two important respects. First, there is more special-interest
legislation (L2 compared to L0), since some legislation that was not profitable to enact when the return was received for only one period is

9a

.
Price

S3

.

Si

L0

L1

L2

Legislation /time

FIGURE I

.

10.

now profitable.

(Indeed, if dcd were everywhere below the marginal

cost curve, there would have been no special-interest legislation at

all in the single-period model.) Second, since the discounted benefits
of the legislation as measured by the area D0E2S0 exceed the singleperiod benefits, the "take" of the enacting legislature, which we
assume to be proportional to the benefits of the legislation to the

group procuring it, increases when legislation extends beyond one
period.

Thus, the legislature has powerful incentives to devise methods
of increasing the permanency of legislation.

--"

As we have seen,

there are two complementary methods of doing this. The first involves
establishing procedures for the enactment of legislation that increase
the cost of repealing it; the second, the creation of an independent
judiciary to enforce legislation in accordance with the intentions of

the enacting legislature. In terms of Figure I, the effect of the
internal procedures is to shift the marginal cost curve upwards to
S2S3 while at the same time shifting the dmeand curve to the right of

d0d1. Internal procedures will presumably be added until the additional
benefits of the legislature from increasing the demand for legislation
are just equal to the additional costs of the procedures.
If, however, the judges served at the pleasure of the legislators,

their decisions would presumably be in perfect harmony with the current
legislature's wishes, and we would be back to the single-period model

with demand curve d0d1 no matter how cumbersome were the internal

procedures of the legislature. It is no answer that interest groups
would simply pay for legislation on the installment plan--a sum each

11.

period in exchange for the continuation of the original "deal." The
enacting legislature would still have an incentive to produce only
L0

units of legislation since it would not be compensated for additional

units. As noted earlier, the legislature might find it unprofitable
to "sell" any legislation at all unless the future benefits of the
legislation could be capitalized and received by the enacting legislature.
Finally, even if the costs of producing the legislation were zero, so

that the number of "deals' was independent of whether or not the
enacting legislature could appropriate future benefits, the legislature would still have a strong incentive to build durability into its
legislation in order to capture some of those future benefits.

If the judiciary is independent, 'it can be expected) for reasons
explained in the next subpart, to enforce existing statutes in accordance

with the intent.of the enacting legislature. But while the combination
of high legislative costs of repeal and an independent judiciary thus
turns out to be an ingenious device for promoting the sale of long-term
special-interest legislation, independence is not without its costs.
The judiciary may decide not to enforce the deal worked out by the

legislature. It may declare the law unconstitutional or interpret it
in a manner that reduces the gains from the law to the group intended

to benefit from it, since most sitting judges, hving been apppointed
in an earlier period, will "owe" nothing to the enacting legislature.
The cost of independence is shown in Figure I by the demand curve
which is lower than D0d1.

The difference between the two curves

is due to the positive probability in each future period that the

.

12.

returns from the special-interest legislation will not be forthcoming

because of adverse judicial rulings. These expectations will be
incorporated into the maximum price that groups are willing to pay

for favorable legislation. Since judicial nullification of legislation
has in fact been relatively infrequent,

it seems reasonable to

assume that D1d1 will lie substantially above d0d1, the single-period

demand curve. This is illustrated in Table 1, which shows the ratio
of the multi-period to the single—period maximum price for several
[Insert Table 1 about here]
hypotheti-cal values of the probability of judicial nullification, the

number of time periods, and the interest rate. We assume that the
the single-period
single-period returns occur with certainty (since in /
model, it will
be recalled, the judiciary is assumed to be the perfect agent of the
enacting legislature), while the multi-period returns are subject to
If, for example, a 10
the risk of nullification in each period.
20 per cent
per cent interest rate and a / probability of nullification per period

are assumed, the present value of the legislative returns (and hence
the maximum price the interest group is willing to pay for favorable
legislation) is between 2.8 and 2.9 times greater in the multi—period

(10 or more periods) than in the single—period model. Overall, the
multi—period to single—period ratios range from 1.7 to 9.0 in Table 1,
the ratio being greater the lower the probability of nullification,
the lower the interest rate, and the greater the number of time periods.
These calculations indicate that there are substantially higher benefits
from multi-period deals even when the probabilities of nullification are

13.

themselves substantial. In fact, in order for the single-period price
to equal the multi-period price and thus for d0d1 to equal D1d1 in
Figure I, the probability of nullification would have to be between
.45 and .5Oin each period.

The equilibrium sale of legislation, which incorporates both the
costs of the self-imposed rules on the legislative process and the
expected utaxhi

resulting

from the independence of the judiciary, occurs

at E1 in Figure I, where L1 units of legislation are produced, yielding
benefits equal to D1E1S2 which are divided between the interest groups

and the legislature. Even assuming that these benefits are greater
than the area d0E0S0, this solution is a second-best one. The benefits
would be greater if the long-term commitments of the current legislature
could be enforced at zero cost. With this possibility excluded, the
independent judiciary serves the function of permitting some capitaliza-

tion

of future returns into the pockets of the current legislature.

C. A Closer Look at the Concept of Judicial "Independence"
The reader may be troubled by the assumption that the "independent1'

judiciary is really independent of interest-group political pressures,
by

our failure to present an explicit theory of judicial behavior, and

by the existence of alternative theories of the independence of the

judiciary.

It

is of course unrealistic to suppose the judiciary wholly

independent of the current desires of the political branches. The
legislature could refuse to appropriate funds to pay the judges'
salaries;

Short

the executive could refuse to enforce judicial decrees.

of outright confrontation, there are various methods by which

S

14.

the political branches can impose costs on the judiciary, such as
budgetary harassment,

tinkering with the courts' jurisdiction,

and altering the composition of the judiciary by the creation of many

new judgeships. Yet such devices have been resorted to infrequently,
even in periods of intense hostility to judicial rulings. The reason,
we conjecture, is the high costs of the available methods of harassment

in relation to the benefits sought. The current legislature may want
judicial interpretations that gut some existing laws, but if it tries
to procure them by forms of coercion that impair the functioning of
the judiciary across the board, it will impose costs on all who use
the courts, including various politically effective groups and indeed
the beneficiaries of whatever legislation the current legislature has
enacted.

the same time, the fact that the legislative and executive

At

branches do have means of coercing the judiciary helps to explain why

the self—interest of independent judges
legislation

highly,
that

is promoted by enforcing

according to its original tenor. If courts are not valued

the imposition

by the current legislature of coercive measures

impair the courts' effective functioning will not be perceived as

highly costly, and such measures will therefore be imposed more often.
The value (both social and private) of courts is a function in major

part of the predictability of their decisions and decision according
to

the original meaning of a statute rather than according to the ever-

shifting preferences of successive legislatures is probably an important
source of that predictability, in part because such a decision is based

15.

on materials (for example, the congessional debates) available to

.

all to study and base predictions of judicial behavior on. In short,
the ability of courts to maintain their independence from the political

branches may depend at least in part on their willingness to enforce
the "contracts" of earlier legislatures according to the original

understanding of the "contract."
There is, to be sure, the possibility that although the judiciary
is independent of the political branches, interest groups will intervene
directly ,with judges to undo the results of an earlier legislative

process. However, the methods of imparting independence from the
political branches of government also serve to reduce the possibility
of

direct or

tenure--in

indirect bribery of the judges by interest groups. Life

circumstances where the job holder intends to remain in the

job for the remainder of his active life--' reduces the likelihood
of

an important £because difficult to detect) form of bribery that

consists of dangling prospects of future employment before the bribe-

taker. Life tenure also increases the expected penalty for bribery,
assuming dismissal is a major sanction for bribery.

Other rules

of the judicial process also operate to reduce the operation of

interest groups in the judicial arena, notably the rules limiting ex
parte

contacts with judges and denying legal standing to groups, as

distinct from the individuals or firms immediately affected in a
narrow legal sense, by the legislation in question.
Not only is the assumption of independence plausible, but the
judiciary in fact commonly behaves as if it were independent of the

wishes of the current legislature. —

—

16.

To be sure, this leaves open the question, what does determine

the outcome of judicial decisions? As mentioned, there are constraints,
imposed by the legislative and executive branches, that set the outer

limits on judicial autonomy but they leave a broad area on which
judicial behavior cannot be explained by reference to those constraints.
Within

this area, the development of an economic throry of judicial

behavior is hampered by the studied efforts of society to divorce

judicial

rewards from the outcome of judicial decisions. A possibility

is that judicial decision-making should be viewed as a consumption

activity from the judg&s standpoint. He decides in a certain way
not because it will get him something else but because he derives
personal satisfaction from preferring one party to the lawsuit over

other or one policy over another, a form of satisfaction that

the

individuals routinely seek in a variety
this

of areas. However, to develop

or any other theory of judicial behavior would carry us far beyond

the scope of this paper, and is we

believe unnecessary to it.

It remains to consider alternative explanations for

of

the existence

the independent judiciary to the one proposed here. The commonest

explanation is that an independent judiciary is necessary to enforce
the

Constitution against the legislative and executive branches of

government. This is unconvincing. The English

judiciary is also

independent but English judges may not have-—and certainly do not exer-

cise——the power to invalidate acts of Parliament. In most other
societies as well, the judiciary has considerable independence (save
in politically very sensitive areas, mainly involving internal security)
yet no power to invalidate legislative action.

17.

Another possible explanation is that an independent judiciary

minimizes the costs of legal procedure. Life tenure reduces turnover and thereby imparts greater predictability to judicial decision-

making. The longer a judge is on the bench, the easier it becomes
to predict his decisions in many different kinds of cases. Also,
long tenure imparts valuable experience to a judge and thereby

increases his efficiency. Finally, as just mentioned, long tenure
reduces the danger of bribery--a danger that exists quite independently

of the existence of interest groups. What these points overlook, however, is'that while long judicial service may be socially desirable,

granting life tenure and a guaranteed salary is not an efficient method

of optimizing the length of judicial service. (Observe that legislators
are not employed on any such basis, though most of the arguments just
noted

also apply to them.) A more efficient method would be to pay

high salaries contingent on satisfactory performance. This would avoid
the disincentive effects of divorcing tenure and compensation from

performance and would be clearly preferable to the life-tenure system--

were it not for the exigencies of
II.

an interest-group system of government.

Positive Implications of the Ecoflopij.cTheQ.ry of the Independent Judiciary

A. Administrative Regulation
Administrative agencies such

as the Interstate Commerce Commission

and the Civil Aeronautics Board are examples of what we may call the
t1dependent" judiciary.

rates in detail,
The

Congress, lacking the time to regulate railroad

establishes an Interstate Commerce Commission to do so.

Commission has some indicia of independence but many fewer than the

federal

courts; in particular, its members serve for limited terms and

18.

turnover is in fact quite rapid. Furthermore, the fact that it has
a much more specialized jurisdiction than the federal courts facilitates
congressional surveillance and direction through the appropriations
process in a way that would be infeasible with respect to the courts.
The analysis in Part I of this paper suggests three propositions
concerning administrative regulation which seem consistent with at
least casual observation:

1. Administrative agencies will be established most frequently
when the probability of de facto judicial nullification of legislation
is high (for example, during the New Deal, when the courts were hostile

to federal economic regulations --"). This is because the ability of
courts to nullify legislation, especially by adverse factfinding in
enforcement proceedings, can be curtailed by consigning the factfinding
function to an administrative agency, which will tend to be more subservient to the legislature.

2. The legislature will, however, preserve judicial review of
administrative determinations

in order to assure that the agency,

in its eagerness to serve the current legislature, will not stray too
far from the terms of the legislative "deal" establishing the regulatory
program that the agency administers.

3. Since, however, judicial review cannot be expected to be wholly
effective, we expect—-and find-—that administrative adjudication is far

less consistent over time than judicial. (A related point is that
precedent plays a smaller role in administrative than in judicial

decision-making.) This follows directly from the relatively dependent
character of administrative judging.

19.

B. The Form of Interest Group Leislation
We have thus far treated the legislative act as complete at the
time of enactment——all of the benefits of the legislation are assumed

to flow without subsequent legislative action. Yet some legislation
is ineffective without substantial annual appropriations by the legislature, either to pay a periodic subsidy or to defray the expenses of

a public agency charged with enforcing the statute. Legislation
incomplete in this sense at the time of enactment is much less valuable
to its
in

the

beneficiaries than legislation that is

complete when enacted;

first case, the beneficiaries may have to, "buy" the legislation

anew every year. In terms of our formal model, we are in effect back
at the single-period demand curve in Figure 1.

In order to enable the

enacting legislature to appropriate part of the future benefits, we

would expect-—and we find-—that interest-group legislation is
typically cast in a form that avoids the necessity for substantial

annual appropriations. Legislation setting up regulatory agencies that
use power over rates and entry to redistribute wealth is an important

example: the annual budgets of these agencies are very small in rela—
27/

tion to the redistributions that they effect. —

Not only

is regula-

tion used much more often than direct subsidization to benefit interest
groups, but when direct subsidies are used their funding is often made
independent of further legislative action by the device of the earmarked
tax, as in the interstate-highway and social-security programs.
The problem of legislation that requires substantial annual appropriations to maintain its effectiveness is forcefully illustrated by the

experience with Prohibition. The supporters of Prohibition were able to

20,.

obtain a constitutional arnendrn2nt, normally as we shall see

particularly durable form of interest—group legislation. However,
unlike many other forms of regulation, prohibiting the sale of
alcoholic beverages required a massive law-enforcement effort.
This is strikingly illustrated in Table 2, which shows how Prohibition

cases came to dominate the dockets of the federal courts. Of course

subsequent Congresses could have appropriated the sums necessary to
increase the number of federal judges, prosecutors, customs inspectors,
etc. to levels at which Prohibition would have been effectively enforced,

but they were unwilling to do so. The result was that the constitutional
amendment was effectively nullified, and it was repealed in 1933 after

having been in effect for only 13 years. Constitutional amendments

21.

that

do not require substantial annual appropriations to enforce

(e.g., the First Amendment) have proved a good deal more durable.'
An alternative to both annual subsidies and regulatory legislation
would be the payment of a single lump sum to the interest group in
the first period, a sum equal to the discounted present value of the

annual subsidies or regulatory protection. Here, it would seem, the
transaction would be complete in the first period and there would be
no need to. have any enforcement mechanism. However, if legislative

enactment iere a cheap and speedy process or the judges were the
agents of the legislators, the interest group that had obtained the
lump-sum payment would have no protection against the legislature's

taxing away the entire payment in the second period, either by the
levying of a special tax or by the courts' interpreting existing tax
laws unequally.

C. The Determinants of-dicial Tenure
The value of judicia' independence is a function of the number of
periods over which the returns from special-interest legislation accrue.
Since an independent judiciary is, as we have seen, a source of costs

as well as benefits to the legislature, we would expect the judiciary
to be less independent

interest legislation.
observes

the shorter the expected duration of specialThis may explain certainJifferences that one

in the selection and tenure of judges at the federal,

state

and local levels of government. As we progress down this ladder,

we

find in general shorter terms for judges and greater reliance on election
rather than appointment as the method of selecting judges. This diminishing

.

4

22.

judicial independence is consistent with the fact that, the more
confined or local is the jurisdiction of a legislature, the less
scope it will have for enacting protective legislation.

There

is more competition for residents among cities and towns than among

states, and among states than among countries, because from the
resident's standpoint different cities are better substitutes for
one another than different states, and different states better sub-

stitutes than different countries. Citizen mobility limits the effectiveness to schemes of redistributing wealth from one group to another

at the state and local levels. Also, the regulation of a product or
service is less effective the more limited the jurisdiction of the
regulatory

authority, because the providers are more mobile within

a more limited area.

Thus it i hardly surprising that many federal
such

regulatory schemes,

as railroadregulation, arose from the debris of state regulatory

attempts and that much state regulation came about as a result of

failures of regulation at the municipal
importance

level. But this means that the

of an independent judiciary to the practice of interest-

group politics declines as we move from

regulation that is less local

to regulation that is more local. The interest groups will not seek
durable compacts from state and local legislatures anyway, so why
should the political branches pay the price of an independent judiciary?
Another situation in which the independent judiciary will be
less valuable to the political system is where legislators, despite
having to stand for reelection every few years, in fact enjoy a long

23.

.
enough tenure in office for interest groups to be willing to accept
long-term commitments from them. In this situation, an independent
judiciary may not be very attractive to the legislature; its value
as an enforcement agency will be slight and may well be outweighed
by its costs in potential nullification of legislative compacts.

of eliminating the independence 0f

Short

branches

the judiciary, the political

can limit the consequences of that independence either (1)

by expanding the size of the judiciary so as to be able to appoint a
substanti'al number of new judges whose policy views will be compatible

with

those of the current legislature, or (2) by filling vacancies as

they arise with older judges, whose expected terms of office will be

short (shorter, perhaps, than those of the legislators). If this
analysis is correct, one would expect an inverse relationship between

legislative tenure and judicial tenture. That is, the longer the
tenure

of the leislatorVs, the greater will be judicial turnover,

persumably brought about by election of judges or by appointment of

older
0.

people to the bench.

The Constitution and the Independent Judiciary
Earlier

we rejected the suggestion that the existence

independent judiciary is best explained in terms of its

role in

the Constitution. Nonetheless, the role of the courts in

enforcing
enforcing
analysis

of an

constitutional provisions is an important one on which

the

in this paper casts some light. We have argued that the

existence of an independent judiciary and the constitutive rules of
legislative bodies (such as the requirement of a majority vote to

24.

enact legislation) are methods of imparting durability to an initial

legislative judgment protecting some group. A constitutional right
is simply another device for doing the same thing. Since such a
right is much more difficult to retract than a statutory right--the
procedures for constitutional amendment being so costly and timeconsuming-—a constitutional provision confers more durable protection

than is possible by ordinary legislative action. But enforcement by
an independent judiciary remains necessary. Otherwise the constitutional
provisions would be continuously reinterpreted to accord with the pre-

ferences of the current legislators.
In the view proposed here, the Constitution has two purposes.

One is to establish the ground rules for a system of interest-group

politics; Article III is to be understood in this light. The second
is to confer protective legislation of a peculiarly durable kind on
those specially Qffective interest groups that are able and willing

to incur the costs necessary to obtain a constititional provision in
their favor.

Such a view has important implications for a number of constitutional controversies; we shall mention three here.
1.

It is sometimes suggested that the protection of freedom of

speech and of the press by the First Amendment should be limited to
political expression, on the theory that the purpose of the First
Amendment is to protect the electoral process by which members of
Congress and the President are selected.

However, a broader view

of the scope of the First Amendment may be quite consistent with the

25.

approach taken here, for it would be congenial to that approach to

S

view the First Amendment as a form of protective legislation extracted
by an interest group consisting of publishers, journalists, pamphieteers,
and others who derive pecuniary and nonpecuniary income from publication and advocacy of various sorts.

2. The question has sometimes been raised whether it is not a
perversion of consti tuti onal pri nci pie to invoke a consti tuti onal

provision

on behalf of a majority rather than a minority group, as in

cases challenging reverse" discrimination (for example, preferring
blacks to whites) or--a more clear—cut example--cases challenging
schemes

of legislative malapportionment that have been adopted by

popular referendum. From the standpoint of interest group analysis
adopted in this paper, it is a detail whether the group comprises

more or less than half of the voting population. Indeed, because a
large group will often be politically less effective than a small one,
due

to the higher costs of collective action to the large group, such

a group may benefit substantially from obtaining constitutional
protection against legislative regulation--though by the same token

it may find it difficult to obtain such protection in the first place.
More broadly, our interest-group analysis casts doubt on the
conventional view of constitutional lawyers that the Constitution is
designed to protect the powerless, unrepresented elements of society.
In a view of the governmental process as one in which the courts and
Constitution play an integral role in a system of interest-group
politics, the Constitution can more accurately be described as

.

26.

designed to protect groups sufficiently powerful to obtain constitutional protection for their interests.

This of course does not

explain why the "Warren Court" interpreted the Constitution as con-

ferring

extraordinary rights on the comon criminal. There is con-

siderable doubt

whether these rights were intended by the framers

of the Constitution and its amendments and perhaps this episode is

best understood as an example of judicial independence. But we do
not pretend to have developed a complete theory of the Supreme
Court's behavior.
3.

There is a long-standing debate over the question whether

the Supreme Court should use the due process and equal protection

clauses of the Constitution to strike down legislation
though

that, even

it does not infringe upon a specific constitutional right

such as freedom of speech, is unreasonable

as judged by some general

criterion of social welfare or public interest. It should not, and
would not to the extent that the view suggested here--that the Court's
role is to enforce the specific interests protected by the Constitution
rather than to act as a general brake on legislation promoting
"factions" --"

(special

interest)--is correct. And, in general,

the Court has not acted as a general brake on special-interest legis-

lation, as the growth of the welfare state attests. The view that
the Court's function is to promote or assure the consistency of the
legislative product with the public interest,

besides placing an

enormous cloud over legislative activity in general, implies that the
Court and the Constitution are outside of the structure of interestgroup politics, whereas we have tried to show that they are integral
elements of that structure.

27.

Conclusion
This paper has sketched an approach to the question of the
independent judiciary that enables a seeming anomaly in the older
political—science and newer economic theory of the political process
as a struggle among interest groups to be incorporated as an essential

element of that theory. Our analysis has certain positive implications
with respect to the structure of government that seem consistent with

observed reality. It also has, as we have just seen, normative
implications with respect to constitutional interpretation.
A

striking element of our

approach is that although we view the

independent judiciary as an essential component in a system of
interest-group politics, we do not view the judiciary as itself "political"

in the sense suggested by Martin Shapiro

and

other debunkers of

the idea of a genuinely independent judiciary. Our view of how the
courts operate is closer to that of the legal commentators who extol
the courts as "above" politics.

Where

we differ from these com-

mentators is in not venerating the courts as repositories of some
special

wisdom, integrity, morality, or commitment to principle. In

our view the courts do not enforce the moral law or ideals of neutrality,
justice, or fairness; they enforce the "deals" made by effective
interest groups with earlier legislatures.

Of course, since

the judges are independent, an appeal to principles may be effective
courtroom or law-review advocacy.

.

Appendix

Some Empirical Tests of Judicial Independence

We have argued in this paper that an independent judiciary
imposes expected costs on the sale of legislation. The possibility
that the judiciary will not enforce the deals worked out by the
legislature reduces the expected value of legislation, which in turn

reduces the benefits to the groups procuring the legislation and

the payments to the enacting legislators. Thus, the degree to which
the courts overturn legislative deals is of critical importance in
evaluati'ng the usefulness of the hypothesis that independent judiciary

fosters interest group politics. If the courts were sufficiently
unreliable, the expected benefits from the sale of multi-period
legislation, made possible by judicial independence, would not offset
the costs of the legislative deals that were frustrated by the courts.
p

And if this were the case, one would have to search further for an
explanation of $udicial independence.

The question of judicial unreliability or the costs of independence is amenable to empirical analysis although what follows

must be viewed as a crude and preliminary attempt. We focus on a
single measure of unreliability--the number of acts of Congress that

have been held unconsititional by the Surpeme Court. Nullification
is an extreme example of judicial unreliability, and for this reason
is likely to be deficient as an overall measure of the costs of
judicial independence.

Nevertheless, it is the only measure that

2.

is

readily available, and the development of a more suitable measure

is beyond the scope of this paper.
Ninety-seven

whole

or

acts of Congress were held

unconstitutional in

in part in the period 1789-1972, or an average of about

one per term of Congress.

Figure II indicates, however, that

there has been a great deal of variability over time in the number

of Supreme Court nullifications per term of Congress. Only two acts
were nullified in the 1789-1864 period while 11 were nullified in
the next) 15 years. Three peaks in nullification activity are observable:
1920-1924 (11 nullifications in the 66th-68th Congresses); 1935—1936
(10 nullifications in the 74th Congress); and 1963-1972 (25 nullifica-

tions in the 88th-92nd Congresses). Between the latter two peaks, the
number of nullifications diminished sharply (5 nullifications in the

1937-1962 perid).
What are the overall costs imposed by nullifications on the
political process whereby legislation is bought and sold? Two
inferences from the data lead us to believe that these costs are

minimal. First, in comparison to the total number of public bills
enacted by Congress, the number of nullifications is insignificant:
97 nullifications out of a total of more than 38,000 acts suggests

an average probability of nullification per actof about .0026. Even
in the peak nullification period, 1935-1936, only nine out of the
1,526 statutes enacted between 1933 and 1936 were declared unconstitutional.

Probabilities of such a small magnitude would seem unlikely

to deter significantly the enactment of special-interest legislation0

FIGURE II

Appendix

2a

10

E

9

a>
-I-

a) 7

0

U)

0
0

6

4- 5

42

0
5

10

15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
Congress number

I0
9

E
a) 8
-I-

0

a) 7
U)

0

6

4- 5
0
C-)

9- 4
3

'I

2

0
5

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90
Congress number

3.

Second, the nullification data take no account of the time span

between passage of a statute and its nullification. A Supreme
Court that in 1970 nullified a provision of a statute passed 61

years earlier would not be imposing substantial costs (discounted
back to 1909) on the groups that originally procured the statute.---"
Legislation that lasts 61 years is of sufficient durability to allow
the full benefits of the deal to have been captured by the groups

involved. So long a lag between passage and nullification is atypical,

however. Thirty-eight acts were nullified within four years of their
enactment, 58 within eight years, and 76 within 12 years. Only seven
acts were more than 25 years old at the time of their nullification.

However, even an act that lasts eight or ten years has sufficient
durability to enable the bulk of the present value of its benefits
to be appropriated.

--—"

If we

restrict the sample to acts nullified

within eight years of passage (because these are likely to have imposed

the largest costs on the groups procuring the acts), not only does

the number of nullifications
the

fall by 40

per cent (from 97

to

58) but

time pattern of nullification changes in one interesting respect.

The recent period, 1963-1973, is no longer a period of peak nullification activity (see Figure [I). Of the 27 nullificatioris in this period,
only nine took place within eight years of enactment.
Multiple regression analysis can be used to estimate the influence
that various factors have had on the frequency of Supreme Court nullifications and on the time lag between enactment and nullification of an

act. The variables included in the regression analysis are as follows:

.

4.

Nt :

number of nullifications per congressional term.

Nt8: number of nullifications per term of acts passed within
last eight years.

number of nullifications per term of acts passed within
last 16 years.

LAG: number of years between enactment and nullification for

., 95)

each of the j nullifications (jl,. .

between 1789

and 1972.

AGEt: average age of the Supreme Court judges at the end of each
congressional term.

TEN: average tenure of the Supreme Court judges at the end of
each congressional term.

BILL: number of public bifls passed by Congress within the last

i years. Note that i = 8 when the dependent variable
is

and i = 16 when the dependent variable is either

Nt or Nt16.

PARt: dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the political
party of the President and the majority party of both
the House and Senate are the same, and 0 if the President's
party is different from the majority party of either the
House and Senate.
ft

DIS:

number of dissenting votes in the Supreme Court for each
of the j nullifications.

t: identity of Congress (t runs from 1st to 92nd Congress).

5.

Multiple regression equations were estimated on the three
dependent variables, Nt8, Nt16. and Nt, over the period 1789-1972.

The specification of the 8 regression is of the following form:
Nt8 = cx+iAGEt +

2TENt

+

3PARt

+

4BILLt8

÷ U.

(1)

The Nt16 and Nt specifications are identical to (1) except that
BILLt16 replaces BILLt8. The model of legal decision making that
underlies the above equation is basically a variant of the economist's

theoremthat when the costs rise from engaging in certain behavior
or the gains fall, the frequency of such behavior declines.

Accrodingly,AGE is expected to have a positive effect on the rate
of nullifications0 Older judges, with fewer active years ahead,
will be less susceptible to legislative or executive "bribery" in
the form of promotions to higher office and are more likely to view

their present position as a terminal one. Hence older judges will
exercise their greater "independence" by nullifying more acts. The
effect of the TEN variable is less certain than AGE. We expect that
recently appointed judges will be more indebted to the current legis-

lature and executive, and hence will be less likely to nullify the
acts of their benefactors, but on the other hand, judges with less

tenure will be less indebted to more distant Congresses0 Hence TEN
should have a positive effect on nullifications only if the nullification variable is restricted to acts that have been nullified within,
for example, eight years of passage.

PAR is included in the

regression analysis to test the hypothesis that the court is less

likely to demonstrate independence and hence nullify laws the less

.

6.

conflict there is between the executive and Congress. A crude measure of this conflict is whether the President's party is the same

as the majority party of Congress. Thus we expect a negative sign
on the PAR variable. Since the dependent variable is the number of
nullifications while the model generates hypotheses on nullification
propensities, we have included the number of bills passed (BILL1) as

an independent variable in the regression. Thus, holding BILL1 constant implies that variations in nullifications reflect differences
in the nullification propensities of the Court.

Table 3 presents the regression results on three nullification
variables--Nt8 (acts 8 years old or less), Nt16 (acts 16 years old

or less), and Nt (all acts). Equations 2.1 —
1789-1972, --' and equations 2.4 -

2.6

2.3

are for the period

are for a narrower set of

observations, the 39th-92nd Congresses.

Overalithe regression results are inconclusive. The age
variable behaves as predicted but is statistically significant only

in the equations that include the full set of observations. In contrast, the tenure variable is insignificant when all observations

are included but significant in the 16 and Nt regressions that
are estimated on the 39th-92nd terms. And the positive and significant
effect of tenure in equations 2.5 and 2.6 compared to its insignificant
effect in 2.4 is contrary to the prediction that the strongest positive
impact of tenure should be observed in the Nt8 regressions.

One difficulty in estimating the separate effects of AGE and TEN
in the same regression is that the two variables are highly correlated.

7.

This is particularly true in the regressions limited to the 39th92nd Congressional terms where the correlation between AGE and TEN

is .70. When TEN is excluded from equations 2.4-2.6, the AGE variable
becomes highly significant. And similarly, when AGE is excluded from
2.4-2.6, the significance of TEN improves.

--"

Of the two remaining

variables in the regression analysis, PAR is insignificant in all six

regressions while BILL1 is significant in two of the six. In sum,
except for the AGE variables the results of the regression analysis

yield little support for a theory of legal decision-making that hypothesizes that the observed degree of judicial independence is a function
of the costs and benefits to the judiciary of exercising independence.
It would be premature, however, to abandon the theory since our measures

of costs and benefits (age, tenure, political party of executive and
Congress) and our measure of independence (nullifications) are highly
imperfect.

Our second empirical test is an analysis of the determinants of
the time lag (LAG) between the passage of a bill and its nullification.
Here each of the 95 acts nullified.between 1789 and 1972 is an observa-

tion in the regression analysis. The regression specification is
in LAGS =

+

1AGE

+

2TEN.

+

3PAR

+

4DISJ

+

5tk

+

6N

+ u

(2)

where the LAG variable is in logarithmic form._' Based on the theory
outlined earlier, we would expect both AGE and TEN to have negative

effects on the LAG variable. Since the nullification of older acts
is less costly to long-term legislative deals (because most of the
present value of benefits are still being received by groups procuring

O

8.

the act), the younger the judges are, the more susceptible they will

be to legislative and executive "bribery and pressure and the less
likely they will be to nullify recent congressional acts. Similarly,
as average tenure diminishes the Court will be more indebted to recent
Congresses and less to past Congresses, making the Court less likely
to nullify acts of the former and more likely to nullify acts of the

latter. We expect PAR to have a positive effect on LAG because the
greater the conflect between the executive and legislature, as measured
by PAR, the less effective the two branches will be in bringing joint

pressure on the Court not to nullify recent acts. We have no strong
a priori predictions on the three remaining variables, DIS, t and N,

in equation (2). N tests whether there is a systematic effect on
the time lag when more acts are nullified per term; t tests whether

there has beena trend over time in the age of acts nullified; and
DIS tests whether the degree of conflict within the Court (as measured

by the number of dissenting votes) varies with the age of the act
nullified.

Equation 2.7 of Table 3 presents the LAG regression. AGE behaves
as predicted--younger judges are less likely to nullify more recent

acts——though its effect is only marginally significant. TEN is signi—
ficant but its effect is contrary to our prediction. PAR and DIS are
not significant. Both the t and N variables are highly significant.
Here we find that the more recent the Congress, the greater the average
age of the acts nullified; and the more acts nullified per term, the
less is the average age of the acts nullified.

Landes-Posner --

*

Footnotes

.
This study has been supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research

for research in law and economics. The paper is not an
official Bureau publication since it has not yet undergone
the full critical review accorded Bureau publications, including
review by the Bureau's Board of Directors.

1.

We define an "independent" judiciary as one that does not make
decisions on the basis of the sorts of political factors (for
the

example,/electoral strength of the people affected by a decision)
that would influence and in most cases control the decision
were it to be made by a legislative body such as the U.S. Congress.

2.

James M. Buchanan, Good Economics—-Bad Law, 60 Va. L. Rev, 451,

491 (1974), See also Frank H. Knight, Economic Theory and
Nationalism, in The Ethics of Competition and Other Essays
277—79, 299 (1935); F. A. Hayek, The Constitution of Liberty,
ch. 12 (1960).

3.

See, for example, Gerald Gunther, The Subtle Vices of the
"Passive Virtues"—-A Comment on Principle and Expediency in
Judicial Review, 64 Colum. L. Rev. 1 (1964).

4.

See The Federalist No. 78,

.

2.

5,

Martin Shapiro, Law and Politics in the Supreme Court: New

Approaches to Political Jurisprudence (l964) Cf. Robert A.
Dahi, Decision-Making in a Democracy: The Supreme Court as
a National Policy—Maker, 5 J0 Pub, Law 279, 294 (1957) (com-

paring Supreme Court to "a powerful comittee chairman in
Congress"). For a penetrating critique of the legal and political-science literature dealing with the relationship between
the Supreme Court and politics see Jan G. Deutsch, Neutrality,

Legitimacy, and the Supreme Court: Some Intersections Between
Law and Political Science, 20 Stan, L. Rev. 169 (1968).

6.

See Robert G. McCloskey, Economic Due Process and the Supreme

Court: An Exhumation and Reburial, 1962 Sup. Ct. Rev. 34.
p

7.

See George J. Stigler, The Theory of Economic Regulation, 2 Bell

J. Econ. & Man. Sci. 3 (1971), and, for a general review of the
literature, Richard A. Posner, Theories 0f Economic Regulation,

5 Bell J, Econ, & Man, Sd. 335 (1974).

8.

Presumably, the new Congressmen could be "bought" by the group
that had obtained favorable legislation from their predecessors.
But this is simply an example of having to pay twice for a single

good. We consider later the alternative possibility of paying
for favorable legislation on an installment basis.

3.

On the costs of legislative enactment see Isaac Ehrlich &

9.

Richard A. Posner, An Economic Analysis of Legal Rulemaking,
3 J. Leg. Studies 257, 267 (1974).

10. At the beginning of the 93rd Congress (January 1973) the average
Senate Comittee chairman had been a member of Congress for
20 (continuous) years. The corresponding figure for the House
of Representatives was 26.4. A partially offsetting factor is
that when seniority is the basis of selection, chairmanships

tend to be awarded to older members, who may not have a long

period of continued service ahead of them. Thus, two of the
17 Senate committees in 1973 (and six of the 21 House committees)
had new chairmen. The chairmen of the remaining 15 Senate cornmittees had been chairmen an average of 6.1 (continuous) years;

the average was the same for the House chairmen. Note that the
maximum tenure of a chairman in 1973 would have been 18 continuous
years since there had been a democratic majority in Congress since

1955. The source of these statistics is 3 Congressional Quarterly
Service, COngress and the Nation: A Review of Government and
Politics 1969—1972, at 52a-55a.

11. This does not imply literal-minded or otherwise inflexible inter-

pretation of the legislation. On the contrary, judicial inter•

pretations that enable a law to survive the vicissitudes of
unforeseen technical or economic changes that might effectively
nullify the law were it not interpreted flexibly are perfectly
consistent with the idea of an independent judiciary.

4.

12. The analysis does not depend on the shape of the marginal cost
curve (assumed in Figure I to be horizontal) or on the assumption that there are positive costs of selling legislation.

13. Our assumption that the market clears when gains from trade
are fully exploited rules out a monopoly output, which would

be less than L0. But it does not imply that legislators are
perfectly discriminating monopolists (in which event they
would cover their costs and receive in addition the entire
area dE0S); a competitive market in the sale of legislation

is possible. Such a market would also clear at E0 but the
area IE0S would be received by purchasers, contrary to our

assumption that legislators receive part of dE0S0. (If marginal
costs in Figure I were rising, legislators would receive an
amount in excess of their costs even in the purely competitive

case.) An additional question is whether the benefits in
Figure I will be competed away by expenditures to obtain legislative seats or expenditures on lawyers, lobbyists, etc.
Since

the results we obtain in this paper are unaffected

by which assumption we make (that is, monopoly, perfect price

discrimination,

competition with and without rents, gross

benefits versus net benefits), we do not pursue these questions
any further.

5.

14. When legislation lasts for more than one period, the demand
curve faced by the current (enacting) legislature will also

depend on the amount of legislation sold earlier. Previous
legislatures will have already exploited many attractive
opportunities that the current legislature cannot resell

again. Thus D0d1 in Figure I will be a vertical multiple
of a single-period curve that is lower than d0d1 since the
latter was constructed on the assumption that legislation
lasted only a single period (implying that the current legis-

lature was not encumbered by past deals). In the subsequent
analysis, which compared D0d1 to d0d1, we assume (contrary
to the initial exposition )

that

both demand curves are con-

structed on the assumption that multi-period deals were possible in the past and that some of these deals extend into
the term of the current legislature.

15. This conclusion depends critically on the modification in the
model (see supra note 14) whereby d0d1 allows for multi-period

deals in the past. If d0d1 did not, then it is possible that
the current legislature would face a multi-period demand curve

that was lower than d0d1, causing the multi-period quantity of

legislation to fall short of the single-period quantity. In
the limit, if all profitable deals had been exploited by the
time the current legislature was elected, and technological
and demand changes did not yield new opportunities, the current

legislature would not be able to make any multi-period (or for

that matter single-period) deals. In comparison, if past and

6.

15 continued

present deals are limited to a single period, the current
legislature might find many profitable single-period deals

available. Even if D0d1 were lower than d0d1 (as originally
derived), the total stock of special-interest legislation
existing at a moment in time would still be greater if multi-

period deals were permitted. The time distribution of these
deals would differ, however, as most would have been arranged
by earlier legislatures with few deals remaining for the current legislature to make.

In this event, the main beneficiaries

of multi-period deals would be past legislators.
Thus,

our model provides an explanation for the original

formation of an independent judiciary since early legislatures,
not encumbered by past deals, would favor an institution--the
independent judiciary--that fostered the making of long-term

contracts. It is also consistent with the current legislature's
favoring an independent judiciary; provided that one takes past
legislative deals as given and generally beyond the reach of
current legislatures, the current legislature would also benefit
from being able to make multi-period deals compared to being
restricted to single-period ones.

16. We consider in Part IIB,

infra, the question why optimum special-

interest legislation does not take the form of a single lump
sum that is paid to the interest group by the legislature in
the first period.

7'

17. See note 1

supra.

18. For example, between 1789 and 1972 the Supreme Court held only
97 acts of Congress unconstitutional. This figure provides, of
course, only a crude measure of judicial nullification and
hence the "unreliability" of the federal courts, since they

exclude

both unfavorable interpretations (which may be made

by the lower courts as well as by the Supreme Court) that stop

shqrt of declaring a statute unconstitutional and statutes that
are never enacted in the first place because prior judicial
rulings

indicate a high probability that they will be invalidated.

See the appendix to this article for a further discussion of,
and attempt to measure, the effect of the Court's power to

nullify 1gislation or the costs of an independent judiciary.

19. The single-period and multi-period expected maximum prices are
respectively:
-

Z1 -

2

R

(1+1)
Rp
'l
(l+i-pJ '

—
'

(l.ij)T

where R is the return per period from the special—interest
legislation, i is the interest rate, (1-p)is the probability
of judicial nullification of the legislation, and T is the

number of time periods. R, i and p are assumed constant per
period. A constant p implies an increasing probability that

.

8.

19 continued

future returns will not be forthcoming since Pt (where t=l, . . .

T)—-the present probability that the returns will be received in
any future period t--is a decreasing function of t. The assumption that p is constant is probably incorrect. The importance of
precedent in judicial decision-making is likely to produce probabilities (p) in periods 2, . .

.,T

that are close to one

proved that the legislation is upheld in its initial test in the

first period. This implies that the calculation in Table 1 understate the multi-period to single-period ratios.

20. This is calculated by setting Z1 equal to ZT, fixing I and I
within the range given by Table 1, and solving for p.
p

21.

Refusing to raise judges' salaries in the face of inflation,
refusing to make adequate appropriations for supporting personnel,
etc.

22.

De facto life tenure or an approximation of it

the

is the

rule for

overwhelming majority of Supreme Court Justices. Of the 94

former Justices, 55 died in office or within one year of leaving
office, and 24 more died within 10 years of leaving office after
having

retired at an average age of 71. The remaining 15, several

of whom are still living, left the Court

at an average age of 61.

9.

22 continued

(See 1975 World Almanac and Book of Facts 770.) We have also
compiled data on the turnover rate every two years since 1885

of all federal court judges. Turnover data can be used to
estimate average tenure on the job, provided that a period is
selected in which the number of judges remains approximately

constant. Unfortunately, the latter condition is rarely met
as the number of federal court judges (including retired but
still sitting judges) has risen from 74 in 1885 to 635 in 1975.
However, the increase was relatively modes (297 to 348) from
1949 to 1965, and the average two-year turnover rate in the
period was .0787 which converts into an average tenure on the

bench per judge of 25.4 years (21.0787). Moreover, most of the
turnover has come from deaths (particularly of retired but still

sitting judges) rather than from resignations. Therefore, our
assumption that a federal judicial appointment is generally a
terminal job is consistent with the evidence on Supreme Court
and other federal court judges.

23.

Cf. Gary S. Becker & George J. Stigler, Law Enforcement,
Malfeasance, and Compensation of Enforcers, 3 J. Leg. Studies 1 (1974).

24. For example, in 1911 the Supreme Court, in Dr. Miles Medical Co.
v. John D. Parke & Sons Co. , 220 U.S. 373, held that the Sherman

.

10.

24 continued

Act forbade resale price maintenance. Powerful pressures for
exempting resale price maintenance from the Act eventuated in
the passage of the Miller-Tydings Act of 1937 and the McGuire
Act of 1952 which created such an exemption for states enacting

Fair Trade laws. The enactment of the Miller-Tydings and
McGuire Acts would have been unnecessary if the Court had responded
to the rising political pressure for resale price maintenance
by reinterpreting the Sherman Act to permit the practice.
The Court's steadfastness in interpreting the Act in accordance
with what it believed (correctly or not) to be the original
understanding of the framers rather than the desires of the
current legislators is a good, but not a rare, example of
judicial independence.

Other examples from the trade-regulation field are the enactment of the original Clayton Act; the Robinson-Patman Amendments
thereto; the 1938 Wheeler-Lea amendments to the Federal Trade
Commission Act; the Celler-Kefauver Antimerger Act; and the

Bank Merger Act of 1966. All resulted from congressional dissatisfaction with judicial interpretation of previously enacted

statutes. Numerous examples from other federal statutory fields
could also be cited.

25. See, for example, United States v. Butler, 297 U.S. 1 (1936);
Schechter Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495 (1935); Hopkins
Savings Ass'n v. Cleary, 296 U.S. 315 (1935).

11.

26. For an alternative explanation, mainly relevant however to
judicial review of administrative factfindings, see Richard A.
Posner, An Economic Approach to Legal Procedure and Judicial
Administration, 2 J. Leg. Studies 399, 416-17 (1973).

27. Some sense of the disproportion can be obtained by comparing
the agency budgets listed in Geroge J. Stigler, The Process of
Economic Regulation, 17 Antitrust Bull. 207 (1972), with the

estjmates (admittedly rather crude) of the transfers involved
in regulation presented in Richard A. Posner, The Social Costs
of Monopoly and Regulation, 83 J. Pal. Econ. 807, 810 (1975).

28.

In Part lID, infra.

29. An apparent counterexample is the just-compensation provision
of the Fifth Amendment, which to be effective requires a substantial

annnual appropriation by Congress to defray the expense

of the government's eminent-domain proceedings.

30. See George J. Stigler, The Tenable Range of Functions of Local
Government,

Policy

in Staff of Jt. Econ. Comm., Faderal

Expenditure

for Economic Growth 213 (Jt. Comm. Print 1967).

.

12.

31. Older judges have an additional advantage from the legislators'

standpoint: their views are likely to be better known, and
hence their behavior as judges is likely to be more predictable.
On the other hand, older judges will be less susceptible to
legislative or executive "bribery" in the form of promotion to
higher office.

32. We 'do not, however, suggest that the protected groups are necessarily those urged by Charles A. Beard in his controversial book,

An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United
States (1913). The details of Beard's analysis have been
sharply criticized. See Robert E. Brown, Charles Beard and
the Constitution (1956).
p

33.

See Robert H. Bork, Neutral Principles and Some First Amendment

Problems, 47 md. L. J. 1 (1971).

34. It may seem paradoxical to view as protectionist legislation
that forbids regulation rather than limits entry. But whether
a group will seek regulation or freedom from regulation depends
on

whether it

The

anticipates friendly or unfriendly regulation.

"gun lobby" is another example of an interest group

agressively seeking nonregulation.

35. Of course, as just mentioned, a group that feels vulnerable
legislative
for

politics may on

to

that account have a greater demand

constitutional protection.

13.

36. See note 3 supra; The Federalist, No. 10.

37. A view strongly implied in Gerald Gunther, The Supreme Court
1971 Term—-Foreword: In Search of Evolving Doctrine on a
Changing Court: A Model for a Newer Equal Protection, 86
Harv. L. Rev. 1, 20-21, 23 (1972), discussed critically in
Richard A. Posner, The DeFunis Case and the Constitutionality
of Preferential Treatment of Racial Minorities, 1974 Sup. Ct.
Rev. 1, 29.

38. See text at note 4 supra.

39. See, for example, Gerald Gunther, supra note 3.
p

40.

This is not to say that all legislation is inconsistent with

efficiency or some other general welfare norm. Our point
is rather that the judicial attitude implied by our analysis
is one of indifference to the ethical content of the legisla-

tive or constitutional provisions that the court is being
asked to enforce.

41. These deficiencies include the following: (1) Nullification
fails to account for judicial interpretations of statutes that
stop short of nullification but nevertheless significantly reduce

the value of the legislative deals. Further, if lower-court

.

14.

41 continued

rulings gut the law in question, a Supreme Court bent on nullification may accomplish this purpose simply by not granting

certiorari. Thus, observed nullifications may be an alternative
to unfavorable lower-court rulings, and present a biased picture
of overall judicial unreliability.

(2)

If nullification of a

particular law can be anticipated, legislators and groups are
likely to be deterred from enacting that law in the first place,

threby saving the costs of enactment. Observed nullifications,
therefore, will fail to account for the number of laws that are
not enacted because of anticipated nullification.

(3)

If

nullification merely delays for a short period of time the
passage of a similar law that is acceptable to the Court (whose
compositiion may change in the interval), the costs of observed

nullificatjons may

actually

be less than the costs of continuous

unfavorable interpretations that stop short of nullification.

42. See The Constitution of the U.S. of America, Analysis and
Interpretation 1597-1619, at Sl25-S126.

We have excluded one

act from our enumeration, involving legal-tender clauses, that
was

declared unconstitutional in 1870 in a case overruled in 1871.

43. The one additional nullification during 1935-1936 was of a
statute enacted in 1926.

15.

44. We emphasize that this inference is limited by the absence of
data on unfavorable judicial interpretations of statutes which

may be positively correlated with nullifications and vastly
greater than the number of nullifications in any period.

45. Act of Feb. 9, 1909, §2, 35 Stat. 614, as amended.

46. The frequency distribution of the time between passage and
nullification for the 97 acts is as follows:

4 5-8
Number

38

47. See Table 1

20

Time (years)
17-25 26—50
12
13
7
5

9-12 13-16

>50
2

supra.

p

48.

Sixteen of the remaining 18 nullifictions in this period were
.1

of

acts passed between 1946 and 1956, with an average lag

between enactment and nullification of 15.7 years. The two
other nullifications, which took place in 1970 and 1973, were
of 1909 and 1960 acts respectively.

49. Since shorter tenure may have a positive effect on nullification
of older laws (for example, laws that are more than eight years
old at the time of nullification), the effect of TEN on all
nullifications per term (Nt) is uncertain.

.

16.

50. The period 1789-1972 spans the lst-92nd Congresses. However,
the first observation in equation 2.1 is the 5th Congress
(to allow for the passage of bills over the preceding eight

years) and hence 2.1 contains 88 observations. Similary, in
equation 2.2 the first observation is the 9th Congress, and the

regression contains 84 observations. When all nullifications
is the dependent variable, the BILL variable is computed for
bills passed over the last 16 years, and thus the first observation in 2.3 is also the 9th Congress.

51. Since there were only two nullifications during the first 38
Congresses, the narrower sample excludes at least 36 observations (depending on whether Nt8, Nt16, or Nt is the dependent
variable).where the dependent variable takes a zero value.

The larger number
in

the

of

zero-valued dependent variables, particularly

regressions that include the early Congresses, suggests

that ordinary least squares is not the most appropriate

statistical technique. We have not, however, nde use of an
alternative procedure (for example, tobit analysis).

52. An additional implication of the analysis is that the likelihood
of nullification of older acts will decline with increase in

tenure. This can be tested directly by employing Nt_Nt8 as the
dependent variable. The regression coefficients and t-values of
TEN are .074 (2.237) for the 9th-92nd terms and .218 (2.556) for

the 39th-92nd terms, which is contrary to our expectation. Note

17.

52 continued

that our definition of holder" acts (nine years or older) is

arbitrary. Nevertheless, sinilar results are observed if
13 years is the cut-off point for older acts.
53. The regression coefficients and Ct-values) of AGE and TEN
when the other is excluded from equations 2.4-2.6
AGE

TEN

N8

.180
(2.910)

.235
(2.527)

N16

.234
(3.263)

.398
(3.890)

N

.285
(3.788

are as follows:

.461

(4.275)

We observed that AGE was insignificant in equations 2.4-2.6 when
TEN was also entered but here the t-value on AGE always exceeds

2.91 when TEN is excluded. TEN, which was insignificant in 2.4
when AGE was entered, is also highly significant in the above

table. The effects of deleting either AGE or TEN in equations
2.1-2.3 are less dramatic because the correlation coefficient
between the two variables drops to .41 on

the full set of

observations (lst-92nd Congressional terms). Nevertheless,
TEN becomes significant in the N16 and N 'egressions when AGE
is deleted.

.

18.

54. The following example illustrates how the data for each
observation are constructed. During the term of the 57th
Congress (1901-1902) one act was nullified (1901). The act
was 3 years old and there were 4 dissenting votes on the

Court. Hence LAG equals 3 and DIS equals 4. The values of
AGE, TEN, PAR, and N of this observation are their values

at the end of the 57th Congress. Note that if more than one
act is nullified during a given Congressional term, then each
of 4these acts is a separate observation in the regression.

The LAG and DIS values would be act specific while the values
assigned to the remaining variables, which are Congress
specific, would be identical.

55. The t and'N results, however, do not appear very robust. Ten
acts were pullified during the term of the 74th Congress (1935-

1936) and the average age of each act was 2.3 years. This
compares to an average age of 10.8 years for the other 85 acts

nullified. If we add a dumy variable to equation 2.7 (which
takes the value 1 if the observation is from the 74th Congress

and 0 otherwise), then both t and N become insignificant though
their signs are unchanged.

.
Table 1

The Ratio of Multi-Period to Single-Period Returns

Interest Rates
.10

(Ep)i
.10

12

co

.30

(l—p) =

profitability

loo

.20

10

9.5

5.7

5.0

4.3

3.6

3.4

4.0

3.6

2.9

2.8

2.4

2.4

2.3

2.3

1.9

1.9

1.7

1.7

'

.20

T

.10

of judicial nullification.

= number of time periods.

.

I.

.

Table 2
Federal Judicial Caseload-—National Prohobition Act

Fiscal
Years

Prohibition Criminal Cases
Prohibition Civil Cases
Per cent of total
Per cent of total
Terminated
Terminated
(Annual average) Civil Terminations (Annual average) Criminal Termination'

1920

92

1.6

5,095

14.8

1921

622

9.8

21,297

45.0

1922

1,537

18.8

28,743

54.1

1923-1928

6,997

42.3

47,495

61.3

1929-1933

12,952

50.2

59,821

67.7

5,279

32.0

19,043

41.8

1934

Source:

U.S. Att'y Gen'l, Annual Reports.

N16

N

N8

N16

N

Ln LAG

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7
95

54

54

54

84

84

88

n

(.160)

-.075
(1.652)

(1.796)
(2.262)

.141

(2.173)

4.829

.327

.130

.306
(2.128)

.096
(.746)

(1.174)

.072

(1.277)

(.916)

-10.340
(1.816)

.089

(1,416)

(1.545)

(1,732)

-7,717

.135

(2.560)

(3.075)

-8.442

.116

.090
.063
(2.111) (1.092)

-.008

(2.627)

TEN

..094

AGE

—7.849

(2.587)

-6.208

-5.483
(2.777)

a
BILL

.

.OOC
.0003

(2.724)

-.114
(.518)

(.152)

-.076

(.098)

-.047

•

(.901)

.0001

(.842)

.0001

.141
-.0006
(.328) (-.220)

(.287) (2.757)

.107

(.184)

.065

.185
.0002
(.621) (1.005)

PAR

(.470)

-.033

DIS

.014
(2.073)

2

.31

.26

.15

.31

.27

.19

R

-.143 .17
(2.616)

N

1.633

1.927

2.075

1,439

1.747

1.943

D.W.

b)
c)
d)

TEN—The 1975 World Almanac

.

AGE,
PAR
BILL
&

.

Book of Facts at 770.

NOTES:
t-values are in parentheses.
1)
n = number of observations in regression
2)
equation
R2 = coefficient of determination
3)
D.W. = Durbin-Watson statistic. Note that in
4)
equations 2.1 - 2.6 we would not reject the null hypothesis
at the .95 confidence level that the error terms are
serially independent. The null hypothesis, however
is accepted only in equations 2.1, 2.4 and 2.5.
a)
N, LAG, DIS—The Constitution of the U.S. of America,
Analysis and Interpretation, 1597-1669, 5125-5126 (1973, 1974).

N8

Dependent
Variable

2.1

Equation
Number

Regression Coefficients and T-Values on Nullification Variables

Table 3

