                          NBER WOREING PAP SIES




                    On the Measurement of Benefits
                          In an Urban Context:
                    Some General Equilibrium Is sues

                            Paul N. Courant
                         Daniel L. Rubinfeld


                          Working Paper No. ll




               National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                         575 Technology Square
                     Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139




                             November 1975



                    Preliminary:   Not   for Quotation

 NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited number for
 comments only. They should not be quoted without written permission.

 This report has not undergone the review accorded official NB publications;
 in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval by the Board of
 Directors.
 *University of Michigan
**National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., and University of Michigan.
  Research supported in part by Sloan Foundation Grant to the National Bureau
  of Economic Research, Inc.
                                Abstract

The validity of using local market data to measure the benefits associated
with policies   adopted in an urban   area is investigated.   It is shown that

the rest of the rld is affected by taxing decisions undertaken in a single
urban area, so that local data cannot perfectly measure the welfare effects
of a policy change. Specifically, the fact that the willingness to pay for
a tax increase is positive in the rest of the world suggests that cost-

benefit analyses which do not account for the rest of the world may be

biased.




                            Ac}ciowledgement s


The authors wish to thank Alan Deardorff, Herbert Mobring, Wallace Oates,

A. Mitchell Polinsky, Richard C. Porter, and. Sidney G. Winter for their

helpful comaents and suggestions.
                                 Table of Contents




I.     Introduction                                      1
II. The Model
III.   Measuring   Williniess to Pay                    7

           Table   3.1   Willin-iess to Pay Accounts    7

       Analysis of Cost—Benefit Issues                  9

           Table 3.2 Cobb-Douglas Example              lil.
IV.    Conclusions                                     16

References                                             18




                                                              .
                                    -1-




I. Introduction

Numerious attempts have been made to utilize rrarket data to measure the

benefits associated with public policy changes in an urban   area.   The

majority of these studies have attempted to determine the relationship

between   property values and certain policy-related variables, such as
local taxes, expenditures, and environmental quality, in order to obtain
an estimate of the willingness to pay for changes in these variablesJ
Recent analysis of property value studies have been critical of them,
pointing to the fact that a correct measure of the benefits associated
with a change in public policy must take into account the willingness to
pay of all relevant economic actors in the urban area.2
       Fecause these methodological discussions focus on the measurement of
benefits within one urban area in a large system of urban areas, it is
usually assumed that the price of capital is unaffected by any local change
in public policy, so that capital owners have a zero willingness to pay for
the policy change. Such an assumption can be quite misleading, however,
because   the assumption that the price of capital changes insignificantly

(so that it may be assumed constant), does not alli one to conclude that

it   is reasonable to assume that the value of capital (price tiiis quantity)
in   the system of urban areas has changed negligibly. In fact, it seems
quite plausible that the willingness to pay for a local policy change on
the   part of all  owners of capital may be quite large. If so, there may be
a    substantial bias involved if one analyzes local public policy decisions


1Tor reference to some examples of these property value studies, see Polinsky
 and Rubinfeld (l97L, 1975).

2See Polinsky and Rubinfeld (1975) for a model in which the relationship
 between these economic actors and willingness to pay is discussed.
                                          —2—




without    accounting for the willingness to pay of economic actors out3ide
                                                                                                  .
the urban area which is directly affected by the public policy change.

       To explore these issues, we utilize a model in which capital and land

are inputs in the production of a homogenous good in a system of urban

areas. Land. is fixed in each urban area, while capital is perfectly mobile

among urban areas. The model is used to analyze the consequences of newly

inposed tax on all capital utilized in one urban area. We find that thile the

price of capital may change only slightly, the tax increase will, in general,

result    in a large decline in the value of capital in the system of urban
areas, and consequently, a large negative willingness to pay of capital
owners in the "rest of the world." However, we also find that the willing—

ness to pay of capital owners is to a           large extent counterbalanced by the
positive     willingness to pay of land owners in the rest of the world, so that

the total willingness to pay for the policy change outside of the taxed

urban area is a     small fraction of the willingness to pay of capital owners.
The fact that this total willingness to pay in the rest of the world is
positive suggests (in the context of the model) that cost-benefit analyses

which account only for the urban area ipacted by a policy change may be

biased.      Finally, we compare the magnitude      of   willingness to pay measured   in   the
urban area in which policy changes occur and willingness to pay           in   the rest
of the world.      We find that the allocative bias associated with the measure-

ment of benefits within the impacted urban area will not necessarily be small.

In one extreme case, one-third of the welfare effects of the tax take place

outside of the taxed urban area.

       These   findings   should be   contrasted with the conventional wisdom on the
subject    as stated by Harberger (1971). While Harberger does not deal explicitly •

with   the   analysis   of a tax on capital in one of a system of urban areas,
                                          —3—



his paper strongly suggests that in the context of such a model it would

be strictly correct to assume that all of the welfare changes associated
with a tax increase occur in the taxed urban area. In discussing the

case of a tax on capital used in the corporate sector, Harberger asserts
(1971, p. 79L) that:
            it is essential to recognize that the X1 refer to activities,
     not    just products. In the case just mentioned the tax would be
     on the activity of using, e.g., capital in            a certain subset   of
     industries - say the corporate sector.                 (the distortion lead-
     ing to welfare loss) would here be the tax per unit of corporate

     capital,    and      its amount.      The   activities of producing and
     consuming a given good should be kept analytically separate when-
     ever the distortions affecting them differ; likewise, a given

     type of activity which is affected by different distortions in
     different regions should be broken down into as many separate
     activities    as there are different distortions. (Italics and the
     parenthetical expression have been added; a footnote has been
     deleted)

     In    the context   of our model      Harberger   seems to   imply that all of the
distortion takes       place in   the   taxed urban area and all of the welfare

change must also occur there. This result is              not   an approximate one; it   is
said to hold strictly for both marginal and nonmarginal changes, and                to
account    for all general equilibrium effects.
     In Section II of the paper the model of production in a system of urban
areas is formally presented. In Section III willingness to pay is defined in

the context of this model, and the questions raised above are reformulated in
terms of the model. The model is then used to analyze and at                least partially
answer the questions. In particular, 1-larberger's statement that all of the
welfare change occurs in the taxed area is seen not to hold in general. Section
III ends with a detailed explanation of the apparent conflict between Harberger' s
                                      —L—




description of the conventional wisdom of applied welfare economics and the

results of our paper. Section IV contains some conclusions as well as

suggestions for extension of our analysis.


II. The Model

The following model is admittedly unrealistic, but is structured so as to

capture those features which are crucial to the cost-benefit issues raised in

Section I. Consider a set of N urban areas ,        each producing identical output

by means of the production function



                   F(K/N, L/N)                                               (2.1)



                              th
where q1 is the output of the i urban area, 1< is the capital (or perfectly

mobile) input, and L is the land (or irrmobile) input, and F is homogenous of

degree 1. We assume that there is a fixed supply of capital K in the system,

and a fixed supply of land, L/N in each urban area. Since land is fixed we

will   suppress   the land input and represent the production function as f(K/N).

We   assume further that owners of capital and land have identical utility
functions, with utility monotically increasing in output. In this situation,
utility maxization is equivalent to profit maximization, as both capital
owners and landords     seek   to maximize their claims on   output. If it is assumed

that factor markets are     competitive,    we may write the first order condition
for profit maximization with respect to the capital input of the 1th urban
area as fo1lows:


 3Each urban area may also be considered to be a single firm        operating in a
  competitive     market.

 We are implicitly assuming that FK, FL> 0 and         F<,   FLL < 0.
                                       —5—




                 s                                                              (2.2)

where s is the rental     price   of capital and the subscript denotes the partial

derivative with respect to capital.

       The assumption of competitive behavior in factor and output markets

requires that the portion of output not claimed by capital owners be received

by the landlords. Given our honogeneity assumption, this implies that:



            r r1     [q1 —   s(K/N)]/(L/N)                                      (2.3)



where   r is the annual rental    price of land. Note that r and s are defined

as claims on physical output per unit        of   input employed. This   formulation

obviates   the need for explicit consideration of changes in output price in

the following discussion.

       Now consider the impact of a newly imposed tax at rate t on the use of

capital in urban area l. To simplify the exposition which follows, we shall

use two conventions; first, we associate upper case letters with the aggregate

of the remaining N-l areas, and second, we associate variables with primes

with   the after-tax equilibrium. After    imposition of the tax, the first
                                             the

order condition for the first urban area differs from the conditions for the
remaining urban areas. In particular, for the first urban area:


                s'(l+t)                                                        (2.4)


5We have chosen to consider a newly imposed tax  rather than an increment to
 an existing tax to simplify the analysis which follows. Our nodel yields
substantively the same results as a model which analyses the impact of a
marginal (rather than a discrete) increase in preexisting tax. (For an
alternative discussion of the relationship between marginal and nonmarginal
changes, see }aus (1972).) However, in the special case of a marginal
change in the tax rate from a point of global optimality (no tax), there
is no deadweight loss, and the willingness to pay for the tax change is
zero in all urban areas.
                                                                                                 .
                                          —6—




The tax    on capital will lead to an outflow of capital, K, from the first
urban   area,    which in our     model will be utilized in equal proportions by
the   remaining N-i urban areas. Thus, the new output of the first urban
area is:

                      q' = f(K/N - K)                                                    (2.5)


Of this output qt, we assume that the revenue                '(K/N   -   LK) is   received by
the   ttgove nt" whose only role is to select future public projects which

can be justified on cost-benefit grounds. In               order for any    tax-expenditure

project to be so justified, the revenue must provide sufficient welfare to

compensate capital and land          owners for the excess burden introduced          by the

tax. In addition, the annual rental on land is computed (using the homo-

geneity and competitive assumptions) as a residual such that:




            rj
                       [q' —   s'(l+t)(K/N—K)]/(L/N)                                     (2.6)




      Finally,        the output of the remaining    N-i   urban areas6 is:


            Q'    =    (N—l)f(K/N + K/(N—l))                                             (2.7)




We shall also find it useful to take into account (as a result of the first

degree homogeneity assumption) that all non-taxed urban areas will earn zero

profits   before and after the tax change. Specifically,


6The original output was Q            (N-i)f(K/N).
                                      —7—




           Q    s(N—1)(K/N) + r(N—l)(JJN)                                    (2.8)




           Q'   = s'(N—l)(K/N   + AK/(N—l)) +        r'(N—l)(L/N)            (2.9)




III.    Measuring Willingness    to Pay

Each economic actor's willingness to pay is defined as the maximum anount          of
output   per year which could    be taken   from him after the imposition of the
tax in the first urban area and leave him no worse off than before. For
owners of land willingness to pay is simply the aggregate change in output
received as land rentals, while for the owners of capital, it is the aggre-
gate change in output received as capital rentals.
     Using the model stnicture presented in Section II, the willingness to
pay of the relevant economic actors can be expressed analytically as        shown

in Table 3.1. We continue with our notational convention by using w to
represent willingness to pay in the taxed area, and W to represent willing-
ness to pay in the rest of the world.

                                   Table 3.1
                        Willingness to Pay Accounts
Taxed Urban Area

Capital owners                  Cs '-s) (K/N)                                (3.1)
                         wK
                                               + s'K — ts'(K/N—tK)
Land owners              wL = q'—q—(s'—s)(K/N)
                                                                             (3.2)

GoverTn1ent                   ts' (K/N-AK)                                   (3.3)
                         wG
Total                    w = wK +     +
                                  wL WG
                                                 =
                                                     q'-q + s'K              (3.1)



Rest of the World


Capital owners                = (s'—s)(K/N)(N—l)                             (3.5)
                         WK
Land owners              WL     (r'—r)(L/N)(N-l)                             (3.6)

Total                    W = WK +           Q'
                                                 - Q - s'K                   (3.7)
                                  WL
                                            —8—



       Equations (3.1), (3.5), and          (3.6)    follow directly from the definition

of willingness to pay given above. For example, equation (3.1) measures

the change        in the   annual   rental value    of the assets held by owners   of   capi-

tal in   the taxed urban area. Note that the owners of capital in the rest
of the world are affected only by the change in the value of the stocks that
they hold     prior to the imposition of the tax. The outflow               of capital to the
rest   of the world as a consequence of the tax does not create the capital

gains (or losses), since capital users must pay a competitive price Cs')

for any capital employed. Analogously, capital owners in the taxed area do

not obtain capital gains or losses because they receive the world competitive

price s' for use of their capital.

       Equations (3.2), (3. Li.), and (3.7) follow from the first order conditions

of profit     maximization and       from the assumption that production is homogenous

of   degree   one. For example, to obtain equation (3.7), we add equations (3.5)

and (3.6) to obtain:



              W      (N—1)/N)[(s'K + r'L) —        (1(    + rL)]                        (3.8)




But, rewriting equations (2.8) and (2.9) we get



              ((N—l)/N)(sK+rL)         Q                                                (3.9)




              s'(K/N+K/(N—l)) + r'(LIN)              Q'                                 (3.10)




Substituting (3.9) and (3.10) into            (3.8)       yields (3.7) directly.

       Equation (3.2) equates the willingness to pay of land owners to the

difference between the total willingness to pay in the urban area (3.Li)
                                     —9—




and   the   willingness to pay of capital owners (3.1) and   the   government (3.3).

This result follows directly from our assumption that land owners receive
the residual gains and losses associated with the -tax change.
     The willingness to pay results are intuitively appealing. Equation
(3.7), for example, states that annual willingness to pay in the rest of
the world is equal to the increase in output due to the capital inflow minus
the annual rental value of the new capital. If this last tenn were not
subtracted, double counting would be involved, since the new capital had to
be rented at the competitive world rental price,     and   did not provide a capi-
tal gain to the capital owners in -the rest of -the world. Si.nilarly, equation
(3L.) states that annual willingness to pay in the taxed area is the loss of
output plus the annual rental value of the capital outflow. The value of the
capital outflow measures the portion of the capital loss which capital owners
in the urban area are able to recoup by renting their capital at the world
price.
      Analysis    of Cost-Benefit Issues

       The equations listed in the willingness to pay accounts provide the

basis for an analysis of the cost-benefit issues described in the         introduc-
tion to the  paper. Specifically, we wish to show that:
       (1) The change in the annual rental value of capital in the rest
              of the world may not be small.
       (2) Willingness to pay of the rest of the world is small relative
              to the willingness to pay of capital owners in the rest of
              the world.
       (3) Willingness to pay in the rest of the world is positive, imply-
            ing that a cost-benefit analysis associated with the imposition
            of a tax in one urban area is always biased so as to understate
            the true benefits to society of the project.
       (I.)   Willingness to pay in the rest of the world may be large in rela-
              tion to willingness to pay in the urban area. Only when willing-
              ness to pay in the rest of the world is relatively small is     it a
              good approxiation to assume that all of the change in economic
              welfare will occur in the taxed urban area.
                                         —10—



        Without   further specifying the properties of the production functions
involved, we are not able to compare the relevant magnitudes in the willing-
ness to      pay accounts. However, the addition of one assumption to our nodel

will    permit more     precise calculations of willingness to pay. Therefore, we
assume that the     capital inflow to one urban area is sufficiently small          so
that f is constant (i.e.,                =   0) over the interval K/N to K/N+K/(N-l) .

        To analyze the first assertion we utilize equations (2.2) and (2.7) to

rewrite      equation   (3.5) as follows:




                                                                                   (3.11)
                   K(N_l)/N[fK(K/N+M</(N_l))_fK(K/N)]



                assumption,

                                                                                            .
But, by our                     we nay write



                                               +
                                     fK(K/N)       f<K/(N_l)                       (3.12)




Substituting into (3.11) we get:




                   KfK/N                                                           (3.13)


        In   general, this term will be negative, since f is negative. More

importantly, however, the value of WK may be quite large, since there is no

reason to expect KK        to   be small in a system with a     finite nurriler of urban
areas. Thus, we can conclude that the willingness              to pay of capital owners

in   the rest of the world will be negative, but not necessarily small.


7This   implies   that the marginal product of capital diminishes at a constant
rate, and is equivalent      to assuming that K/(N-l) is closely approximated by
the differential dX.
                                          -11-




       To prove the second assertion, we utilize the following expression for

the increased output in the rest of the owrld:

                             K/N+K/ (N—i)

            Q' — Q      (N—i)   I fx0)                                          (3.i'i)

                              K/N
Substituting    into   equation (3.7) and utilizing equation (3.12), we may

write
                        K/N+KI(N-1)

            W      (N-i) I             +<)(k_K/N)]]ç -
                              [fK(
                        K/N                                                     (3.15)

Integrating, and     solving    we get:



            W =
                  _f((K)2/2(N_i)                                                (3.16)




Then, dividing by WK in equation (3.13) we get:



           W/WK [K/2K][N/(N—l)]                                                 (3.17)



The absolute value of W/WK, the ratio of the capital outflow from         the   taxed

area to twice the amount        of   capital in the world is clearly small.

       The third   assertion can be seen directly by noting that W is     strictly

positive   in   equation (3.16). To see this intuitively note that      the   change

in   output in the rest of the world is the result of an increase in capital
and a decrease in the marginal product of capital, with the consequence that
the price of capital falls from s to s'. On the other hand, the entire change
in the capital stock is evaluated at the new world price s'. Thus, the
increased value of output will exceed the absolute value of the change in the
                                          —12—




capital stock by an amount equal to the area of a triange with height
                         8
(s—s ) and    base LK.
       In   considering the fourth assertion, it is no longer valid to use the

approxin.tion of a constant second derivative of output with respect to

capital, since the capital outflow in the taxed area ny                be   large relative

to its total capital stock. However, we can           obtain    useful bounds     for   the

ratio of willingness to pay in the taxed           area, w,   to willingness to pay       in
the rest of the world, W,        by    temporarily maintaining   the   assumption that

    is constant, or equivalently that                = 0.     To obtain these bounds we

rewrite the equation (3. L)       to    obtain an equation analogous to equation (3.15):

                   K/N-LK

              w
                   K/N                                                                  (3.18)

Integrating       and solving, we get:


              w                                                                         (3.19)
                    [f<(K)2/2][(N+l)/(N-l)]


Then, dividing w by W in equation (3.16) and           taking absolute       values, we get:




                         (N+l)                                                          (3.20)
               lw/WI




8The third assertion is not dependent upon the simplifying assumption necessary
 to prove the first two assertions. These results follow after some nianipula-
 tion if we subtract 'tK from both sides of equation (3. 1) to obtain
                                 K/N+AK/ (N-i)

              Q'—Q—sK        (N-i) f

                                 K/N

 Thisintegral is always positive since the marginal product of capital is.
 always declining over the range of integration.
                                     —13-



Thus, if f = 0,        the magnitude of willingness   to   pay in the taxed   area
is   exactly N+l tines the magnitude of willingness to pay in the rest of

the world. This estimate is useful because it provides a lower bound for

the true ratio of w to W in the case where f> 0. In this case the

marginal product of capital increases at an increasing rate as capital

flows out of the taxed area. When compared to the case         in which   the mare-

ginal product increases at a constant rate (in equation (3.18)), the          lower
bound result becomas clear.
       An illustration of this is given in Table 3.2, which presents the
values of key variables of the irodel for a Cobb-Doublas production function
associated with different tax rates. The third partials of a Cobb-Douglas
are, of course, positive, and it     is readily seen that the ratio of wi       to
 wi is greater than N+1 in all cases.

       There is nothing in neoclassical production theory, however, which

assures that f1< is everywhere positive. For example, it can be shown

that   a   C.E.S. production function with an elasticity of substitution less

than .5 will have negative third partials at some factor ratios. By the

same   logic that makes N+l a lower bound of the ratio of Jw to W where
                                                                  I




IQKK
       is nonnegative over the relevant range, it is clear that N+1 is an
upper bound for that ratio where f< is nonpositive.
     The situation in which the ratio of I wi to I wJ is smallest occurs when
the marginal product of capital rises negligibly in the taxed urban area as
capital flows out, although it falls non-negligibly in the rest of the
world.
                                                _lLi


                                          Table 3.2
                                                                                                 S
                                      Cobb-Douglas Example

                K =    L     1000 Q   = (N_l)(K/NaL/a)          a   .5 s =    5


Case      I     N100
t              K                 S        WK
                                                           W
                                                                         WK
                                                                                        w


    .01         .195        J9995      -.9xl0                        -.85x102
    .1        1.72           .9957     -.3xl03         - .0l3         3Q_l         +37x1Q
1.0           7.8l           .9812     -1.8x102        -1.255        -1.86         +7.0xl03



Case II N10
t              K                 s'        WK
                                                           w
                                                                         WK
                                                                                        w

    .01       1.777          .995l                     - .009         -.xl0'       +.3x10
    .1        15.896         .956                       - .12         -3.9         +3.5x102

1.0           72.973         .809      -1.91           -12.92        -17.2         +6.8x101




To approximate             this situation,   we assume    that the nrginal product of capital
remains constant in the taxed area. Then equation                    (3.18) is simply

                           K/N-txK

                   w        I K11 + [fK(K/N) + (f<)(EK)/(N_1)]AK                        (3.21)


                           K/N

Equation (3.21) simplifies to:


                   W
                           f(LK)2                                                       (3.22)
                             N—i



          The absolute value of this last expression twice that of W, willingness
 to pay in the rest of the world. The implications of this may be quite
                                      —15—




serious. In the rather extreme case of equations (3.21) and (3.22), fully

one-third   of the welfare effects of the tax take                      taxing
                                                          place outside the

jurisdiction    -   regardless of the number of urban areas in the system.
     Regardless      of whether or not   this extreme possibility ever     occurs, we

have shown unambigously      that willingness to pay     in the rest   of the world
(in response to a tax increase in one urban area) will be positive. The
apparent conflict between this result and the outcome of Harberger' s formu-
lation arises because Harberger is unnecessarily vague when he defines              dis-

tortion   as "the excess of marginal      social   benefit over marginal   social   cost
per unit of activity" (1971, p. 789). If Harberger's definition of distortion
(as applied to our model) is taken to be the difference between the marginal
product of capital at the social optimum (before the tax) and the marginal
product of capital in actual use (after the tax), then our formulation can
been seen to be consistent with that of Harberger (1971, p. 789, equation (6)).
However, if this definition of distortion is chosen, Harberger's conclusion
(described in   the introduction) that     all of the welfare effects can be measured
within the taxed urban area does not hold. This result follows immediately
because the capital tax causes the marginal product of capital in the rest
of the world to deviate from the social optimum. Thus, a capital tax in one
urban area causes the capital market throughout the world to be distorted.
     If one does not accept the proposed definition of distortion, then the
model presented here stands as a counterexaile to the validity of Harberger' s
formulation. Our model suggests that despite Harberger's claims, his measure
of welfare change is strictly valid only for small changes fran a global opti-
mum, and therefore does not possess the simplicity and robustness which has
been claimed for it (1971, p. 796).
                                                                                      .
                                      -16—




IV.    Conclusions

To    the extent that the model used in this paper    is   applicable to "real
world" cost-benefit problems, the      results   derived in Section III establish
the following:
        (1) When the measurement of benefits is restricted to the irrmediate
               urban area, the results of the cost-benefit analysis will, in
               general, be biased, in that a project which taxes a mobile
               factor in one urban area will (due to the outflow of that fac-
               tor) lead to positive benefits in the rest of the world. How-
               ever, the magnitude of that bias is likely   to be   small.
        (2) A project which is financed through a tax on a mobile factor
            will have inportant distributive implications in the rest of
             the world. Holders of the taxed factor in the non-taxed areas
             will experience capital losses several orders of magnitude larger
             than the net welfare gain experienced in those areas. fljrther—
             more, holders of other factors will receive capital gains
             slightly larger in magnitude than the capital losses experienced
             by holders of the taxed factor. Thus, although the a.llocative
             bias deriving from a project undertaken in one urban area may
               be small in the rest of the world, there can be a significant
               change in the functional income distribution of an entire
            system of urban areas due to the taxing policy of one urban
            area.9
        (3) While the allocative bias in cost-benefit analysis will always
               be small in magnitude, it will not necessarily be small relative
               to excess burden in the taxing jurisdiction itself. Indeed,
               if the production function has a negative third partial with
               respect to capital, as much as one third of the total welfare
               effect may occur outside of the taxing jurisdiction.
        It might seem surprising to some readers that the willingness to pay in
the    rest   of the world associated with the tax increase is      not identically




9Recalling  that the model used here is equivalent to a model of a system of
 firms in a competitive industry, we conclude that the standard assumption
 that factor prices may be treated as roughly constant in response to a
 change in behavior in one firm is appropriate. However, the product of
 price tines quantity (i.e., total factor returns) is not well approximated
 by a constant. This is verified in Table 3.2.
                                       —17—




zero, since the tax     impacts   directly on the first urban area. For a     nonmar-

ginal change in the tax rate, however, it is necessary to examine the impact
on the entire capital market to correctly calculate willingness to pay. This
follows   because the tax   in the first   urban   area results   in an outflow of capi-
tal to the rest of the world, with only the last unit of capital being paid
its marginal product. Since all of the infranrginal units, of capital flowing

into the rest of the world have been paid less than their marginal product,
there is a net positive willingness to pay in the rest of the world. Of course,
the world   willingness to pay is simply the net loss in real output resulting

from   the tax. Thus,    our concern lies with     the problem of the distribution of
benefits among urban areas, a perspective which is somewhat different from
that of most cost-benefit analyses.
       The central purpose of this paper has been to investigate the validity
of using local market data to measure the benefits associated with policies
adopted in a given urban area. While a more elaborate model, including more
than one product, price changes, and a mobile labor force, can be expected
to yield further insights into this question, the model presented here does
provide a beginning. In brief, the rest of the world is affected by taxing

decisions undertaken in a single urban area. Thus local data can never per-
fectly measure the welfare effects of a policy change. However, the magnitude
of   the welfare change   in the   rest of the world is   likely to be quite small, as
a result of offsetting changes in factor returns that may be quite large. Thus,
local policies can have important implications for income distribution in a
large system. Finally, in what may be a special case, but a special case -that
cannot be ruled out on theoretical grounds, the rest of the world may have
good reason to be concerned with the tax policy in Peoria.
                                   -18—



                               References
                                                                                 .
Harberger, A. C.,   "Three Basic Postulates  for Applied Welfare Economics:
   An Interpretive Essay," Journal   of   Economic Literature, Vol. IX, No. 3,
   September, 1971.

Kraus, M., "Differential Tax Incidence: Large Versus Small Tax Changes,"
   Journal of Political Econoirj, Vol 80, No. 1, January/February, 1972.
Polinsky, A.M., and D.L. Rubinfeld, "The Long-Run Incidence of a Residential
   Property tax and Local Public Services," Working Paper #1207-29, The
   Urban Institute, Washington, D.C., February l97L.

_______________________________    'Property Values and the Benefits of
   Environmental Improvements:  Theory and Measurement,"     Institute of
   Public Policy Studies, Discussion Paper No. 67, The University of Michigan.
   March 1975.




                                                                                 .



                                                                                 S
