                NBER Working Paper Series




            NOTES ON THE TAX TREATMENT OF HUMAN CAPITAL


                         Michael J. Boskin




                     Working Paper No.    116




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305



                          November 1975


                  Preliminary; not for quotation.

NEER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This repor has not undergone the review accorded• official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

This                                      with the U.S. Treasury
       research was supported by a contract
Department (EJo. TOS—76—13; OS—612). Early work on this subject
was supported by a grant to NBER from the Rockefeller Foundation.
I have benefit ted from conments received at the Treasury Confer-
ence on Fax Research.
                               NOTES ON THE TAX TREATbENT

                                    OF IWMAI'1 CAPITAL*

                                   Michael   J. Boskin




           Over the last decade and a half, economists have rediscovered the

ciceptof human capital.1 The analysis of both the discrepancy between

the   growth of    output and inputs in industrialized economies and the

distribution of earnings has led economists to focus on the acquisition

of knowJedge and skills by human beings. It is now widely recognized

that such human capital investments as expenditures on education, job—

training,      migration and      health are an important feature of advanced

economies.

           While human capital has         played a central role in labor economics
for some time, and        in   growth accounting from time to time it only
rarely has crept into the mainstrean of public finance. Most analyses
of tax incidence and of the efficiency properties of alternative tax
devices have simply ignored human             capital.   Further, most analyses of
human capital have simply ignored taxes. When labor economists have
attempted to discuss the tax           treatment   Of human capital, or when public

financiers have attempted to incorporate human capital into the analysis
of    a   problem in taxation, the result frequently has been an unsupported
assumption that the current tax treatment of human capital discourages


*
     This paper is part of a larger project on the taxation of human capital.
     Sections 2 and 3 are each being expanded into more thorough treatments
     of incidence and efficiency, respectively.

     This rediscovery is frequently associated with T. W.               Schultz' presiden—
     tini address (l961, arid Becker [1961W Kiker [19661                trabes the human
     capital 'onrept back to Petty.
2
     ee    U r 1.1 chen [19701,   Becker   {i967) ,and Mincer 119691.
                                       —2—




its   accumulation. For example, in his widely—heralded presidential

address, T. W. Schultz asserts:3

              Our tax laws everywhere discriminate against human
         capital. Although the stock of such capital has become
         large and even though it is obvious that human capital,
         like other forms of reproducible capital, depreciates,
         becomes obsolete and entails maintenance, our tax laws
         are all but blind on these matters.

Further, virtually every writer on the modern theory of optimal income

taxation1 defends the assumption of an elasticity of substitution between

the consumption of goods and leisure much larger than empirical studies

of labor supply would suggest by invoking tax disincentives to human

capital accumulation.

         While the issue is basically an empirical one, some light can be

shed on the efficacy of such statements by carefully examining the ways

in which taxes affect human capital accumulation. Section 1 presents a

preliminary attempt at such a clarification.

         If the current tax system, (or any proposed alternative) does

discourage human capital accumulation, the overall economic implications

are potentially enormous. Kendrick [19T estimates that the aggregate

annual investment in human capital is of the seine order of magnitude as

conventionally measured savings. Any significabt tax—induced decrease

in human capital accumulation might result in a large decrease in out-

put a. nd/or redistribution of income. Section 2 outlines a simple general

equilibrium model   with two capital goods — physical     and human — and the

saving   corresponding to   each,   to begin to deal with these issues.

  $chu]tz [1.961,], p. 17. However, Becker [.1964] and Goode[1962) point
  cue the tax—fr cc. nature oP foregone earnings.

  See Mirrlees [1971 arid Sheshinski [1972] as examples.
                                      —3—


         Once   human capital is flewed as an alternative source of wealth
and   hence human capital    investment as a source of current saving (re-
sources withdrawn    from   current consumption to help increase future
output5),   the old issue of the differential     tax   treatment   of alternative
                              6
types   of capital arises.        Sensible tax policy with respect to the tax-

ation of' either physical or human capital must take into account the

tax treatment of the alternative asset. Section 3 outlines some points

of departure for such an analysis.




    Recognized quite some time ago by Abramovitz (1956].

6
    Discussed in detail in the static case by Harberger [1966].
1. Does the Current Tax Treatment Discourage
   Human Capita). Investment?


         As noted above, when the effects of the current tax treatment of

human capital is discussed, the presumption appears to be that a large

disincentive to such investment exists. Certainly this has never been

documented empirically. Nor do adherents to this view identify the real

culprit in the situation. Is it the taxation of the returns to human

investment at a positive rate? Is it the progressive rate structure

of the personal income tax? Is it the failure to allow educational ex-

pense deductions? Is it the income effect of the tax combined with

differential public and private marginal propensities to invest in

human capitalt

         While the effects of the personal income tax on human capital

investment depends upon all of these details, we begin by focusing on

what we believe to be the single most important feature of the relation

between human capital investment and the tax system, namely that the

bulk   of   such investments are    financed   out of foregone earnings which

 are   not taxed. The failure to appreciate this basic feature of human
 investment is, we believe, a source of much of the confusion on the
 effects     of taxes on human   investment.
                                                                       of
            From Keridrick {19751, we note that roughly eighty percent

 human   capital   investment consists of education and informal on—the—job

 training; the remaining twenty percent consists of approximately equal



   Again, Becker [1964] and Goode [1962] potht this out, but they do not
   develop the implications (of the failure to tax foregone earnings) for
   efficiency or equity stressed below.
                                     —5—




amounts of mobility and health expenditures. Further, Mincer [1962]
estimates that roughly forty percent of combined education and training

costs    are accounted for by on—the—job training. Virtually all of

job training costs.are foregone earnings as are perhaps three—fourths

of higher education costs and some fraction of medical and migration

costs. Thus, well over one half of human capital investment costs

consist of foregone earnings.

         Let   us take on—the—job training as an example. In the early
part of the typical work life, it appears that a substantial fraction
of time spent on the job is devoted to training as opposed to directly
productive     work. While the distinction between work and investment

is very difficult to make in practice, an interesting analysis by Heck—

man [1973] indirectly infers that the percentage of time spent training

may be as   high as thirty or forty percent in the early    years of labor

market   experience   and declines toward zero over perhaps twenty years or

so. Hence, a typical young worker earning $10,000 per year may be

directly working only two—thirds of the time, being paid at an annual

rate of $15,000 and buying back one—third      of his time for training
(acquisition    of skills) for $5,000.

         How is this $5,000 human capital investment taxed? The worker's

true income is $15,000; at a flat tax rate of t, with no depreciation

of the human capital investment, the worker pays a tax of $l5,000t.

Since   the $5,000 in human   investment   is financed out of foregoz earnings



80f     àourse, this percentage also may be influenced by tax considerations.
                                         —6—




which are tax—free, the worker's actual tax payment is $1O,000t.               The

failure to tax     foregone   earnings is thus equivalent to an inmediate

write—off of the investment cost.9

            In the absence of an income tax,    the   worker would engage in on—

the—job training up to the point where the incremental investment cost

just matched the present value of expected future returns.            En our   ex-

ample,       the $5,000 cost must be matched by at least a present value of

$5,000 in expected future returns from the investment. The imposition

of    a tax at   a flat rate t      on the income from the investment reduces the

net    return by one—third; the instantaneous write—off reduces the tax liability
by one—third (at the margin). The present value of the depreciation deduction
equals the cost of the investment and if the training was a profitable
investment with no tax, it is still profitable in the presence of the
tax—free foregone earnings.
       More formally, the prospective investor in job training purchases
an asset — skill, knowledge, etc. — costing C and yielding an incre-
mental income stream       The present discounted value of the job
                                .



training before the imposition of an income tax is           just


                    t=
                                    dt     —c                                  (1.1)

                    t=t 0

 9
      See E. C. Brown [l95] for a discussion of the neutrality of immediate
      depreciation (plus loss offsets) of physical capital. Also see White
      and White [1971ij for a comparison of expensing and economic depreciation.
                                          —7—


where r is the rate of interest. When the asset is purchased with

    foregone earnings, the net return to investing in the training (or

other human capital investment so financed) is simply



                   (i-t). (f
                               t=t
                                  itt
                               t=65
                                         -C).                         (1.2)


                                     0


If the investment was worth undertaking in the no tax situation, it is

still worth undertaking and a flat rate income tax which does not

include foregone earnings in the tax base does not discourage human

capital investments financed out of foregone earnings.
•
          The major human capital investment cost which is not tax exempt

is the direct cost of education, i.e. tuition, books and related expenses.

It is these expenses which have received the most attention in the public

finance    literature. The argument has been that such expenditures are a
valid cost of earning income and should be deductible either when made
                                                10
or depreciated throughout the working life.          While true economic depre-
ciation of educational expenses would be nondistortionary (since under
true economic depreciation the differential equation describing the
value of human capital is independent of the tax rate, the value of the
                                           11
investment would not be affected by the tax) it is not the only way to

achieve neutrality. Indeed, any tax which between its interest deducti—


10
     See Goode [1962 ]   for
                          a discussion of these issues. Frequently ignored
     is the lack of taxation on the human capital gain during education;
     this tax is postponed until the income stream is realized.
11
     See Stiglitz [1975). Indeed, this discussion closely follows his dis—
     cussion of tax depreciation of physical capital.
                                   —8—




bility   and depreciation allowances yields a deduction whose present

value equals the investment cost is neutral.       While I would be the

last to argue that capital markets work perfectly, particularly in

financing human investment, a modest fraction of higher educa-

tion expenses are financed by borrowing and at least the interest

on this debt is deductible against future income.

         In analyzing when tax depreciation of educational expenses

would be neutral it is important to note that many students invest-

ing in education have little other income and hence would not benefit
                                                                 12
from immediate write—off of out—of—pocket educational expenses. Un-

less they were allowed to carry such a write—off forward for a consid-

erable period, the present value of the depreciation allowance will

fall short of the present value of the tax liability on the return to

the investment and hence will discourage investment in education.

         The progressive rate structure of the personal income tax acts

in an analogous manner and not just on educational investments. Any

human capital investment which increases future earnings enough to

drive the taxpayer into a higher tax bracket (after accounting for in-

come   averaging   provisions) may decrease the ratio of the present value

of the depreciation allowance to the present value of the incremental

tax liability. Investments which are profitable at the current tax rate




       Given the exemptions and deducrions in the income tax.
                                       —9—




may   not be so when account is taken of the increased future tax rate.
In the on—the—job training example noted.abOve, the worker will require
a before tax expected present value of increased earnings of $3333/(l—t')
where t' is the new (presumably higher than one—third) marginal tax rate.
If the new rate is forty percent, he requires an increase of $5555 in
present value terms, or about eleven percent more titan with the un—
'hanged tax rate.
         In addition to the distortion in the amount at the investment in
human capital,   the tax   system   also alters the composition of human   in-

vestment.    For example, the instantaneous depreciation of foregone earnings

(relative to slower economic depreciation) favors longer,.lived human in-

vestments, e.g. general, rather than job specific, on—the—job training.

         The final source of tax distortions in human investment decisions

stems from the income effect of the tax. Since the tax revenue transfers

resources from the private to the public sector, the issue hinges on

differential marginal propensities to invest in human capital publicly

and privately. There is a substantial amount of public human capital

investment, hut separating the marginal from the average propensity to

invest in human capital is not easy; nor is it easy to determine to

what extent the private sectár adjusts its own human capital investment

decisions to the perceived public investment.

         In summary, the current progressive rate structure of the personal

 income tax probably creates a disincentive to accumulate human capital;

 this disincentive is perhaps most severe for secondary workers in two—

 earner families whose incremental incomes from human investment may gen—
                                        —'a-


erate a large      increase in marginal tax rates. The lack of an educational

expenditure depredation allowance probably biases investments away from

education to job training. While the extent of these distortions is

primarily an empirical matter——which forms the bulk of the research yet

to be conducted——recall that a substantial fraction of human investment

is exempt from tax.

          Finally, we note that the optimal investment decisions of house-

holds deal simultaneously with human investment and conventional

saving.    A full examination of the effects of the tax       system   on human

investment      requires an analysis of the tax   treatment   of physical
capital and the potential substitution of physical and human           capital.

Indeed,    intelligent tax policy with respect to the depreciation of

physical capital should account for the special, and perhaps inevitable,

tax treatment of human capital. We begin to deal with these issues below.

We merely note here that the result described above, neutrality of a

flat    rate   tax, does not hold when nonhuman capital is introduced into

the    analysis.    While the   result depends upon the details of depreciation
allowances,      method of finance and interest deductibility for nonhuman

capital, a tax increase      may well induce substitution of human for non-
human capital.
                                       — 11   —




2.   Tax Incidence in an Economy with Human Capital 'Accumulation.


        until quite recently, the typical analysis of the effects

of taxes on the distribution of income has been made in a static

context. Fixed stocks of capital and labor may be mobile across

sectors in response to after—tax return differentials in such

models, but the problem of the growth of factor supplies has

been relatively ignored. A series of recent papers has refocus-

ed attention on tax—induced changes in saving, capital accumula—
                                                     13
tion   and the long—run distribution of income.           Most of these

studies have adopted rather simplistic savings functions. In

perhaps the most important of these papers, Feldetein 974a_/

has generalized the savings behavior to allow both differential

propensities to save out of wages, profits and government revenue

and a potentially interest—elastic savings rate. In /1974W,

he demonstrates that a significant fraction of a capital inôome

tax may be shifted to labor via a decreased capital—labor

(and hence wage/rental) ratio.           Perhaps the most surprising

although in retrospect quite understandable —          result   from his

work is that in the long—run the elasticity of the supply of.
labor is totally irrelevant in determining the incidence 62 the

     See Diamond /197Q,         Sato   L1962/, xryzyaniak Ll962/, and
     Feldstein /197417    and   /1974b7.
                                 — 12   —




tax.    This occurs because of the usual assumption of a constant

returns to scale technology under which only the rate of growth

of the labor force, not its size at any point in time, affects

the wage/rental ratio.

          While these models of long—run tax incidence have not yet

been totally assimilated in the teaching and practice of public

finance, I believe it is important to extend such models to

account for the second - and quantitatively equally as important —

type of capital accumulation in advanced economies: investment
embodied in the knowledge and skills of the labor force. In

models designed to examine the long—run incidence of a tax, we

would do well to adopt a more general view of the supply of labor,

defining    it not just as total person—hours of work but in its
envelope sense, subsuming human capital investments.
          From this perspective, the rate of growth of the effective,
or quality—corrected labor force, may be affected by taxes.
Indeed,    a tax which lowers the after—tax rental rate on human

capital, such as an income or payroll tax, given the rate of

interest and the price of any purchased inputs in human capital
                                                     14
production,    will decrease human capital investment     unless an
                                                '5
appropriate depreciation policy is followed.         This in turn

 Il

       See Ben—Porath 219707

       See section 1 above.
                                        — 13 —


will   drive up the ratio of physical to human capital and the

ratio of unit rental rates of men to machines. In symmetry with

the result of Feldstein quoted above, taxes on human capital,

i.e. taxes on earnings, may be shifted in part to owners of

physical capital. While I am still in the process of experi-

menting with alternative forms of representing this phenomenon

in a simple general equilibrium setting, let us sketch out some

of the basic consideration. This is done most readily by taking

the Feldstein model as our point of departure and making some

simple additions.

         Following Griliches /197.Q, we define a constant return

to scale production function of physical capital, K, and quality—

corrected labor, EN, where N is the nuither of workers and E is

a labor—augmenting quality multiplier:


                                   YF(K,EN)                              (1)



Physical capital accumulation, convential saving, and human

capital accumulation follow:


                                   k=sy—
              •
                  •

                      •                                                  (2)


                                   EhY— E •                              (3)
                                           N

where S     and           are depreciation rates and s and h represent
                                       — 14 —

                                                         16
saving rates, for physical and human capital.

        The population grows exogerieously at rate n


                                                                         (4)
                              N

Letting L = EN, and defining capital accumulation net of de-

preciation, we have

                              Y        F(K,L)                            (1)


                              Ic         Y         and                   (2')

                              i    = hY+nL                               (3)

Factors are paid their respective marginal products:


                                   =    r   (1 +                         (4)


                              FL = w        (l-FYL)                      (5)



where r and w are after—tax factor returns and Pt.1           is    the rate

of   tax on factor   I
         Following Feldsteifl L1974a and l974/, we allow saving

to respond to its rate of return; however, each type of saving
                                                               17
will depend upon the returns to ech type of saving:


                               s =     s (r, w)                          (6)


16
     Conlisk /1970J uses this model to discuss the residual in
     growth accounting.
17
     An integenerational family model suffices to justify such a formulation
     even if we are skeptical of the cross—elasticities In the case of a
     single individual. Uncertainly is ignored in the present discussion,
     but hedging away from the relatively more uncertain factor income Is
     potentially important.
                                          — 15 —


                                  h   =    h (r, w)                            (7)


where r and w are returns to physical and human capital, respec—
           18
t ively.

           Again, following Feldstein, we also allow short—run labor

supply to respond to its return:


                                  L        1(w). N                             (8)


           Finally, the equilibrium growth            path   requires L              ,   so
                                                                      L        K


                                  sLY =hKY+nKL.                                (9)



           This systemof equations can be transformed (via sub-

stitution and total differentiation) into a system of linear

equations in which dw and dr, the change in the returns to

human and physical capital, are a function of the tax ratesand

saving and human capital accumulation propensities, their rate—

of—return sensitivities and the parameters of the production

technology, i.e.


                dw =      f   (s, h, 5r' 5w' Fir, 1'w'        '
                                                                   P1.   P1)

                dr   =.   g (s, h, 5r' 5w' hr, hw r,              a, 11

     We al],ow our notation t slip here, confusing rates of return
     and rental prices. An additional unit of human capital earn-

     return of w (1 —         e
     ing w at each point of time from t to T has a marginal rate of
                          (Tt)), where r is the interest rate.
                                   —16


where   subscripts denote partial derivatives,        r is   the elasti-

                                                       labor's share in
city of substitution in production and           cC


production.
           The incidence of the tax nay be inferred from the change

in   the    returns to physical and human capital. The important

point      to note is that the "long—run" supply of labor and the sen-
sitivity of human capital to its       return,   do    affect the in-
cidence of        the tax.

            It is also important to note that even if human capital

accumulation is own rate—of—return inelastic, or if tax policy

appropriately neutralizes the direct effect ot the tax on

the rate of return to human investment, a more general savings

behavior allowing differential public and private propensities

to invest in human capital would suff ice to render human capital

accumulation important in the analysis of long—run tax inci-

 dence.

           me conclude thiS sectionby noting the woefully in-
            Let

 adequate empirical information upon which to approximate long-run
 tax incidence. While we have a fairly decent handle on the.
 parameters of the production function, we have very
                                                     little in-
 formation usable in obtaining a rough guide to the conventional
 saving and human capital accumulation equations. We have
                                — 17 —


virtually   no information on the latter (indeed, an estimate of

the annual investment can be obtained only indirectly); on the

former, a renewed interest has emerged, but inclusion of the

interestrate in consuit ion functions or savings equations is
the exception, rather than the rule, worse yet, use of the
nominal     rather than the real interest rate quite likely biases
                                                   19
the result toward a zero interest elasticity.

       Thus, an improved set of estimates of savings functions

and a (any?       )   set of estimates of human capital accumulation
equations, as well as a better grasp on government saving and

human investment, are essential to shed some light on long—run

tax incidence.




     See Feldsteiri /197g.
                                          — 18 —



3.    Some Brief Comments on Optimal Capital Accumulation


         In Section 1 above, we focused on some of the ways the tax

syAtem affected directly the accumulation of human          capital;

in Section 2, we introduced physical capital as well and out-

lined a model of long—run tax incidence. We return now to the

question of efficient capital accumulation when we account simul-

taneously for physical 'and human capital accumulation.

         Consider the problem of maximizing social welfare measured

as the discounted. sum of individual utilities:
                       00
                       r •,.—t
             Vs Jc                   Pt U (Ct)         at              (10)
                0.
subject to the constraints


                =        SF(K,L)
             L =        hF (K,Li +nL


where        C =         (1s—h) F (K               )




                                 N


and          5t. lit      >      0


             St +ht                  1.



Given initial stocks of physical and human capital, we may apply

the maximum principle to this problem by defining the present

value of the Hamiltonian as:
                                           —19—
                                                              =
           (Kb, Lt, St, lit, q. Vt. t )

                                                                          +                (11)
               e—I,t
                           lPtU(ct)
                                           +   qt B   F (Kt, 4)



                            Vt (lit
                                          F (Kt. 4) + nt

where e_Pt     t   and C" Vt             are the auxiliary variables associated

with the differential equations defining capital accumulation.

Necessary and sufficient conditions for a maximum are the follow—

.ing:

               K =         s   F (Kt, Lt)                                        (with ic)O)

               H =             F       (Kt. 4)    + nL

                       =            — St   F_/        —
                                                          lit     Fk Vt -     (t-Slie' U

               Vt
                                   —
                                       lit F/ Vt          —
                                                              St FL   q                    (12)



                                   —
                                        (l8tht)    U FL

                       =    TJ
                Vt =
                                                                          20

Where subscripts denote partial differentiation. Substituting

 and rearranging, we have:

          Ct           Fkp
          Ct


               =               P




 20
      I spare the reader the laborious                 proof of this proposition.
                              — 20 —



Where   C =     —c         the elasticity of marginal utility.

This thus: obvious that optimality requires


              Fk =   FL

i.e. the marginal efficiency of physical and human capital must

be equal. This result hardly should be surprising; it is precisely

analo7ous to the usual efficiency rule of equalizing gross—of—tat

rates of return on physical capital in all uses.    Again in analogy

with the usual treatment of the physical capital stock, owners of
capital will respond to net—of—tax rates of return in making their
investment    choices. It is thus inappropriate solely to examine

the tax treatment of physical capital, or of human capital, in

isolation. The tax treatment of each must be examined simultan-

eously.

          While a detailed analysis of this proposition is beyond

the scope of these notes a few general remarks will serve to

 illustrate some of its implications. First, it is obvious

 that our tax system through exclusion, preferences. maximum rates

 and other devices often imposes different rates of tax on income

 from physical and human capital accruing to the same.taxpayiflg

 unit in the same year. The same taxpaying unit also faces widely

 different rates on the two types of income given the usual life—

 cycle patterns of the two types of saving and the progressive
                                 — 21 —

rate   structure and limited averaging possibilities in the

current personal income tax, while there may well be other

social objectives served by such differentation, it does distort

the composition and timing of investment choices.

         Second, there may well be inherent constraints in the tax

treatment of human capital which have important implications for

the tax treatment of physical capital.       For example, liquidity

and enforceability constraints may make it extremely costly

to attempt to include foregone earnings in the tax base, i.e.

itis likely that a large fraction of human capital investments
must be tax—exempt and thus treated as if instantaneously depre-
ciated. Even if we achieve the Objective of uniform tax treat—

merit of income from physical capital in   all   sectors of the economy

(via   whatever combination of rate structure, depreciation allow-
ance and other devices is necessary), if the tax system uniformly
lowered   the rate of return of all types of physical capital

relative to human capital, we would be underinvesting in physical

capital. Indeed if it is the case that the tax system discrimi-

nates against physical capital relative to human capital (I

suspect it does but this is a difficult proposition to establish

given the wide variation in effective tax rates on alternative

types of physical and human capital), a strong case could be made

2).
       See BOskin (1975) for a discussion of the inability to tax
       foregone earings due to household work.
                                      -22--


                                                               22
for liberalization of the tax treatment of physical capital.        In a

sequel, I will report on a set of optimal tax rules for the taxation of

physical capital under alternative constraints on the tax treatment of

human capital. We also note that this distortion in taxation of human

and physical capital is exacerbated by inflation, since human and physical

capital have different proportions of tax recovery of costs via depreciation.

In any event, we plan to attempt to say something empirical on this point

in future research.

          Finally, let me conclude with a proviso:

          Our entire analysis hasbeen conducted in the usual elosed economy

framework. In an open economy, tax policies may be disciplined sharply by

the (actual or potential) international movement of human, as well as

financial, capital.




.22
      Efficient allocation of the total capital stock may thus directly conflict
      with short—run income distribution objectives.
                              — 23 —

                            REFERENCE S



Abramovitz, N., "Resources and Output Trends in the United
   States since 1870," Amer. Econ. Rev., May 1956

Becker, 0., Human Capital, Columbia University Press for
   NBER, 1964.

Becker, G. Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of
   Income, Ann Arbor, 1967.

Ben—Porath, Y., "The Production of Human Capital Over Time,"
   in W. Hansen, ed., Education, Income and Human Capital,
   NBER, 1970.

Boskin,   M.,. "Efficiency Aspects of the Differential Tax Treat-
   ment of Market and Household Economic Activity," Jour. Pub.
   Econ., Jan. 1975.
Brown, E. C., "Business—Income Taxation and Investment Incen-
   tives," Ch. IV in Pt. III of Income1 Employment     and Public
   Policy, Essays in Honor of.Alvin Hansen, 1948.

Conlisk, J., "Comment" in W. Hansen, ed., Education, Income
   and Human capital, 1970.

Diamond, P., "Incidence of an Interest Income Tax," Jour. Econ.
   Theory, Sept. 1970.

Feldstein,   M. "Tax Incidence with Growth and Variable Factor
   Supply," Quar. Jour—Econ., November 1974.
Feldstein, M., "Incidence of a Capital Income Tax in a Growing
   Economy with Variable Savings Rates," Rev. Econ. Stud.,
   Oct. 1974.
Feldstein, N., "Inflation, Specification Bias and the Impact
   of Interest Rates" Jour. Pol. Econ., Nov. 1970
Goode, R., "Educational Expenditures and the Income Tax,"
   in Economics of Higher Education, S. Mushlin, ed., 1962

Griliches    Z., "Notes on the Role of Education in Production
   Functions and Growth Accounting," in W. Hansen ed., Education,
   Income and Human Capital, 197),
                                 — 24 —



Harberger, A., "Efficiency Aspects of Taxes on Income from
   Capital," in M. Kryzyaniak, ed., The Corporation Income Tax, 1966.

Heckman, J. "Estimates of a Human Capital Production Function
   Embedded in a Life Cycle Model of Labor Supply,1' mimeo, 1973.

Kendrick, 3. The Formation and Stocks of Total Capital, NBER,
   forthcoming, 1975.

Kiker, B. •   "The Historical Roots of the Concept of Human Capita r'
   Jour.   Pol. Econ. Oct. 1966

Kryzyaniak, M.., "The Long—run Burden of a General Tax on Profits
   in a Neoclassical World," Public Finance, 1967.

Mincer, 3.,    "On—the—Job Training: Costs Returns and Some Im-
   plications,"    Jour. Pol, Econ., October 1962.

Mincer, J., "The Personal Distribution of Income. A Survey with
   Special Reference to the Human Capital Approach," Jour.
   Econ. Lit,, 1969.

Mirlees, 3., "A Exploration in the Theory of Optimal Income
   Taxation," Rev. Econ Studies., April, 1971.

Sato, K., "Taxation and Neoclassical Growth," Public Finance, 1967.

Schultz, T.W. "Investment in Human Capital," Amer. Eôon. Rev.,
   51,   March 1961.
Sheshinski, E., "An Example of the Income Tax Schedule which
   is Optimal for the Maxi—Min Criterion," IMSSS Tech. Report
   No.74, 1972.

Stiglitz, 3., "The Corporation Tax" Tech. Report No. 162,
   IMSSS, Stanford, 1975.
White,H. and A. White, "Tax Neutrality of  Instantaneous Versus Economic
    Depreciation,"   R. Bird and J. Head,
                   I..                     eds., Modern FiScal Issues:
    Essays in Honor of Carl S. Shoup, Toronto, 1974.
