               NBER Working Paper Series




            ANALYSIS OF LONGITUDINAL EARNINGS DATA:
                  AMERICAN SCIENTISTS 1960—70


                        Lee A. Lillard
                               and
                          Yoram Weiss


                   Working Paper No. 121




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                         January 1976



                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board Of Directors.

This research was supported by grants to NBER from the National
Science Foundation (SOC71—03783) and from The Rockefeller Founda-
tion (RF 72087). The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation or The Rockefeller Foundation. The authors wish to
thank Barbara Williams for very competent assistance.
                              I. INTRODUCTION


     Earnings functions which relate individual earnings to some, presumably

relevant, characteristics are often used to predict the effect of individual

choice on future earnings. Typically such estimates are based upon a single

cross section. There are, however, well known difficulties in applying the

results of such comparisons across individuals to the prediction of the earn-

ings of any single individual.

     One   difficulty   ié that individuals of different ages who are observed

at a given point of time may vary systematically with respect to their date

of entry into the labor force. If either the slope or the level of Individual

profiles depends on vintage, then the cross section information is not suf—

ficient to separate these effects from those associated with the accumulation

of experience. Generally speaking, we expect the cross section to underestimate

the effects of experience on earnings. This difficulty can be overcome only

if we pool information from several successive cross sections. (See Weiss
[11], and Welch [12]).

     A second difficulty is that a snapshot at a given point of time provides

no information on trends or any other dynamic changes which occur in the

economy. We can use cross section data for prediction only in an economy

which is either in a stationary or a steady state equilibrium. Again, by

pooling information from several successive cross sections we can produce some

estimates of the trends in earnings for various subgroups of the population.

    A third difficulty is that individual earnings are also affected by

some characteristics which the researcher is unable to observe. The strength

of the longitudinal data is that it enables us to make use of the fact that
                                      2



these unobservables are already to some degree incorporated in the past
                                                                                S
earnings of the same individual. A standard example is that of unmeasured

ability. If the individual can be observed repeatedly one may incorporate

the information on the existence of persistent effects (without actually

measuring them) to improve the efficiency of the estimates of the earnings

function. Furthermore it is important to know the relative importance of

individual persistent effects relative to the total unexplained variance.

We obtain from the model quite different distributional (welfare) implica-

tions if "errors1' are uncorrelated over time. In such a case we would

expect that over a whole life time the mean error is zero, and individuals

with the same observable characteristics can be viewed as having identical

"permanent" income. If however, there are persistent error elements an

individual may be systematically below or above the mean of a group with

similar observable characteristics.

     Longitudinal data may also be useful in eliminating some selection

biases which occur when different individuals are sampled. For instance,

suppose that the longer the person is in the labor force, the more is learned

(say by employers) about the individual's ability. Again this information

on the individual, e.g., his professional reputation, is not known to the

researcher. Suppose further that as a result of such learning individuals

may be selected out of the sample (i.e., survival of the fittest), then it

is clear that an estimate of experience effects which is based upon comparing

different individuals (of the same vintage) may overestimate the potential

gain for any single individual.
                                    3




     Finally, longitudinal data may be useful in reducing errors of measure-

ment. One can measure with greater precision variables like schooling and

experience which affect individual earnings. In this paper we present and

compare estinate.s of earnings function based upon cross section and long1tudini

data. Our source of data is the N.S.F. Register of Techinical and Scientific

Personnel. This data is used to illustrate the main methodological issues.


     The major findings of this study are as follows:

     (1) Simple cross section estimates grossly underestimate cohort profiles

during the period 1960—70. Furthermore the growth in earnings is not uniform
                            M0a ftC&iL.+
across experience groups and eare- vintages tend to have steeper profiles

in most fields. Consequently the rate of return or present value comparisons

based on cross sections are likely to be misleading even if the standard adjust-

ment for growth is made.

     (2) For purposes of estimating mean profiles and mean effects of variables

estimates based on pooled independent cross sections are quite close to

those based on the more expensive longitudinal data.

     (3) There are important persistent unmeasured individual effects on both

the level and growth of earnings. Consequently, individuals with the same

observed characteristics will still have a wide variance in their permanent

income.
                                     4


                                                                                      .
                      II.   THE EARNING FUNCTION


       The earnings of an individual reflect current and past voluntary decisions

and exogenous factors. An economic model is necessary to describe the precise

nature of the interaction between individual choices and varying economic en-

vironments. In this paper we shall not attempt to provide such a model, (see

however, Weiss [ll]) We shall simply postulate the following simple model

of earning determination.



l1)         mY =lnYP +lnYT

              p
The term ln 't.    denotes the systematic part of earnings (e.g., human capital)

which reflects past decisions of the individual. The variable in Y denotes

the transitory element in earnings. It reflects decisions or exogenous events

which affect only the current level of earnings without any future ramifications

for individual earning capacity.     The systematic part of earnings is determined

by two linear relations which determine its initial level and growth:



 (2)        in         + Xa2 + V'1 + gp



 (3)        dmnYL ai    + g + X?3 + V + Z'..y + T?



where t is the year at which the individual is observed, and      i.'
                                                                        is the year

at which the individual entered the labor force (we shall use year at which

highest degree was obtained). The vector X denotes factors which are specific

                                                                                      .
                                    5



to the individual, remain fixed throughout his life, such as sex, level of

degree and age at highest degree. The vector V denotes factors which are

common to individuals who entered the labor force in year p, but may differ

from year to year, such as the amount of knowledge provided by schools at

year p, size of entering cohort at p and expectations formed at year p.

The vector Z1 contains variables which for every individual vary with time,

such as his experience and type of employer. Finally the vector   T denotes
general market conditions at year t, as deviations from the general trend       g.

     The nature of our data is such that all individuals are observed over

the same period of time. Starting salaries ln Y.     are observed only for a

minority of the sample. To estimate the parameters of both (2) and (3) it

is necessary to integrate equation (3) and use information on current earning

levels. For that purpose we shall make several highly restrictive assumptions:

     (1) Apart from trend the individual expects no change in (real) market

conditions. All departures from trend   T. are viewed as unexpected and

will enter the transitory part, ln Y.

     (2) The only individual variables varying with time are age and experience,

which are linear functions of time. Type of employer is expected to remain

fixed, and is included in the X vector together with the individual charac-

teristics. Any deviations from the "normal't type of employment will be included

in the transitory part, ln Y.

     (3) The effect of year of entry follows a simple growth trend, and can

be indexed by the year of entry. We thus aggregate all the vintage effects into

a single variable i.
                                     6



      We can now integrate equation (3) to obtain a single level equation,
                                                                                     .
which must hold at every point of tie



(4)        in       a0 + a1(t—p) + X(a2 + (t—p)ct3)            + P[i +

                    + -y1(t—p) +           —          +
                                               -r)        gt




where p is year of Ph.D., (t—]t) is experience, Tt is current age, and

T is age at attainment of Ph.D. Equation (4) is a straightforward

generalization of the earnings function developed by Mincer [8].          The only

difference is the explicit appearance of age at highest degree, age, vintage,

and time as explanatory variables. These additions are suggested on a theo-

retical basis as well as by their availability in our data. However, an

important problem of identification arises. There are two basic identities

which may be noted.




(5)        t    p + (t—p)             or

           current year of observation =       year   of highest degree + post

           degree experience.



(6)        Tt = T   + (t—p)           or

           current age = age at highest degree + post degree experience.



It is therefore impossible to identify the separate effect of all these variables.




                                                                                     .
                                         7




       Furthermore, depending on the data we may have even further restrictions.

If, for instance, we have only a cross section at a given point of time, the

effect of t cannot be estimated at all, and experience cannot be separated

from vintage. If we have time series data for a single individual, or a number

of individuals of the same vintage, the effect of vintage cannot be estimated

and we cannot separate time from experience (only g + c can be estimated).

Since our data consists of time series on individuals of different vintages,

by pooling them two of the effects can be identified in terms of the third.

Specifically, we shall omit year of highest degree, age and the square of age

from the estimation. The effects of these omitted variables are then captured

by the coefficients of the remaining variables from each identity.

       From equation (4) if 'i    is   omitted, the coefficient of time will also

capture the growth in starting salary which is vintage specific, ,          in   ad-

dition to the general growth in productivity, g, which accrues to all vintages.

Similarly   the coefficient of experience will be (ct1—1) and will be biased
downward by the effect of vintage on the level of starting salaries. Finally,
the coefficient of experience squared will be (11+12)12 and will capture age
effects.    The effect   of age on the curvature of the earning profile 12' will

be   identified by the coefficient of the    Interaction between age at highest

degree   and experience.
                                     8



                        III.   THE ERROR STRUCTURE
                                                                                    .
       The purpose of this section is to describe the statistical procedures

which will be used in the estimation of the earnings function. Two quite

different models are considered. They are (1) the standard variance component

method of pooling time series and cross section data, (See Wallace and Hussin

[10], Naddala [7], and Nerlove [91) and (2) a procedure which allows for first

order serial correlation among individual observations. The variance component

model implies the same correlation among all observtions on the same indiv-

idual but allows the correlation to vary among individuals. In the first

order autoregressive model the correlation between observations on the same

individual declines with their distance but is restricted to be the same for

all individuals. The variance component model reflects the operation of

unmeasured variables which vary among individuals but which do not vary during

the decade. The autoregressive model reflects the aggregate effect of

unmeasured variables which differ among individuals and among years for a

given individual but which vary "smoothly" or not purely randomly over time.

A comparison of the two estimates enables us to examine the sensitivity of

coefficient estimates of the earnings function to the alternative specifications.

       The simple variance component model, can be written as




                                   I =   l,...,N   individuals
 (7)    p
          it =S.+E
               1   it              t = 0,2,... ,lO     .
                                                    time periods (two year
                                         intervals, 1960—1970).




                                                                                    .
                                        9




 where       and        are independent of each other and all included variables.

          The S component of this error structure reflects the effect of un-

 measured variables in equation (2). It is thus a pure level effect. (In a

 later section we shall discuss the possibility of unmeasured variables which

 persistently affect earnings growth, equation (3)). Under this specification——

 the individual component         represents a random variance component for which

 we need only estimate a mean and variance, rather than treating it as a

 parameter to be estimated.

      For several reasons we have chosen to estimate time effects rather than treat

them as random. First we feel they represent an important source of growth

in earnings common to all individuals in the sample which should be measured

even though it only measures our ignorance of the sources of that growth.

Secondly, exogenous time effects are different for different subgroups of the

sample, which would be hard to capture by a variance components procedure with

respect to time effects. Thirdly and importantly, there are only six years

in the NSF sample and more than six parameters are estimated so that far too

few degrees of freedom are available for a time variance components procedure

to be meaningful.

      As Is well known, the generalized least square estimate for this model

is given by a weighted average of within Individual and across Individual,

sample moments. Specifically



(8)                =[
                        N,         N
                       X X —6(l—e) E
                                            '—1
                                                  [
                                                      NE
                                                                       N
                                                         X1ftiY1—6(l—e) E X1InY1]
               GLS. 1=1           1=1                 1=1              1=1
                                             10




where         is the 6 x 1 data matrix for individual i, Y is annual earnings
                                                                                            .
                                                 2
and     0 may be estimated from the OLS residuals, as 0 = _____________
                                                                 o2÷6ci
      The parameter 0 represents the weight given to among versus within

individual variation. A 0 close to zero weights within individual variation,

(in       —   in   Y.) ,   high   relative to among individual variation (in Y.)

That is, when 0 is small due to 0 being large relative to o for a given T,

a regression on means would be expected to have little predictive power relative

to a regression on deviations since unobserved individual differences compose a

larger share of the total residual variation. Conversely, when                is small

relative to             for gciven T, a regression on means is expected to have greater

predictive power relative to deviations and thus a large 0 close to one is

appropriate.
                   Usually alternative consistent estimates can be obtained by regression

simply on means for individuals (using only among individual variation) or

regression on deviations from individual means (using only within individual

variation). A special characteristic of our model is that such regressions are

not only less efficient but are also subject to difficulty in separating time and

experience effects. Specifically, by using a regression on means across

individuals the time effect cannot be identified and vintage effects cannot

be separated from experience effects. Such a regression is analogous to a

single cross section and is subject to the same problems. Similarly, by using

only within individual variation the effect of vintage cannot be identified

 (as is true of any other variable whose effect is fixed throughout the period

of observation) and the effect of time cannot be separated from the effect of




                                                                                            .
                                      11




experience. The parameter estimates represented by these two extreme

procedures are not only orthogonal in the usual statistical sense (within

group and between group estimates are always orthogonal) but are also orthogonal

in their respective interpretations, level and growth, in the context of this

model. Each is interesting in its own right. We are interested however in

an incorporation of information from each source in an optimal way.

          In Table 1 we present the various variance components by field. The

second column gives the total residual variation due to all sources from the

pooled OLS regression. The second column presents the individual level

variance components.      The proportion of the residual variation due to   S   is

64 percent in the aggregate. That rather high proportion is remarkably stable

across fields. The null hypothesis that p = 0 is strongly rejected.

       In the case of a simple first order autoregressive residual structure among

individual observations the error structure assumes the form



(9)
                 =        +          .

                                                     =


It    should be noted that the autocorrelation among residuals is net of time

effects which are common to all individuals and are estimated directly. This model

differs from the usual first order autoregressive model (see Durbin [2]) in two

respects: (1) the residuals are blockwise autoregressive, within indi-

vidual observations, and (2) observations are each two years apart. The general-

izations are straightforward. In the procedure used here the parameter           is
                                                         2
first estimated from the OLS residuals, R.t, by Rit = y      R2. Secondly
the data matrix is tranformed by the matrix IT
    Table   1.   Variance Components by Field

                                                                                                 Serial
                                                                                                 correlation
                                                                                                 assuming
                                                                                                   2
                                        Variance Components Assuming y = 0                        a=0

                                                                                         2
                                                                                         a
                                         )                                 .                 C
                     Sample                         2
    Field                         a                                    0       1—
                                                                                    ,.
                     size(6N)            a                       p                       2             -y

                                                                                     mY

    All Fields       67770      .0505   .0323    .0182      .639     .086       .802

    Chemistry        25980      .0510   .0325    .0185      .637     .087       .802              .883
    Physics           9684      .0447   .0276    .0170      .619     .093       .827              .861

    Biology          12960      .0568   .0363    .0205      .640     .086       .814             .857
    Math              4548      .0502   .0341    .0161      .679     .073       .844             .880

    Psychology        9816      .0535   .0351    .0184      .657     .080      .750              .885

    Earth Sci.        3882      .0382   .0234    .0148      .614     .095      .798              .863



    For description of data set, see p. 14 and   pp.    A1—A3.




.                                                 .                                                            .
                                       12




                               0    0 0 0 0

           where   T=     —Y   10000             I
                                                 i1—y
                                                     2\i,2
                                                  _____
                           o       2i o o o
                           o O—y 1 0 0
                           o   0    O—y 1 0
                           o   o 0 0_y2l
Finally,   OLS is applied to the transformed data.

Estimates of the parameter y assuming no individual variance component (c =    0)
are presented as the last column in Table 1. The values of y are large and

highly significant. Again there is considerable stability across fields.

     Each of these two extreme models is superior to a purely stochastic

specification and one can gain efficiency by using either of them. However,

given the large number of observations in most fields there are only minor

differences in the coefficients between the extreme variants of the GLS methods

as well as between them and the OLS estimates (see Appendix Table A3 for the

comparison of estimates for chemists). In the next section which analyzes the

estimated earnings function we will use results based upon the simple variance

components model.

       We now turn to a more detailed analysis of the covariance structure

across years for chemistry which is the largest single field. Consider first

the correlation between log earnings in the various years. (Table 2.)

There is a large positive correlation (76 percent to 87 percent) between successive

years but the correlation declines as the observations become further apart.
                                     12a



Table 2. Log Earnings Variance and Correlation Matrix for Chemistry

       Variance
                              Correlation
                                                                      .
                    1960     1962          1964    1966    1968

1960     .0936
1962     .0851      .859

1964     .0762      .817      .852

1966     .0723      .741      .788          .871

1968     .0768       .628     .677          .761    .820

1970     .0830      .551      .606          .689    .758    .757




Table 3. Residual Variance and Correlation Matrix for Chemistry

            .
        Variance
                    1960
                              Correlation

                             1962           1964    1966    1968
                                                                      .
1960     .042

1962     .045        .720

1964     .044        .668     .741

1966     .048        .590     .673          .800

1968     .059        .498     .568          .682    .761

1970     .068        .442     .517          .618    .703    .700




                                                                      .
                                    13



(The 1970—1960 correlation is only 55 percent.) In part, the positive

correlation is due to measured individual variables which remain fixed

throughout the sample period, such as sex, and type of employer.   However,   -




the correlation pattern of the residuals (Table 3) net of the various

measured characteristics (including those which vary with time) is still

of the same nature. There is a positive correlation (70 percent to 80

percent) between successive years which declines to 44 percent for observations

which are a decade apart. This indicates the importance of persistent

unmeasured effects. The question is whether they are best captured by a

simple variance components model which assumes the same realization of the

random unmeasured effect throughout the sample period, or by a simple auto-

regressive scheme which only requires that successive realizations be correlated.

    The correlation matrix implied by the simple variance component model

consists of a matrix with 1 on the diagonal and .637 for all off diagonal

elements. The variance covariance matrix implied by the simple blockwise first

order autoregressive model suggests a simple correlation of .884 among successive

years (and correspondingly .781 among our observations which are two years apart)

declining to .291 for observations a decade apart. The actual pattern of residual

covariance declines monotonically with the distance between observations but not

as rapidly as predicted by the simple autocorrelation model. It seems that a

more general error structure incorporating both components would better fit

the data.3 However, since these two cases yield very similar estimates we will

not proceed to develop the more general model.
                                      14
          IV. EMPIRICAL RESULTS: THE EFFECT OF TIME AND VINTAGE
                                                                                      .
       The data for this study is a longitudinal file from the NSF Registry of

Scientists. Each scientist in the sample reported at two year intervals, his

earnings and personal and occupational characteristics. We focus on scientists

with a Ph.D. degree. The scientists are classified into six fields on the basis

of the field of greatest scientific competence. The fields are: Biology,

Chemistry, Earth Science, Mathematics, Physics, and Psychology. In each field,

as well as for the aggregate of all fields, we will estimate earnings function

(4).     More specifically, the following variables are included: The log of

basic income as dependent variable; year of observation; type of employer

including academic, government and private industry; quality of degree; the

interaction between type of employer and year of observation; post degree

experience; the difference between post degree experience and years since degree

(break); experience squared: and the interaction of experience with type of

employer, age at highest degree, quality of degree, and break. In fields where

there are a substantial number of women (more than 100) we have also added a

female dummy and its interactions with experience. Detailed descriptions and

summary statistics for the sample characteristics are presented in the Appendix.

       It will be useful to introduce a more descriptive notation to be used

hereafter and to rewrite equation (4):



(11)      log earning = a60 + b60 private industry + c60 goy + d60 unstable


                      + yr.62 (a62 +                            gov + d62 unstable)
                                     b62 private industry + c62




                      +yr 70 (a70 +
                                      b70 private industry + c70 gov+ d70 unstable)
                                         15




             + exp      +     private Industry + 2 gov + 13 unstable)


             + exp l yhd + a2 exp)


             + agehd (a3 + a4 exp)


             + pre—experience (a5 + a6 exp)

             + break (a7 + a8 exp)


             + female (a9 +
                              a   exp)


             + thp school (a +
                               a12 exp)




     The coefficients of this earning function estimated for each field and the

aggregate of all fields by the variance component procedure outlined in the

last section are presented in appendix Table 2.

     Having estimated an earning function which incorporates time and vintage

effects, we now are in a position to evaluate their separate roles in the

determination of earnings. Specifically, we use equation (11) to produce two

types of predictions:

     1.    Predicted cross section profiles, where year of observation is held

          constant but year of highest degree varies inversely with experience.

     2. Predicted vintage profiles, where year of entry is held constant, but

          the year of observation varies together with experience.

     Such predictions for all scientists in academic employment are presented

In Figure l. There are two basic features of this diagram: (1) The level of
                                       16




7.o                     MI Fe(ds


         E?nsns
                                                          —


                                            \)int.

                                                        I- -        -


I
 (




                                                                     194oC.S
                                                                                     .
.1




      i, k:                                            35:
     Figure 1. Log Earnings Profiles for the Aggregate of All Fields — Academics


     Assumes Male = 1, Break in Experience   0, Pre—Degree Experience =   0,   Top
     Ten School = 0, Age at Highest Degree = 26.
                                   17




later cross sections and vintage profiles is higher. (2) The slope of later

cross sections and vintage profiles is higher. We shall discuss each of these

effects separately.

     It should be clear that our model does not allow us to separate the effect

of time from that of vintage on the level of earnings. Thus the 1970 cross

section may be higher than that of 1960, either because all vintages enjoyed

the same general growth in productivity during the period, or alternatively,

because more recent vintages start at a successively high initial salary. The

interpretation of the cross section and vintage profiles will, however, be

quite different. Under the first extreme interpretation the cross section

profiles describe (in the absence of slope effects) the experience—earnings

relationship. The vertical difference between cross sections reflects then the

shift in individual lifetime earnings profiles due to growth in exogenous

productivity.

     Under the alternative extreme interpretation all growth in the level of

productivity over time accrues to the entering cohort and experience earnings

drift upward for successive vintages. The corresponding vintage profiles are

the solid lines connecting the cross section profiles and labeled with the

appropriate year of Ph.D. They represent the earnings paths actually attained

on average. The contribution of experience for each vintage is given by the

solid vintage line. The cross section profile then underestimates the experience

effect by precisely the vertical shift.

    The most likely situation is that both vintage and time effects are

operating. Their effects can be separately identified only by analysis of the
                                    18


                                                                                    .
underlying   causal factors influencing the productivity of individuals over

time and of cohorts. There are, however, two weak indications that the shift

in the level of the profiles is probably due to time effects rather than

vintage. First the cross section profiles do not move smoothly through time.

Individual year effects deviate significantly from the trend. Moreover, the

individual deviations from trend correspond roughly to the changes in demand

(and supply) conditions for scientists over this decade.    (See Freeman [3].)

We will use the term starting salaries to indicate the level effect since either

the growth or the vintage interpretation has the same implication for starting

salaries.

     Let us now examine the changes in the slope of the earning profiles. The

basic phenomenon is that holding experience constant, the slope of the individual

earning profile is increasing with time (or vintage). This is also reflected

by a higher vertical shift in the cross section profile for groups with more

experience. There is thus a positive interaction between time or vintage and

experience. In principle it is, again, impossible to separate time effects and

vintage effects on the slope of the experience—earnings profile. Given the

empirical results, either (1) during the 60's exogenous growth in productivity

affected individuals with higher level of experience more favorably (a positive

interaction between time and experience), or alternatively (2) more recent

vintages tend to have greater earnings growth as well as a higher initial level

(a positive interaction between year of Ph.D. and experience). One might argue

that during the period under consideration, the time effects on slope would be

different for different years depending upon the state of demand and supply.
                                       19



 We know that during the period conditions
                                              changed from rapid growth to a
 slow—down and in some cases reduction in
                                             real earnings toward the end ot the
 period. It is likely that more recent and
                                              more experienced scientists fare
 differently under varying economic cixcuinstances.
                                                       Specifically one might
 expect that younger newly hired scientists will suffer more in the downturn

 and gain more in the upswing. If this were the case we would expect to find

 individual year effects on the slope which would be significantly different

 from a pure trend. This possibility was tested for two fields, physics,

 which underwent the sharpest changes in demand, and psychology. In each case

 there was no significant difference from trend. The finding of systematically

 greater earnings growth for scientists who are observed at a later date

relative to those with the same
                                   years of experience but observed at an earlier date
is probably due to their being of more recent vintage. A possible theoretical

explanation is that the effect of more recent and
                                                      higher quality schooling is
not merely through the effect on starting salaries but also through a higher

rate of investment on the job. (See Weiss Ill]).

     The broken lines, which are associated with each vintage in Figure 1

reflect estimates of the minimal effect of experience for these vintages.5

They are calculated under the assumption of zero level effects for either time

or vintage. The difference between the broken line and solid cross section line

reflects the interaction between
                                   experience and vintage (or time). The difference
between the broken line and the vintage profile reflects the contribution of

time or vintage level effects, Even in the absence of level effects the cross

section underestimates the experience
                                        profile of any given cohort since it also
                                     20




           the reduction in slope for older vintages. The bold lines for each
                                                                                     .
reflects
vintage incorporate in addition to experience the level effects of time and

vintage. The higher total growth in earnings during the sample period for

more recent vintages (and lower experience groups) reflects the combined

effects of non—linear individual profiles for each vintage, and the interaction

between vintage and experience.

     To highlight some of the problems associated with predicting individual

earnings from cross section data,consl-der a person of 1948 vintage who was

observed with 12 years of experience in 1960. Suppose we wish to predict his

1970 earnings If we use the earnings of an individual with 22 years of ex-

perience in 1960, then we would underestimate his earnings by 35 percent. Even

if there were no exogenous time effects on the level of earnings we would
                                            difference between the 1960 CS and the
understate his earnings by 8 percent (the

 dashed line at 22 years experience).

     The differences between cross section profiles and vintage profiles are

highlighted most dramatically when we try to predict outside the sample period.

 Thus if one attempts to predict the lifetime earnings of a person who acquired

 his Ph.D. in 1970, the 1970 cross section provides a marked underestimate.

 This is true even if we assume that the growth in the level of earning which

 we observed during the 60's does not extend into the future (zero exogenous

 growth). This more conservative projection which allows vintage (or time)

 interaction with experience is given by the dashed 1970 profile.   Clearly,

 if one assumes that on average the 60's trend coincides with the long run trend
                                   21



and that all growth in starting salaries was due to time, a considerably

higher profile is indicated (the solid profile tagged 1970 vintage).

     The shape of the earnings profile and the effects of time and vintage

tend to vary from field to field and across type of employer. We shall not

provide a detailed description of these differences, We shall only

mention two extreme cases, physics and psychology. In psychology

there is virtually no interaction between vintage (or time) and experience.

Thus, apart from a correction for trend, cross section profiles provide an

adequate description of the experience effects. In physics, there are relatively

strong interactions between vintage (or time) and experience. Consequently,

cross section profiles provide a misleading picture of the experience effects

on earnings.


Comparison of Cross Section and Longitudinal Estimates.

     Alternative predictions of cross section and vintage profiles based upon

estimates from three different sources are presented in Figure 2. Included are

generalized least squares estimates based upon longitudinal data on the same

individuals, ordinary least square estimates based upon the pooling of three

independent cross sections of different individuals, and cross section estimates

in which separate regressions were fitted to independent 1960 and 1970 samples.6

    Apart from relatively small differences the three estimates in Figure 2

are quite close.7 This implies that for the purpose of predicting means conditional

upon observed variables the relatively less expensive independent samples are

sufficient. These results also indicate that the earnings relationships is

sufficiently stable over time to allow pooling of observations from different
                                         21a


                                                                                                      .


                                                                  ) pøde4 ijvs                ,Ot-5

      L6                                                         L)yflpCOk 1OL?
                                                                 3) pool &L t:j   (.0   7b,


.1




I
                                                                          )flS
      /
                    IC
                                               XP

     Figure 2. Comparison of Estimated Profiles by Data Source
                                All Fields — Academics
                                    22




points in time without a complete set of interactions with time. The degree

of closeness of fit, of course, is even higher within the same body of data

(longitudinal or pooled independent cross sections). The close correspondence

between the three estimation techniques (GLS, pooled OLS, separate OLS) is

illustrated for physics in Appendix Figure 2. The fit is more remarkable

considering the dynamic changes in demand for physicists which occured during

the decade.

     It is also worth noting that the GLS estimate is quite successful in

predicting outside of the longitudinal age range (the separate cross sections

each cover the full age range), e.g., at less than ten years of experience in

1970 and at older experience levels in 1960.

     There are, however, some differences in the coefficients which are worth

noting. (see Appendix Table 2, last two columns.')   The

coefficient of experience is considerably higher when estimated from pooled

independent cross section than from longitudinal data (6.4 percent vs. 5.4

percent). To some extent this is compensated by a larger exp2 term, and the

net result is that at low levels of experience higher contribution of experience

is predicted. As we have already indicated this result may be interpreted as

reflecting selection process whereby there is a greater probability of survival

(in the Registry) among more able scientists which results in an overestimate

of the experience effect for any given individual. This survival effect is

absent in the longitudinal data since the same individuals are observed

repeatedly.

     Our ability to partially control selection is also useful in sharpening

the precision of our estimate of the effect of the quality of degree. The
                                    23




          of degree is defined here according to whether the school from which
                                                                                    .
quality
the Ph.D. degree was granted, was ranked among the top ten in the field.

Using a pool of independent cross sections, there is again a selection bias,

whereby the scientists of low ranking schools who survive in the sample are

relatively more able, and thus the interactionbetween experience and quality

of schooling is underestimated. In the longitudinal data we find a significant

positive interaction between quality and the slope of the earning profile.     (A

similar result is reported by Johnson and Stafford [41 and [51). This

possibly indicates that more able individuals (who attend better schools)

enjoy a higher "productivity" of experience.    The absence of a significant

negative difference in starting salaries indicates, as would be expected, that

the quality of school difference in mean relative earnings is permanent and

not compensated.
     Another noticeable difference between the GLS and OLS estimates is the

decrease in the coefficient of break. We define break to be the difference

between years since degree and reported experience.    To some extent this

 difference reflects genuine interruption in the accumulation of experience due,

 for instance, to military service. There is also the possibility of error in

 the measurement of experience. In the longitudinal data we assigned work

 experience to individuals who participated continuously on the basis of their
                                          decade of observation. The result is a
 average reported experience during the

 considerably smaller mean break and, more importantly, the variance in break

 is reduced. The GLS estimate indicates a negligible contribution to earnings

 of a year out of the labor force. This appears to be more plausible than the

 OLS estimate, which predicts that a person who is absent for a year, will upon
                                   24




his return enjoy a 4 percent increase in his wage, merely due to the increase

in age. This growth rate is almost 70 percent of that of a scientist who

participated continuously.

     In the pooled independent cross section data, we estimated the effects of

current type of employment on earnings. The longitudinal data allows us to

obtain information of the normal employment of each individual. We classified

the scientists in four groups: those who were continuously employed in the

government in private .employment and in academics, and a unstable group

designating those scientists who changed employers at least once during the

decade. (This group consists of 24 percent of the sample but includes non—

reporters.) It is interesting to point out that the basic results are similar

in the two samples. The scientists in private industry earn more than

scientists in academics but this difference declines over time (33 percent

difference in starting salaries in 1970 vs. 17 percent in 1970) and with

experience. There is a negative interaction between employment in private

industry and ecperience indicating that scientists in academics invest more

in on—the—job—training. There are, however, significant differences between

the OLS and GLS estimates of these coefficients. The longitudinal data

estimates imply a sharper reduction in the advantage of private industry over

time, and a weaker negative interaction of experience with employment in

private industry.
                                    25




         V.   TRANSITORY AND PERNANENT EARNINGS DIFFERENTIALS
                                                                                   .
    In   this section we provide an analysis of the variance in earnings

focusing on the following issues:   (1) the portion of the variation in earn-

ings which can be attributed to differences in measured characteristics, and

the portion due to unmeasured individual characteristics; (2) the portion

of income variation at a given experience level that is permanent, and the

part which reflects voluntary investment decisions, and is thereby compensated

at later stages of the scientist's career.   (3) the share of purely random

and transitory effects.

     In Figure 3 we present the frequency distribution of scientists' log

earnings in 1970. The distribution has a mean of 5.35 (this corresponds to

a level of about 21,000 dollars per year). About 4.4 percent of the scientists

earn more than 50 percent above the mean (i.e., above 5.85) and only 3.1 percent

earn less than 50 percent below the mean (i.e., below 4.85). Inequality as

measured by the variance of the log of earnings, among individuals in 1970

was .081. In comparison the variance in the log of earnings due to observed

characteristics is .017 (21.0 percent) and the variance in the individual

5 component is .032 (39.5 percent) which means that the unobserved character-

istics are more important than observed characteristics in explaining earnings

inequality. This result is quite stable across fields.

     Conceptually 6 captures the proportional effect of individual ability,

family, and social background and other unobserved differences which remain

fixed throughout the period. What we identify of course is only the net

effect of these factors. It is important to note these effects do not cancel
.,                                                 5a




 1




                                                                            mean = 5.3517
                                                                       std. dev. =   0.2851




                                                         5.5-                  "I        3    t.c

                                           LN EARNINGS 1970
       Figure 3. Distribution of 1970 Log Earnings.




 01o

 /0

                                                                           mean = 0.04456
                                                                       std. dev. = 0.02740




             0      .O/    .o,.   .O3 • 1O5              •&      .ô7   •o .t           ,/b    .1/
                             MEAN GROWTH, (LN Y70 - LN
                                                       Y60)/1O
       Figure 4. Distribution of Decade Mean Earnings Growth
                                   26



each other out on average. Therefore    (S     reflects an unobserved permanent
                                                                                       .
income component. Thus       is a measure of permanent income inequality

among observationally alike individuals at a point in time.

     The effect of the transitory element c, is the remainder after account-

ing for the variance of 6 and the explanatory variables. This remainder is

about 35 percent of the total variation, for the aggregate of all fields. This

source of variation should be excluded from any measure of permanent earnings

inequality. Note however that the differences (&y             — &2) is only an upper
                                                         70

bound on permanent earnings inequality in 1970 since it includes variation due

to differences in experience which may be compensated over a lifetime.

     Some insight into the role of transitory and experience related effects

can be gained by examining the distribution of the mean log earnings over the

decade. The distribution of these means can be viewed as a rough proxy for

life time earnings.8 Since the data covers only 10 years, its variance will

overstate inequality in human wealth.        The variance in means is .067 which

is greater than 1/6 of the variance in any single year. (It is 82 percent of

the 1970 variance, rather than 17 percent.) This reflects the fact that while

part of the experience related differences among individuals are eliminated

there remains a very substantial permanent component (see Lillard [6] for a

further analysis of this issue).

     The longitudinal nature of our data provides an opportunity to examine

size distribution of earnings growth rates. The relative frequency histogram

for mean real annual growth during the decade 1960—70 over individuals is

presented in Figure 4. The distribution has mean .0466. On the average, the
                                   27



real earnings of scientists during the decade grew by almost 5 percent per

year. There is also a substantial amount of variation around this mean;

the standard deviation is .0274. Approximately 2 percent of the sample

actually sustained a negative ten year mean growth rate. In the other extreme

the proportion of scientists who enjoyed a real annual rate of above 10 percent

is 2.4 percent. The effect of measured variables on the growth in earnings is

approximately the same as their effect on the level. The aggregate variance in

the mean annual growth rate during the decade was .00075. In comparison the

variance due to observed individual variables is .00017, (22.7 percent) while

the variance in persistent individual residual growth rate differences is .00029

(38.7 percent). There thus remains an unexplained 38.7 percent. Once again,

these shares are quite stable across fields (see Table 4).

     The approximate normality of both the level and growth distributions

is roughly consistent with a simple random walk model for the log of earnings

(see Aitchison and Brown [1]). Our data, as well as theoretical considerations

suggest, however, that such a model is an oversimplification. Consider, for

instance, the substantial negative correlation between the growth in earnings

and the mean level of earnings over the decade. (See Table 4.) To some extent

this correlation reflects a life cycle phenomenon, whereby earning is positively

related and growth is negatively related to experience. This concavity property

of the log earning profiles is a widely documented empirical phenomenon and is

consistent with the findings reported in the last section. A more interesting

question is the simple correlation between the level and growth in earnings

net of the effect of measured variables.
    Table   4.   Residual Analysis by Field.




                                                   &                                CORREL
      FIELD                            62
                    anY7o—LnY6o)/l0            LnY70—LnY60)/l0   (LnY70—LnY60)/l0


                                      .00029        .386            —.1259           .138
    All Fields           .00075
                         .00080       .00031        .388             —.1067          .220
    Chemistry
                         .00072       .00028        .389             .2O56           .059
    Physics
                         .00080       .00029        .363             —.1621          .058
    Biology
                         .00067       .00027        .403               2038          .007
    Math
                         .00074       .00031        .419             —.0179          .126
    Psychology
                         .00058       .00019        .326             —.1447
    Earth Science




.                                              .                                             .
                                                     28



       Only the omitted variables which affect the level of earnings have been

accounted for by the simple GLS procedure which we adopted. Theoretical con-

siderations underlying Equations (2) and (3) suggest that a persistent indi-

vidual element is likely to occur in the growth equation as well. Put differ-

ently there is a possibility of interaction between experience or time and

individual unobserved characteristics.                      (For a more detailed discussion of these

and related topics, including the role of ability and access to capital markets

see Lillard [61 and Weiss [11].)

       We may utilize the longitudinal nature of the data to analyze the joint

distribution of individual level and growth components of residual variation.

The residual structure may be reformulated as



                  =       +
(12)        u.
             it       1       1      it
                                  + 0.               9. =   —5,—3,—l,l,3,5


The parameter .           represents      the effect of omitted variables which are

individual specific but which alter the earnings—experience or earnings—time

relationship. The term Z tepresents the aggregate effects of both (t—1)
                          ) which cannot be separately identified for the reasons out—
and (Exp9. — Exp.
oined earlier. The S term correspondingly takes new meaning under this

model, i.e., 6i = 6'i +           i time
                                      .  .   t   +
                                                      i Exp
                                                                .
                                                                    Exp   .   Since it is not unreasonable

to   expect some of the same unobserved variables to affect both 6* and ,                             it
is an empirical question whether the two are correlated. A positive correlation

between          and 6* implies that individual profiles are diverging from the

predicted profiles over a life time. A person whose observed earnings at a

given point of time exceed, for example, the mean earnings of observationally

identical individuals, is not only likely to maintain this discrepancy on the

average, but also to increase it. Strictly speaking the
                                       29

                                                                                        .
correlation   pattern between        and .    relates
                                                    only   to whether unobserved

individual effects are compensated during the decade of observation. We can

justify a life time interpretation only if               is "large" relative to
                                                   exp

   time
     As we have already indicated the simple correlation between mean relative

earnings lnY and mean decade growth rate (lnY70 —                    is consistently
                                                         lnY60)/lO
negative and in the 10 to 20 percent range. In contrast the simple correlation

between        and .    (net    of all measured year, vintage and experience effects)

is consistently positive (see Table 4). The strength of the relationship varies

from negligible in math to nearly 24 percent in earth science. The 22 percent

estimate for chemistry is especially significant due to the large sample size.

This can be interpreted as indicating an overlap of variables affecting both

the level and growth of earnings in the same direction. This is weak evidence

that the effect of these variables is not compensated in the sense of offsetting

lower relative earnings early in the life cycle with greater relative earnings

later.

          Since we observe every individual for only 10 years it is necessary

to consider the evidence within narrower experience groups. It is possible

that differences which are not compensated during the decade are neverthe-

less compensated over the life cycle.        In this case one would observe a

                           (see Mincer [8]), and a correlation between         and
U-shaped pattern for

   which is negative at low levels of experience and positive later. If on

the other hand the variance in 6 increases with experience and level and

growth individual components are positively correlated then unobserved pro-

files are diverging from the predicted profiles over the lifetime. An interest—
                                      30




ing special case is when individual level and growth are negatively correlated

at early experience levels and positively correlated at late experience levels.

In this case the actual lifetime profiles may cross the predicted ones. If

lifetime profiles cross the predicted ones then the unobserved deviations are

roughly compensated over a life time. If the profiles diverge the compensation

does not occur which implies greater inequality among individual scientists

than the one which is indicated by the variance in observed characteristics.

Care must be taken In drawing inferences, however, since experience as of 1960

and vintage are linearly related.

      The actual pattern of residuals across various experience groups are

presented in Table 5 for chemists. Most fields are like chemistry except with

weaker positive correlation between        aid    The tendency of

to increase with experience, and the positive correlation between

   and S* indicates a mild "fanning out" of the relative earnings

profiles from early to late experience levels. This pattern Implies that the

tendency is for unobserved differences in Individual profiles not to be com-

pensated over the life cycle. They do not then represent different investment

patterns with the same lifetime earnings wealth. They indicate that those with

greater relative earnings are also experiencing greater earnings growth, at all

experience levels. This implies greater inequality in lifetime earnings

wealth than is implied by the predicted mean profile presented earlier.

Alternatively the pattern for chemistry may represent a greater dispersion in

both mean relative earnings and mean growth rates for older vintages.
                               30a

                                                                    .
Table 5. Variance—Covariance of 6 and by Experience for Chemists.



YRS EXP     SAMPLE      2             "2       "2          " "
  1960       SIZE      G              O        a       Corr(6,)
Overall      4330     .05104         .03254   .00031      .220
  0—5        1075     .02955         .01113   .00030      .329
  5—10       1332     .03546         .01986   .00027      .238
 10—15        800     .05295         .03620   .00034      .307
 15—20        531     .07174         .05718   .00034      .137
              402     .09857         .07297   .00029      .155
 20—25
   >25        190     .11482         .07209   .00038      .125      .
                                     31




                                   FOOTNOTES



      1Strictly speaking, we should add in each identity a variable indicating

 possible breaks in the accumulation of experience. For simplicity we omit

 this variable from the analysis but will introduce it in the estimation.

     2There are several ways to estimate 0 from the data. Maddala suggests

an analysis of covariance of the model allowing between individual     2
                                                                     (os) and
within individual (a2) effects. Nerlove [91 suggests the alternative of

simply taking the variance of estimated dummy variables. In our case there

are an intractable number of dummy variables to be estimated (always over 150

and often more than 2000). An alternative we consider is to estimate the dummy

variables CS.   in   a two stage procedure. First estimate the model by OLS then

estimate each individual parameter by the mean residual. Clearly these esti-

mators 5, are unbiased. The corresponding variance of the estimator is not

an unbiased estimator of the true variance. A correction is made for the sample

variance of      resulting from the relatively few yearly observations for each
individual.

     An alternative estimator can be derived from the residual variances in the

following two regressions:    (1) The regression of means over years corresponding

to between individual variation.    (2) The regression of deviation from individual

means which corresponds to within individual variation. Again, a correction for

the sample variance in    c, resulting from the fact that we have relatively few

yearly observations, is necessary to obtain unbiased estimates. We have experi-

mented with both methods of estimation of the residual variances, and found the

differences in 0 to be negligible.
                                                     32




      The results of this comparison for Chemists are given in the Table below:
                                                                                                                .
         Alternative estimates of variance components based on 25,980
         observations on 4330 chemists.

                                                              Unbiased Estimates Of

       Method                                  o2
                                                 C
                                                                26             p          o      1—0


       Pooled OLS (Y                          .01850           .03254         .637    .087      .913
(1)    Residual Analsis

       Means Equation (Y.)
                                              .01833           .03271         .64t    .085      .915
(2)    & Deviations (Y      it     I    )
                                                          I




      3We experimented with an error structure of the form


                = (l—y)6 +                      +                    0<   -   < 1.

 This model incorporates both an individual variance component and serial correla-
                                                                                                                .
                                                                       individual
 tion. The I component represents first order serial correlation among
 observations net of the 6                  component (ii. —                  "it—1
                                                                                      —
                                                                                           6.) + c.    and is

 assumed the same for all individuals.

                        2

            =    2
                        6
                      + 1        a 2C
                       i_y2

 The variance—Covariance matrix for this model is




            E(UTJ')          +
                                 i2 a2)          I    x A
                                                  33




                                                                             -

                           1 p+(l—p)y p+(l—p)y2                  p+(l—p)y5

                                     1       p+(1—p)y        .
                                                                 p+(1—p)y
         where A =
                                                  1

                                 sym

                                                                   1




Obviously the special case of the simple individual variance component obtains

when y = 0     and the special case of blockwise serial correlation obtains

when S. = 0      and all of the forms developed In the text apply. This combined

model should simulate the observed residual variance—covariance matrix more

closely than either of the special cases. While we were unable to obtain

consistent estimators for y and p under the general model, ad hoc estimates

derived by correcting for asymptotic bias reproduced the residual covariance

quite well.

      41n constructing these profiles we assumed age at highest degree = 4

(age is measured from 22), pre—experience = Break = Female = Top school =            0.
The 1970 cross section profile is given by:



              mY =
                                         0exp +
                           +         +            exp (c&1(l970—1958—exp) + a2exp)
                     a60       a70

                 +   4
                         (c3 + c4exp)


(Year of highest degree is measured from 1958).
                                        34




The 1958 vintage profile is given by:
                                                                                  .
           mY a60 -      2g +       + g)exp +
                                                a2exp2 + 4(3 + a4exp)

                 a70
where


        5The 1958 vintage profile, which assumes no growth, i.e. the broken

line in figure 1, is given by



               lnY =         + c0exp + a2exp2 +
                       a60                        4(a3 + c4exp)


        6Three independent random samples of 10,000 scientists each were drawn

from the unmatched National Registers of 1960, 1966, and 1970. For further

analysis of this data see Weiss [11].

        7The relatively inferior correspondence in 1960 reflects the absence of

data for 1960 on whether an academic scientist's earnings were for 9 months or

12 months. A correction was imputed from the data which is available in the

other years. A different method was used in the longitudinal where information

on the same individual in other years was used, and the independent cross

sections where the sample mean probability of 9 month salary was imputed to

all academics. Comparisons for 1966, in which the problem does not arise, are

presented in appendix Figure 1. Like the 1970 comparison they support the

conclusion of the text.

        8These are geometric 10 year means which underestimate the arithmetic

means. The latter is of course more relevant to present value calculations.

Also discounting is ignored.

        9The pattern for biology is one in which early in the life cycle there
                                   35




is a positive correlation between level and slope effects and late in the

life cycle they are negatively correlated. This, along with the increase

in the variance of 6 with increased experience, implies a "bow" in the

individual lifetime profiles among individuals. Profiles diverge from the

predicted ones early in the life cycle then converge to it.   Alternatively
there are substantial differences between younger and older vintages with

the difference occurring at roughly 1940.
                                   36



                              REFERENCES
                                                                                      .
[1] Aitchison, J. and J.A.C. Brown. The Lognormal Distribution, Cambridge
        University Press, New York, 1957.

[2] Durbin, J. "Estimation of Parameters in Time—Series Regression Models,"
         Journal of Royal Statistical Society, Series B, Vol 22, 1960.

[3] Freeman, R. "Supply and Salary Adjustment to the Changing Market Science
        Manpower Market: Physics 1948—1973," American Economic Review LXV
         (March 1975), pp. 27—39.

[4] Johnson, G. and F. Stafford, "Lifetime Earnings in a Professional Labor
        Market: Academic Economists," Journal of Political Economy, 82,
         (May/June 1974), pp. 549—570.

[51 _________________________, "The Earning and Promotion of Women Faculty,"
        American Economic Review, LXIV, (December 1974), pp. 888—903.

[6] Lillard, L. "Inequality: Earnings versus Human Wealth," forthcoming
        American Economic Review

[7] Madalla, G.S. "The Use of Variance Components Models in Pooling Cross
        Section and Time Series Data," Econometrica, Vol.39, No. 2 (March 1971),
        pp. 341—357.

[8] Mincer, J. Schooling Experience and Earnings, New York, National Bureau
        of Economic Research, 1974.

[9] Nerlove, M. "A Note on Error Components Models," Econometrica, Vol. 39,
        No. 2 (March 1971), pp. 383—396.

[10] Wallace, T.D. and A. Hussain. "The Use of Error Components Models in Combining
         Cross section with Time Series Data," Econometrica, Vol. 37, No. 1?
          (January, 1969) pp. 55—72.

[11] Weiss, Y. "The Earnings of Scientists, 1960—1970: Experiene, Age, and
         Vintage Effects," NBER Working Paper #99, 1975.

[12] Welch, F. "Black/White Differences in Returns to Schooling," American
         Economic Review LXIII (December 1973), pp. 893—907.
APPENDIX
                                     Al

                           Description of Variables




YR62, YR64, YR66, YR68, YR7O =       5 year dummies. YR1960 is the omitted one.

PRE EXP =     pre degree experience, professional work experience prior to
              obtaining highest degree.

TOPSC     =   Top ten school dummy. The rank of each scientist's university
              was established upon rankings provided by Cartter for 1964 and
              1969, Kenlston for 1957 and Hughes for 1925. See Johnson and
              Stafford (1974). Those scientists who attended a school in
              the top ten percent of this ranking were assigned this dummy
              variable.

BRK       =   Break or interruption in post degree experience. It is the
              difference between years since degree and post degree experience.

AGEHD     =   Age at highest degree.

EXP       =   Post degree professional experience based on an yeage 1960
              experience level. If experience was reported for any of the
              6 years it was translated to 1960 experience and averaged over
              the reported years.

YHD       =   Year of highest degree.

FEMALE        Female sex dummy variable.

LOG OF EARNINGS = Dependent variable, log of basic salary In 1970 real dollars.
            Academic scientists' salaries In 1962—1970 were adjusted to a 12
            month basis if a 9 month salary was indicated. In 1960, no indicator
            was available so 1960 salaries were adjusted upward by a pre-
            determined probability that their basic salary was reported on a 9
            month basis.




Type of employer during the 10 year period:

        P1 = Private   industry.

        C =    Government and non—profit institutions.

        U =    Unstable, i.e., the respondent switched type of employers
               over the 10 year period.

               Academic employer Is the omItted clas.
                                      A2

                             Description of NSF Data



1) Total number of observations =          104,906

2) Criteria for rejecting

      A) If highest degree is < B.A. or non—reported or a foreign degree
          or an associate..

      B) If (YHD —     yr.    of birth) < 15 yrs. for   B.A. or
           If (YHD —   yr.    of birth) < 17 yrs. for a M.A. or Ph.D.

      C) If YHD or yr. of birth not reported.

      D) If level of highest degree           level of highest degree in 1970.

      E) If individual was any type of student in 1970.

      F) If major of highest degree #         first
                                               specialty in any reported
           year for which specialty is reported after Y}(D.

      G) If individual was a student for any reported year after YHD.

      H) If individual's employment status was not reported for every
           year after YL-ID.

      I) If both gross and basic income were never reported for all years
          after YHD and if he was not unemployed or not retired. (i.e.,
          use  ifany income was reported after YHD even if he was unemployed
          or retired)

      J) If YHD > 1960.

      K) If individual was not a fully employed non—student every year.

      L) If basic salary was not reported for every year.

      M)   If gross salary was substituted for basic salary in any year.
                                     A3

Appendix Table 1. NSF Longitudinal Sample Characteristics

                                                Field

                                                                                 Earth
                       Aggregate Chemistry Physics Biology Math Psych Sd.

Sample Size             11295        4330     1614      2160      758    1636     647

Type of Employer (%)
   Academic              .382        .208     .372      .552      .679   .446 .451
   Government             .102       .053     .064      .138      .032   .185 .236

   Industry               .274       .564     .205      .072      .074   .014 .130

   Unstable               .237       .175     .358      .236      .215   .322 .182

Ph.D. at Top Ten
  Grad. School            .302       .244     .354      .333      .352   .290 .487

Year of Ph.D.
   Mean (1900s)           50.4       49.6     51.3      49.6      51.0   52.1 51.1

   Std. Dev.               7.3        7.3      7.1          7.6    8.0    6.6     7.4

Age of Ph.D.
   Mean                   29.3       28.1     28.8      29.3      29.6   31.5 30.9
   Std. Dev.               4.2        3.3      3.6          4.2    4.7    5.4     4.4

Experience in 1960
   Mean                    9.5       10.2      8.6      10.0       9.8    7.8     8.9

   Std. Dev.               7.2        7.3      7.0          7.4    7.8    6.4     7.3

Pre—Degree Exp.
   Mean                    2.6        1.9      2.6          2.2    3.5    3.7     4.2

   Std. Dev.               3.5         2.8     3.3          3.4    4.3    4.3     4.0

Break in Exp.
   Mean                    .17         .12      .08         .40    .16    .10      .07

   Std. Dev.               .78         .67      .56         1.1    .72     .77     .49
                                                                                                 A4




AppeitIlx Tibte 2: Rcgres.ion EtimaLes by Field and Eatimaclon Ticbn19ue


                                                                             DEPENDENT VARI.4SLE IS LOG EARNINGS

INDEP.               CLS                   GLS          •           CLS                   CLS                   GLS                   CLS                   CLS               OLS
VAR.           CHEMISTRY            PSYCHOLOGY                 BIOLOGY              PHYSICS               EARTH SCE                 )IATH           ALL FIELDS            ALL FIELDS

              COEF           ti     COEF           ti       COEF           it!    COEF            ti     COEF           ti    COEP            ti    COEF           It!    COEF           ti
CONST       4.343                 4.466                 4.351                    4.434                 4.433                 4.378                 4.418                 4.054          290.0
     YR62    .0881         12.1    .0846         9.6        .0722          9.6    .0427         8.9     .0739          6.2    .0852          8.0    .0813         22.8
     YR64    .1590         16.5    .1700     12.5           .1509         13.1    .1312         10.1    .1859         10.8    .1573          9.3    .1621         31.4
     YR66    .2271         17.4    .2530     12.7           .2021         12.0    .1745         9.4     .2546         10.5    .2189         8.7     .2270         30.8    .209           28.8
     YR68    .2767         16.1    .3360     12.3           .2625         11.3    .2083         8.3     .3214          9.8    .2575          7.4    .2865         23.7
     YR7O    .2536     11.6        .3373         9.5        .2488          8.2    .1572         4.8     .2961          6.9    .2198         4.9     .2685         20.8    .245          42.9
FRE EXP—(P).0116           5.8     .0129         6.0        .0094          3.5    .0187          7.1    .0202          5.9    .0082          2.3    .0160         15.3    .0128          9.3
PxE       .0002            2.0 —.0002            1.6. —.00008               . —.0005             3.4 —.0004            2.1 —.0001             .8 —.0002            3.2 —.0003S           3.7
EXP.(E)      .0533         33.4    .0519         20.8       .0631         28.9    .0613         26.3    .0478         15.0    .0589         18.1    .0539         57.9    .0644         47.7
BRK—        —.0095          1.5 —.0163            1.4       .0511          8.0    .0334          2.0 —.0179             .7 —.0124             .6    .0064          1.7    .0440          10.2
BRJxE        .0001           .3 —.0001             .2 —.0008               2.4 —.0019            3.0 —.0007             .7    .0004           .5    .0001           .7 —.0021            7.9
ACEUD        .0049          2.8    .0039          2.2       .0072          3.2 —.00007            .03 .0017             .5    .0056          1.7    .0012          1.3    .0088          7.5
AGEHOxE —.0013             14.6 —.0011           11.3 —.0015              13.1 —.0011            8.0 —.0007            4.0 —.0012.           6.8 —.0010           21.5 —.0013            14.6
E2          —.0006         10.3 —.0008            7.5 —.0006               6.7 —.0004           4.6 —.0008             6.1 —.0004            3.0 —.0006           16.5 —.0008            11.2
TOPSC       —.0117          1.1    .0037           .2 —.0196               1.4    .0150          1.1 —.0249            1.3    .0033           .2    .0056           .9    .012             .9

TOPSCxE      .0018          3.6    .0013          1.7       —.0002          .3    .0016          2.3    .0015          1.5    .0010          1.0    .0012          4.1    .0015          1.7
ThOxE        .00033         3.2    .000005         .03 .00055              3.5    .00079        4.9 —.00015             .7    .00076         3.3    .00035         5.4    .00027          3.7
Ft.MALE     —.1590          4.1 —.0956            3.7 —.1983               8.3      0             0       0             0       0             0 —.1853            10.8 —.I4              5.3
FEMxE       —.0015           .8 —.0018            3.6 —.0013                .8      0             0       0             0       0             0    —.0012          1.5 —.006              3.9

PRIV—(PI) .3662        26.7        .3198         4.3        .3294     10.3       .4122      19.2        .2614          7.2    .5785         11.9    .3326         39.6    .393          26.0
COVT.(C)     .214          8.4     .0347         1.5        .0259         1.0     .1886         5.9     .0903          3.1    .2976         3.8     .0912          7.9    .068           4.2
UNSTAB—(U) .2298       14.0        .0234         1.2        .0232         1.3     .2837     15.9        .1512          5.0    .2003         6.9     .15t6         19.2
PIxE        —.0016         1.6     .0033           .5 —.0082               3.2 —.0018             .9    .0030           .9 —.0095           1.8 —.0038             5.9 —.006             7.1
Gxl         —.0051         2.8 —.0024            1.0        .0020         1.1 —.0021              .9 —.0032           1.6     .0006           .1 —.0006             .6    .0022          2.5
txE          .0001           .1 —.0004             .2       .0022         1.5 —.0034            2.3 —.0022              .7 —.0027           1.1 —.0007             1.0
P1x62       —.0384         4.9     .1072         2.5        .0101           . —.0088              .7    .0463         2.1     .0054           .2    .0249          5.2
P1x64       —.0742         8.8 —.0381              .8       .0150           .7    .0512         3.4     .1395          5.6    .0003           .01 .0676           12.9
Ptx66       —.1296     13.5 —.1244               2.1 —.0316                1.4 —.0982           5.7 —.1983             7.0 —.0597           1.5 —.1169            1I.6 —.097             6.2
P1*68       —.1729     15.8 —.1276               1.8 —.0679                2.8 —.1510           7.5 —.2359             7.2    .0943         1.9     .1668         24.3
P1*70       —.1654     13.3 —.1587               1.9 —.0515                1.7 —.1528           6.5 —.2188             5.8 —.0917           1.6 —.1636            20.8 —.110             7.1
Cx62        —.0407         2.8 —0232             1.7 —.0231                1.7 —.0400           2.0 —.0324             1.8 —.0501           1.3 —.0350             5.2
Cx63        —.0045           .3 —.0191           1.2        .0180          1.2 —.0075             .3 —.0307            1.6 —.0122             .3 —.0123            1.7
Gx66        —.0147           .8 —.0582           3.0 —.0001                 .01 —.0030            .1 —.0326            1.5 —.0303             .6 —.0333            4.0 —.026             1.5
Cx68        —.0469         2.3 —.0629            2.8 —.0369                1.9 —.0389           1.4 —.0483             2.0 —.0707            1.3 —.0593            6.3
Cx70         .0316         1.4 —.0326            1.2        .0175           .8    .0244           .8    .0463          1.7 —.0333             .5 -.0038             .6 —.001               .1
0*62        —.0291         3.0     .0114         1.0        .0241          2.4    .0048           .4 —.0154             .8    .0389          2.3    .0013           .3
Ux64        —.0736         6.8     .0038           .3       .0280          2.1 —.0318            2.6 —.0552            2.5    .0170           .9 —.0249            4.5
Ux66        —.1323         10.9 —.0080             .5       .0247          1.8 —.0844            6.0 —.0714            2.7 —.0077             .4 —.0573            9.2
0*68        —.1657         12.0 —.0098             .6       .0078           5 —.1288             8.0 —.0980            3.2 —.0583            2.3 —.0861           12.0
0*70        —.1805         11.4 —.0028             .1       .0111           . —.1301             7.0 —.0441            1.8 —.0656            2.2 —.0896           10.8
82                                        .871*                 .468*                    .624k                 .676*                 .701 *                .608*                 .634


     *Equacjon, estimated in dsvi*tton form with c.m.t.mt 1cu1ata4 •.parately. R valu.. are weighted                                                 but    exclude the contribution
      of the Conetant.
                                                 A5

 Appendix Table 3: Regressions by Estimation Technique                   Chemistry

                               OLS                    GLS                     GLS
                           __________            VARCOMP                     DIJRBIN

                           COEF      Iti         COEF       Iti       COEF              ti

 CONST                     4.343     342.        4.343                4.346            223.

 YR62                       .0880         8.1     .0881 12.1           .0892            14.0

 YR64                       .1588     13.9        .1590 16.5           .1614            15.7

 YR66                       .2267     18.0        .2271 17.4           .2311            16.0
 YR68                       .2759     19.0        .2767 16.1           .2825            14.8
 YR7O                       .2525     14.8        .2536 11.6           .2615            10.7
 PRE EXP=P                  .0157     10.4        .0116      5.8       .0128             5.0
 P x EXP                   —.0001           .9    .0002      2.0       .0001                 .8

 EXP=E                      .0532         52.0    .0533 33.4           .0531            29.6
 BRK                        .0078         1.7    —.0095      1.5      —.0005
 BRK    xE                 —.0011         4.0     .0001          .3   —.0004             1.0
 AGEHD                      .0032          2.4    .0049      2.8       .0042             1.9
 AGEHD x E                 —.0012         14.3   —.0013 14.6          —.0013             9.5
                           —.0006          9.8   —.0006 10.3          —.0007             8.3
 TOPSC}!                   —.0111          1.5   —.0117      1.1      —.0130             1.0
 TOPSC x E                  .0017          4.3    .0018      3.6       .0019             2.8
 YHD x E                    .00033         4.5    .00033 3.2           .00030            2.6

 FEMALE                    —.0987          3.7   —.1590      4.1      —.1527             3.2
 FEM x E                   —.0056          3.9   —.0015          .8   —.0018                 .7
                    = P1    .3684         36.0    .3662 27.7           .3599            25.4
 GOVT =         G           .2268         11.4    .2314         8.4    .2238             8.0
 IJNSTAB            U       .2309         18.3    .2298 14.0           .2258            13.3
 P1 x E                    —.0018          3.6   —.0016      1.6      —.0010             1.0
 G x E                     —.0049          5.5   —.0051         2.8   —.0045             2.5
 U x E                      .0001           .1    .0001          ;1    .0006                 .5

 P1 x 62                   —.0383          3.1   —.0384      4.9      —.0396             6.1
 P1 x 64                   —.0742          5.9   —.0742         8.8   —.0768             8.4
 P1 x 66                   —.1295         10.1   —.1296 13.5          —.1334            11.8
 PT x 68                   —.1728         13.2   —.1729 15.8          —.1780            13.5
 PT   x    70              —.1652         12.4   —.1654 13.3          —.1717            11.5
 G x 62                    —.0406          1.7   —.0407         2.8   —.0416             3.4

 G x 64                    —.0042           .2   —.0045          .3   —.0062                 .4

  C x 66                   —.0144           .6   —.0147          .8   —.0173                 .8

 C x 68                    —.0465          1.9   —.0469         2.3   —.0503             2.0

 C x 70                     .0319          1.3    .0314      1.4       .0271             1.0

 U x 62                    —.0293          1.8   —.0291         3.0   —.0302             3.7

 U x 64                    —.0739          4.6   —.0736         6.8   —.0758             6.5

 U x 66                    —.1327          8.2   —.1323 10.9          —.1356             9.5

 U x 68                    —.1663         10.0   —.1657 12.0          —.1701            10.2

 U x 70                    —.1812         10.7   —.1805 11.4          —.1859             9.8
      R2                           .478                 •533*                  .97
   *Equations estimated in deviation form with constant calculated separately. R2
values are weighted but exclude the contribution of the constant.
                                           A6




                                                     •              ,



                                                     :irtr:                   I '•
                                                                                     '.) 3 poo'ecL 'r. ,(cO1U,'7Ô 0L4
                                                                                     'i) .p1ed
                                                              4 ..•j•         iji
                                                                                                     rc           L5


                                                                              •1 .1 4''


       LO                                            •iit•                                                   t

 .5

'.4
                                                     •
 .3

 .7
                                                         ••     •       4
                                                                              I ,.: .
,C



 :1



                                                                        14.
44
                    0               2c      -i      3d




      Appendix Figure 1. Comparison of Estimated Profiles by Data Source — 1966
                          Cross Sections.

                                  All Fields — Academics
                                                  A7


                                                                                                                              .

,0 -L&- A&S
.1


 .1



 .6




 .1




614
 A

 .1




 .6


  1



 .2




             C
                     -fr


                     ID
                             fl
                             :.:::::::   ::::::    :::::::   ::::::i




                                                              -




                                                             3c
                                                                  .   .
                                                                          —.




                                                                          .    I.




                                                                                    fl:4
                                                                                           I
                                                                                               i5uv"pc ecLS

                                                                                               3)peoLr

                                                                                               -




                                                                                               H
                                                                                                     .




                                                                                                   .2.)
                                                                                                    3)




                                                                                                    a)
                                                                                                    I.)
                                                                                                         kd Lrs,ô-?




                                                                                                                 H
                                                                                                                       64-5

                                                                                                                      oCL.5




                                                                                                                              .

      Appendix Figure 2. Comparison of Estimated Profiles by Estimation Techniques —
                          Longitudinal Data
                                    Physics — Academics
