                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE MARKET FOR OPTOMETRIC SERVICES
                              IN THE UNITED STATES


                                  Douglas   Coate




                          Working Paper No. 122



      CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                      National Bureau of Economic Research. Inc.
                       261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                                   February 1976




                        Preliminary; Not for Quotation

           NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
      number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
      permission.

           This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
      publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
      by the Board of Directors.

This research was supported by grants to the NBER from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation and the National Center for Health Services Research (PBS Grant
P 01. HSOO451). The author would like to thank Michael Grossman and Fred Goldman
for helpful comments, Christy Wilson for research assistance, and Catherine Grant
for  typing.
        The purpose of this paper is to analyze the market for optometric
services      in the United States. This is done primarily by specifying and

estimating     a market model for optometric services. Within the context
of the model marty of the more interesting questions relating to the prac-
tice of optometry can be considered. Some of these are: What factors
influence the location decision of the optometrist? What effect does
advertising     have on the   demand for optometric services? To   what extent
is the interstate mobility of optometrists inhibited by restrictive
licensing     arrangements? To what degree are     the services of ophthalmolo-
gists   and   opticians   substituted for those of the optometrist? What   role
do price and income play in determining the demand for optometric ser-

vices?

        This paper is divided into seven sections. In the following section

an   overview of the practice of optometry is presented. This is succeeded
by an examination of the distribution of eye health professionals in the
United States. In sections 3—5 a market model for optometric services
is specified and discussed. Next, estimates of the model are presented.
Finally, the implications of this research are considered.

                      1. The Practice of Optometry: An Overview

        The primary health services provided by optometrists are the examin-
ation of the eye and      the prescription and provision of lenses to correct

refractive     error. Optometrists   also adjust and   repair eyeglasses. The
mean   gross income of the    16,000 self-employed optometrists in the United

States   from their professional practices    is   approximately $50 thousand,
                                      —2—



implying   that upwards of   $800 million are spent   annually on   the services

of self—employed optometrists.1 Optometrists are engaged primarily in

solo practice. About 17 percent of self—employed optometrists are in

partnerships or group practices.2 Most optometrists are general practi-

tioners. Only about 3.5 percent of optometrists specialize in contact

lenses, vision training, industrial vision or other fields.3

        Besides optometrists, two other eye professions are involved in the

delivery   of eye care services in the United States. The ophthalmologist
diagnoses eye disease, administers medical treatment, performs surgical
operations, and prescribes eyeglasses to correct refractive error. The
primary   role of the optician   is the fitting and dispensing of eyeglasses
according     to prescription. There are approximately 8,600 active ophthal—

mologists and about 11,000 active opticians in the United States.4


                    2. The Distribution of Eye Health Professionals
                                    in the United States


        The uneven distribution of primary health professionals in the United
States   has long   been a source of concern    to health economists. In 1971,

for example, the mean number     of   physicians per 100,000 population in rural

states was 93.5, as compared to 125.8 in     urban states. 5 Optometrists,
like   physicians, are more   heavily concentrated in urban areas. There are
9.7 active optometrists      per 100,000 in   urban states as compared to    7.8   in

rural states.     A similar disparity exists in ophthalmology manpower between

urban   and   rural states. There are 4.8 active ophthalmologists      per   100,000

population     in urban states and 3.6 per 100,000 in rural states. Opticians
                                         —3—


are also concentrated in urban        states,   with 7.0 active practitioners per

100,000 population, as compared to 4.2 per 100,000 in rural states.6

        Because rural    practitioners    are also fewer   spacially,   their rela-

tive scarcity is magnified.         In   addition, rural practitioners are      prob-
ably older than their urban counterparts,          and   thus could be less

productive.7 It should be noted, however, that            despite   the differentials

that   exist   in medical manpower between urban      and rural states,      there is

no evidence that the residents of those states where the supply of medical

Services is low are in poorer health as a result.8

        Because of the concern over the "maldistribution" of health profes-

sionals, an important emphasis of this research is an examination of the

location decision of the optometrist. The market model discussed in the

following section is specified so that the location decision of the

optometrist comprises one of the structural equations.


                             3. pecification of the Model

        A   fully   specified model of the market for optometric services must

describe both the demand for and supply of optometric services. The

model estimated in this paper consists of a demand equation, two               equa-
tions which     together describe the supply of optometric services and one

identity.9 The supply side is investigated by examining              the   workload

and    location decisions of the     optometrist. Pour variables        in   the model

are    endogenous. These are the per capita quantity of optometric services
danded, price, the         per   capita number of optometrists and the workload
of the optometrist. The model is presented beloW.
                                    —4—



1.           —
                 d'          Y, Age, NW, Ed, Advert, Oph, Opti)

2.   Opto*       Opto (p*, License, Y, Grads)

3. Works     —   Work   (p*)

•    d           Opto   •   Work


     *I)i5ignates endogenous variable.



             —   quantity of optometric services demanded per
                 100,000 population

     P       — price
     Y       —   per capita        income

     Age     —   percent     of the population 65 and over

     NW      —   percent     of the population non—white

     Ed      —   percent     of    the population with 1-3 years
                 of college
     Oph     — ophthalmologists per 100,000 population
     Opti    —   opticians per 100,000 population
     Opto    —   optometrists        per 100,000   population
     Advert — advertising restriction dummy,
                 1 — no     state    restrictions on advertising

     License —   national board licensinq .duny
                 1 — national boards not accepted

     Grads   —   number of graduating optometrists from
                 optometry schools

     Work    —   averageannual output supplied by
                 optometrists
                                     —5—



                                      4. The Data

      The model is estimated across states by combining several data sources

from the mid—1960's. Two of these sourtes are used to compute the quantity

measure of the per capita consumption of optometric services by state.

This measure is calculated by multiplying the annual averaqe output of

optometrists in each state by the number of practicing optometrists per

100,000 population. The latter figure is taken from the 1968 National

Vision and Eye Care Manpower Survey of the National Center for Health Sta-

tistics.1° The average output figure is derived from data collected in the

1964 American Optometric Association Survey of Optometrists. In this na-

tional survey data were collected from over 4,000 optometrists on the whole-

sale value of lenses, temples, and frames purchased by the optometrist in

1964 and on the annual number of visual examinations provided. These out-

put measures can be converted into a single output index by deflating the

wholesale value of eyeglasses to physical units and then combining the

number of eyeglasses and eye examinations provided into a single measure

by using the respective prices as weights.11

      The 1964 average output of optometrists by state is determined by

averaging the output indexes of those optometrists who responded to the

AOA survey. Those states where less than forty optometrists responded to

the AOA   survey   were excluded from the data base.   Thirty-two   states had

forty or nre respondents. These average output figures are then multi-

plied by the number of practicing optometrists per 100,000 population in

1968 in order to compute the quantity measure of the consumptin of

optometric   services per   100,000 population for each of the 32 states.
                                          —6—


Any bias in this measure resulting from             the   combining of the data sources

fran   two different years should not       be      large since any changes in the

state per    capita stocks of optometrists over the four—year period would
be small.
        The data sources for the remaining variables included in the model
are revealed as each equation is discussed in detail.

                      5. DisCussion of Ea'uation Specifications
5.] The Demand for Optometric Services
        A   well-specified    demand equation includes        price of the product,   the

income of     potential consumers, the prices of substitutes and           complements

and    taste variables. Equation 1        falls somewhat short of this ideal. The

price variable is derived from the 1964 ADA survey of optometrists. It

is   computed for each state      by   taking   a   weighted average of the gross
annual income per unit of output of the responding optometrists, where
the weight is the units of output produced.
        The prices of the competing eye care services offered by ophthal-
mologists     and opticians cannot be included in the demand equation           because
the    data are not available. However, it may be possible to gain some

idea of the substitutability of the services of competing eye profes-

sionals for those of the optometrist by entering the number of ophthal—

aologists and opticians per 100,000 population into the demand equation.

A problem with      this approach is     that the relationship between the number

of   practitioners and the price of        their services is not clear. On the one

hand,    an above   average   number of practitioners might depress price to a
                                      —7—




below average level; on the other hand, higher than average prices could
serve    to attract a higher than average ninnber of practitioners.
        A dummy variable   is included in the demand equation which takes on
a value of one for those states that did not restrict the advertising of

optometric services. The advertising of optometric services should re-

duce the cost of these services to consumers. Search costs are reduced

because the price and terms of sale as well as information on the sup-

pliers identity, location and reliability are, often provided. Lee

Benham has shown that advertising also lowers the price paid by con-

sumers for    eyeglasses because it stimulates price competition among
sellers. 12 Holding price constant, the effect of advertising should be
to shift the demand curve for optometric services to the right because
it lowers the information Costs faced by consumers and may also enable
optometrists to more effectively compete with ophthalmologists for
patients seeking visual examinations and corrective lenses. Ophthal—
mologists,    like all physicians, cannot advertise as a condition of

license.

        Those states not restricting advertising were determined from Lee
Benham's classification of states in accordance with the restrictions

placed   on the advertising of eyeglasses. Benham constructed the series

by   examining state   laws, by interviewing optometrists and members of

state optometry    boards, and   by searching newspapers for eyeglass adver-
t.tsements.
        Several socioeconomic variables have been specified in the demand
equation.     The age distribution variable, percent of the population 65
                                      —8—



and over, was included in the demand relation because the need for and
utilization of corrective lenses increases dramatically with age. Near

vision generally deteriorates auite rapidly after the age of 35, with

90 percent of adults between the ages of 45 and 54 having visual acuity
                        13
of less   than 14/14.        The same pattern holds for distance vision, al-

though the rate of deterioration with age is not as great. With this

background, it is not surprising to find that the utilization of

corrective   lenses increases markedly with age. About 90      percent of

adults   have eyeglasses by the age of 60) Consequently, the older the
population the optometrist serves, the greater should be the demand for

his services.

        The race variable, percent non-white, is included as an independent

variable because of evidence that blacks have stronger vision than whites.

For   example, at the age of     50, about 90 percent of Negro males   have   un-

corrected distance vision of 20/30 or better as compared to less than 75

percent of the white male population of the same age)5 To test whether

inter—state differences in racial composition actually translate into

differences in the demand for optometric services, the percent of the

population that is non—white is entered into the demand equation.

         Income and education may also play a role in determining the demand

for optometric services. The utilization of corrective lenses is posi—

tively correlated      with family income and   the education of the family head.

Fifty    percent   of the population in families with income in excess of

$5,000    had corrective lenses in 1965—66, as compared     to 44 percent of the

meabers   of families with income     less than $5,000.   Fifty-four percent of
                                           —9—



the population in families where the head had 13 or more years of educa-
tion owned corrective lenses in 1965—66, while 46 percent of the members
of families where the head had less than 13 years of schooling had correc-
tive lenses'6 it is not evident from these figures whether the income
effect results from the higher educational levels associated with higher
income individuals, or whether the educational effect actually reflects
a positive income elasticity for corrective lenses. In order to separate

out   the   effects of income and education on the demand for optometric

services, the state per capita income and          the   percent of the state popu-

lation with 1—3 years of college are entered into the demand equation.

        Although the utilization of corrective lenses increases with income

and education it is not clear, ajriori, that the partial effects of in-

come and     education   on the demand for optometric services would be posi-

tive. This is because the higher the income and            education   of an .individ-

ual, the more likely he is to use the services of an ophthalmologist

instead of an optometrist to obtain an optical prescription. Twenty-

five percent of those individuals with family income under $5,000 who

had   an   eye examination and purchased eyeglasses during       the two years
preceding   July 1965 to June 1966 used an. ophthalmologist as a source of
their   optical prescription, while the same figure for those with family
income of     $5,000 and over was 36 percent. Similarly, 28 percent of

those   individuals   whose family head had twelve years of schooling or

less used an ophthalmologist as the source of their optical prescription

while the comparable figure was 48 percent for those individuals whose

family head had    thirteen   years   of   schooling and   over)7
                                          — 10   —




         All of the socioeconomic variables were collected from the 1970
census.

5.2 The Supply of Optometric Services.
         The determinants of the supply of optometric services are examined
by the estimation of a location equation and an average rkload equa-
tion.

5.2a The Location of Optometrists
         Price is included in the location equation and is expected to be
positively associated with the number of optometrists per 100,000 popu—
lation.       With price held constant, the per      capita   income variable in

the location equation must be interpreted as a proxy             for   the cultural,

educational and other environmental advantages of a state which are

correlated      with per capita income.

         The number of graduating students in optometry schools is entered

into the equation to test whether graduating optometrists have a propen-

sity to remain in the state where they receive their professional edu-

cation. One reason why this should be the case is that optometry

schools   would seem more likely       to draw entering students from their own

states.       This   is because home state   students are often given preferential

treathent when considered for         admission and often face loirier tuition
         18
costs.

         To serve    as a proxy for   the stringency of state licensing require—

ments a national board       dummy variable   is included     in the location equa-
tion.     This   variable   takes on a value of one for those states which did
                                       — 11    —




not accept the national board examination in 1968. The national board
.vai"ination was accepted in lieu of the written portion of the state
                                            19 The failing rates on in-
licensing examination in 26 states in 1968.
dividual   state licensing examinations        would probably   be a more approp-

riate barrier to entry variable, but such data are not available.

Implicit in the use of the national board dummy is the assumption that

those   states which do not accept the national board examinations also

have the most stringent licensing reauirements. Although state

licensing requirements are established for the expressed purpose of

ensuring   that   high standards of optometric care are         practiced,   many

economists      have argued that   licensing   is used by members of a profes-

sion in order to limit the number of competing practitioners. It                is
interesting to note that in most cases it is the professions that have

demanded that their members be licensed. Consumers, who supposedly

need    to be   protected from malpractice, have been less concerned about

professional licensure.

        There is evidence that the licensing arrangements of some profes-

sions have been used to restrict labor mobility between states. Holen

found that interstate mobility in law and dentistry was low             relative     to

medicine because of the structure of licensing arrangements ... (and)

because of the exclusionary practices of various state licensing

boards. ,,20     She found that those states in which lawyers or dentists

enjoyed high incomes also tended to have high failure rates among

candidates for license. This was not true for the case of physicians,

where restrictions on interstate mobility are small because of
                                         — 12 —




reciprocity agreements and the use of national boards. Maurizi has pre-
sented regression results that support the hypothesis that state licensing
boards adjust the pass rate on licensing examinations in order to protect
                                                21
the incomes of those already licensed.


5.2b The Workloads of 0pcunetrists

           Price   is the   only variable in the workload equation. Optometrists
are   expected to take on greater workloads the higher their        per   unit re—
       .
ward   for doing so, unless their supply curves are backward bending and
the average optometrist operates on that portion that is negatively
sloped.

                                    6. pirical Results
6.1        The Demand for Optometric Services
           The second stage estimates of the demand equations are presented in
Table i.22 All variables are in logs with the exception of the adver-
Using dummy. The per capita income coefficients (elasticities) vary
from .34 to .59 in the demand equations. This range is high relative to
the    income elasticities of demand estimated for physician services by
                        23
Fuchs and Kramer.             A relatively higher income elasticity of demand for
                                            .




optometric services is not unexpected. A good portion of optometric
services, such as tinted glasses, re expensive, stylish frames and
extra glasses, would seem to fall into the luxuryM category. In fact,
the income elasticity of eye health services could be substantially greater
than .5. The income elasticity of demand for optometric services would
uMerstate the income elasticity for eye health services if the tendency
                                                           TMLE 1
                          Demand for Optometric   Services:   Second    Stage of   Two Stage Least   Square.
                    The


                                             Ophthal-
                                             mologista Optician.                                      Mvertise
                     Percent        Per         Per            Per
                                                                                                       1   Yes
                     65 and        Capita     100,000        100,000
                                                                            Price        Education     0 - No    Constant
                      Over         Income    Population     Population



                                                                             —1.00            .26                   7.78
-                         .53         .55                       —.23
    1.                                                                     (—2.12)         (1.58)                 (3.68)
                      (2.7)        (2.28)                     (—3.30)
         (—4..)
                                                                 —.24        —1.54            .36        —.07      6.31
    2.                    .51          .59
                                                                            (—.56)          (.69)      (—.18)     (2.02)
         (.i)        (2.22)        (1.81)                     (—2.50)

                                                                              —.48                                 9.2].
    3.      —.            .50          .34                                                                        (3.50)
                                    (1.50)                                  (—.89)
         (-3.'.      (2.13)
                                                                                               .09         .13     11.75
    4.      -.15          .55          .49                       —.21
                                                                                             (.50)      (1.80)    (6.12)
         (—3.i        (2.45)        (1.78)                    (—2.67)

                                                                                .34                        .17     13.45
    5.       .]5           .56         .48                       —.20
                                                                              (.23)                      (.91)    (1.81)
                      (2.32)        (1.41)                    (—2.15)
         (—3.s.>
                                                                                   .78                     .22     15.72
                           .55         .48         —.09          —.19
    6.      —.15                                                                                          (.5)     (.72)
                                    (1.10)        (—.11)       (—.95)         (.18)
         (—2.'.o)     (1.77)




                                             the advertising     dummy.     t statistics in parentheses.
    All Variables in natural logs except

    N—32.
                                           — 14      -


to utilize the services of ophthalmologists and opticians rather than op.-
toinetrists to secure optical prescriptions and corrective lenses increased
                 24
with income.
        The interpretation of the coefficients of the advertising dummy and
the education and price variables is hazardous because of mu].ticollinearity.
The advertising dummy varies markedly in the estimated demand equations.
In   regression 4, with        the   price variable excluded,      the advertising dummy
coefficient is         significant at the 3 percent confidence level25 and indi-

cates that the         demand for optometric services is 13 percent         greater in
those states      where advertising is not restricted. However, with price

included      in the   demand equation the t values of the advertising duxruny fall

to below one.

        The education variable is positively related to the quantity of Opto-

metric   serv.ices demanded and approaches statistical significance in equa-
tion   1, where       the   advertising dummy   does not appear. In regressions 2, 4,
education      is included with the advertising dummy and is statistically in-

significant. An insignificant education coefficient would lend support

to   the hypothesis that the          tendency to utilize the services of ophthal-

mologists and         opticians   rather than optometrists to secure optical pre-

scriptions and corrective lenses increases with education. This conclusion

follows if it is accepted that the taste for corrective lenses increases

with education. This assumption seems reasonable. The more educated place

a greater emphasis on good            health   and   probably   have a greater interest in

reading, an activity that requires the use                of   corrective lenses in most

cases    by   middle age.
                                  — 15   —




     The   price coeffiàieflt varies from —.48 to —1.54 in regressions 1—3,
but becomes positive in regressions 5 and 6 when the education and adver-
tising variables are excluded from the estimated demand equations.
     The coefficients and statistical significance of the race and age
variables remain fairly stable in the estimated regression equations.
The positive association between the demand for optometric services and
the percent of the population 65 and over is an expected result given
the increased utilization of corrective lenses with age. The age elas-
ticity is approxin%ately.5. The percent of the population that is non-
white is negatively related to the quantity of optometric services
demanded. The negative association can be explained in part by the
stronger vision possessed by Negroes. Perhaps an equally important
explanation, however, is the higher price of securing optometric ser-
vices that Negroes probably confront because of higher transportation
and search costs. Many Negroes live in urban ghettos or rural areas in
the South where optometric care is relatively scarce.
      The regression results provide no decisive evidence on the extent
to which the services of ophthalmologists and opticians are substituted
for optometric services. This is true because of the inconclusive re-
gression estimates as well as the considerations discussed above (see
pp. 6—7). The optician. variable is highly significant and negatively
related to the demand for optometric services when the ophthalmologist
variable does not appear in the demand equation. When the two competing
eye professional variables are entered together, however, the optician
                                     — 16   —




variable is significant at only the 30 percent confidence level. The
ophthalmologist variable is always statistically insignificant, even
                                                                 26
when the optician variable is excluded from the demand models.
      The "better performance" of the optician variable may indicate that
opticians offer services that are more
                                       competitive with those of the op-
tometrist than   is   true for the eye care services provided by ophthalmolo-
gists. This interpretation is consistent with the fact that the dispen-
sing portion of the optometrist's practice comprises the major portion of
services   supplied. According to the output measure used in this study,

the dispensing of corrective lenses comprises 76 percent of optometric

output and visual exams the remaining 24 percent.27 The coefficient of

the optician variable     is stable at about —.20 in all the estimated demand
equations.
                                      — 17 —




6.2 The Location of Optometrists
        The second stage estimates of the location equation are


                output — 6.44 + 1.01         Price +    .58     Per Capita Income
                         (1.86) (1.51)                 (1.86)


                                +     .002 Graduating Optometry Students
                                    (1.61)


                                —     .15    National Board Dummy.
                                    (1.71)


All variables are in logs except the number of graduating optometry students
and the national board dummy. The t—statistics are in parentheses.
        Optometrists appear to be quite sensitive to price in making their
location decision.      This price coefficient of 1.01 is in the upper range of

the price elasticities for the per       capita   supply of physicians reported by

Fuchs   and Kramer.    Optcmietrists may be more sensitive to interstate varia-

tions in   price because they are more       likely to migrate (interstate) than

physicians. This conclusion is based on the assumption that migration in

both    these   professions is undertaken predominately by recent graduates of

the   professional schools. The established practices of older practitioners
should make thest reluctant to migrate. Recent graduates of optometry
schools should be more prone to migrate than their physician counterparts
                                      — 18 —




because of the much smaller number      of optometry schools.       There existed

only ten optometry schools in nine states in 1968, while medical schools

were located in nearly every state. The national board dummy             coefficient
indicates that    state   licensing examinations are    an   effective means of

restricting entry, given the assumption that states which do not accept

the national boards in optometry have the more stringent licensing re-

quirements. The duxriny coefficient indicates that states with more

restrictive licensinq requirements have 15 percent fewer optometrists

per 100,000 population, holding other variables equal,           than   those

states with less restrictive licensing arrangements. To put this

another way, consumers in those states with restrictive licensing

requirements could have a substantially larger stock of optometrists

from which to choose if these entry restrictions were eased.

       The graduating optometry student coefficient demonstrates that

optometrists   have at least a slight rrooensity to remain in the state

where they receive their professional education. The elasticity of

the number   of   optometrists per 100,000 population with respect to the

nLmther of graduating optometrists inherent in the regression results is

very small, approximately .03. A small elasticity is to be expected be-

cause only nine states have optometry schools in the United States, so

a   significant aunt of      outmigration must   take   place   by optometrists
from the state where they receive their professional training, or optome-
trists would be much less evenly distributed around the country than they
presently are.      The   elasticity must also be small because the total number
of   graduates from optometry schools in any     one year is small in relation
to the   stock of practicing optometrists.
                                     — 19 —




       The attraction of optometrists to high per capita income states,

holding price constant, indicates that      environmental      factors which are

correlated with per    capita   income play a significant role in their

location decision. This finding is discussed in more detail in

Section 7.


6.3 The Workloads of Optometrists

       The simple reqressipfl of the log    of   average workloads on the log

of price yields:


             Log average workload —     3.22     —    1.05 log   price.
                                        (2.15)       (—3.43)


The t—statistics are in parenthesis. The obvious explanation of the nega-

tive price coefficient is that optometrists are on the backward bending

portion of a labor supply curve. The price coefficient shows              that an
instate price increase of 10 percent should reduce the average workloads

of optometrists by about 10 percent. The supply of optometric services

within the state would remain about the same, however. The regression

results   for the   location equation indicate that the per capita number

of   optometrists would increase by approximately 10 percent as a result
of a 10 percent price increase.

7.     Implications of the Research

       At the outset of this paper a brief discussion was provided of the

concern of many health economists over the uneven distribution of health

professionals, particularly between urban and rural areas. Optometrists,

as well   as physicians, were seen to be relatively scarce         in   rural areas.
                                           —20-


I
    The estimation of the market model        for   optometric services in this study

    provides some insight into the reasons for the uneven distribution of

    health manpower. The estimation of the equation describing the location

    decision of optometrists revealed that price, per capita income and the

    stringency of      state licensing requirements were the most important    deter-

    minants of    the location of optometrists. In Table 2 the means of these
    variables    are   presented for the urban and rural states included in the
    cross section.      The regression results and the data in Table 2 together

    indicate that differences in the price of output and in the environmental

    and cultural qualities of a state that correlate with per        capita   income

    primarily explain the uneven distribution of optometric manpower between

    urban and rural states. Differences in the stringency of state licensing

    requirements,      as represented by   the national board dummy, work in favor

    of   rural   states in terms of the location of optometric manpower.

           The mean number of optometrists per 100,000 population.in the

    nineteen urban states is 9.71. This is 15 percent greater than the

    mean number of 8.45 optometrists per 100,000 population in the

    thirteen rural states. The price coefficient in the estimated loca-

    tion   equation indicates that if the price of output in rural states
    increased to the urban state mean, or by 5.5percent, the mean number
    of optometrists per 100,000 would increase by the same percentage.
    The price effect, therefore, does not account for the major portion of
    the discrepancy in the per capita number of optometrists between urban
    and rural states. Apparently, the environmental and cultural attributes
                                  — 21   —




                                 TABLE 2

            Sample Means of Location Decision Variables for
                  Optometrists, Urban and Rural States




        Variable Name           Urban Statesa         Rural States
.

    price                          $7.69                  $7.29


    Per—capita income             $4,068                 $3,251


    National Board Dummy              .63                     .53



    N                                    19                    13



                 in the urban   category have 55 percent or more of
    their population in urban areas.
                                          — 22   —




of a state that correlate with oer capita income primarily explain the
optometrist's preference for urban over rural areas. The per capita
income coefficient in the location equation suggests that the 25 per-
cent   higher income level in urban           states has attracted 15     percent

optometrists     than would have been         the case if urban state     incomes were

at the rural state level. It is this                 life   style differential, then,

that   appears   to be mainly responsible for the uneven distribution of

optometrists between urban        and   rural areas.

        The same   effect   could be very important in explaining the urban-

rural discrepancy in te location of physicians. The per—capita income

coefficients in the physician location equation estimated by Fuchs and

Kramer   were as high as .5 and         statistically       significant with price also
                                                                  28
included as one of the other independent variables.                    The stock of

physicians in urban    states is 34 percent greater than in rural states.29
More than    one-third of this urban—rural state disparity in the per
capita number of physicians can be accounted for by the differences in
life—style    opportunities,     given the per-capita income           differential of

about 25 percent and assuming           the   upper range of Fuchs      and Kramer's
estimated per-capita        income coefficients from their location equation

are    relevant.
        The relative scarcity of optometrist's in rural areas does not

translate unimpeded       into   a similar differential in the supply of

optametric    services.     The estimated price coefficient in the workload

equation showed the average optometrist to offer less services in

response to increases in price. The price of optometric services in
                                       — 23 —




urban states    is 5.5 percent higher than in rural states (see Table 2).

According to    the price coefficient in the workload eauation, average

workloads in urban      states   should correspondingly be about 5.5 percent

lees.    About one—third of the differential in per capita optometric

msnpower    between   urban and rural states, therefore, is made up for in

terms of the total supply of optometric services by higher workloads

taken on by rural optometrists because of lower market prices.

        The same argument could also be relevant to the supply of physi-

cian services in urban and rural areas. Regression results have been

presented    by Fuchs and Framer and by Feldstein which support     the

hypothesis    that physicians reduce     supply in response to an increase in

fees.3° This     may be a partial explanation of why residents of rural
areas are not in poor health relative to urban residents. The relative
scarcity    in the supply of physician services in rural areas may not     be

nearly as great as the relative scarcity of physicians.
                                       Footnotes


        1In    1968 there were 18,299 optometrists in active practice. Self-

employed optometrists totaled 16,218. (National Center for Health Sta-

tistics, Optometrists flnoioyed in Health Services, United States, 1968,

Department     of   HEW Publication No. (HsM) 73—1803, Vital Health Statistics —

Series 14, No. 8.) In 1969, the mean annual gross income of practicing

optometrist was $46 thousand. (Fred Chipnan, "AOA 1969 Economic Survey,

Part W, Journal of the American Ootometric Association, Vol. 41, No. 6,

June   1970,   p. 551.)


        2National Center for Health Statistics, Optometrists Employed in

Health Services, p. 14.


               Survey of Optometrists," Journal of the American Optometric

Assocjation, Vol. 40, No. 12, December 1969, p. 1195.


       4Opticians      Employed in   Health Services, United States, 1969, Detart—

ment   of   HEW Publication No. (HSM) 72—1052, Vital Health Statistics —

Series 14,     No. 3, pp. 8—9.

        hthalmology Manpower: Characteristics of Clinical Practice,
United States, 1968, Department of HEW Publication No. (HMS) 73—1802,

Vital Health Statistics —         Series   14, No. 7.


       5States classified as urban         have   55 percent or   more of   their popula-

tion in urban       areas • The   state per   capita numbers of    physicians were

weighted    by state population in computing the         urban    and rural states means.
                                     p— 2



The 1971 per capita number of physicians by state was taken from

bution of Phicians in the U.S., 1971, Center for Health Services,

Research and Development, AMA, Chicago, 1973.


             considerations presented in footnote 5 apply here as well. The

per capita number of eye professionals by state was taken from Optome—

trists Employed in Health Services, op. cit.; Opticians Emtloyed in Health

Services, op. cit.; and Oohthalmology Manr>ower, op. cit.


        7?ein argues that many rural ohvsicians have reached an age where the

increased need for leisure time has offset the productivity gains assoc-

iated with work experience. See Rashi Fein, The Doctor Shortage, The Brook-
ings   Institute,   Washington, D.C., 1967, pp. 74—75.

        8Victor   Fuchs and Marcia Kramer, The Determinants of the Expenditures

for Physician Services in the United States, 1948-68, National Bureau of

Economic Research, Occasional Paper 117 and DHEW publication HSM 73—3013,

1972.


        9Thia   model is very similar to the market model for physician ser-

vices estimated by Fuchá and Kramer, .       cit.
        10Cptometrists Employed in Health Services, United States, 1968,

Department of Health, Education and Welfare Publication No. (HSM)      73-1803,
Vital   Health Statistics — Series 14, No. 8.

                  procedure is described thoroughly in Douglas Coate, "The
Optimal Employment of Inputs in Fee for Service, for Profit Health
Practices: the Case of Optometrists," NBER      Working Paper, October 1975.
                                         F- 3




      2See Lee Benham, "The Effect of Advertising on the Price of Eye—

glasses," Journal of Law       and Economics, October 1972, pp. 337-353.

      13
                         ,   inocuiar Visual        Acuity of Adults, U.S., 1960—62,

National Center for Health Statistics, Series 11, No. 3.

      14
                         ,   Characteristics    of Persons with Corrective Lenses,

1965—66, National Center for Health Statistics, Series 10, No. 53.
                                                                                       S

      15
                       —,    Binocular   Visual Acuity of Adults, oo. cit.

      16
                         ,   Characteristics    of Persons with Corrective Lenses,

op. cit. These figures are        age   adjusted.


      17lbid.


      18                                                            individual
           The data source for    the   number of graduates from                 optom-

etry schools is M.Y. Pennel and M.B. Delong, "Optometric Education and

Manpower,"   Journal   of the American Optometric Association, Vol. 41, No. 1,

November    1970.

      19lhis information was       collected    from unpublished data of the Opto-

metric Center of New York.


      20Arlene S. Holen, "The Effects of Professional Licensing Arrange-

ments on Interstate Labor Mobility and Resource Allocation," Journal of

Political Economy, 73, October 1965.


      2A1sx Maurizi,         "Occupational Licensing and the     Public   Interest,"
Journal of Political Economy,       Vol. 82, No. 2, March/April      1974.
        22Th. regressions are unweighted. Residual plots did not indicate
heteroscedasticity.

•       23Th income elasticities in what Fuchs and Kramer call their re
successful estimates of the demand for physician services range from .04
to .20. Fuchs and Kramer,    op.   cit., p. 33
        240ne problem with this interpretation that is relevant to regres-
sions 1—2, 4—6 is that either the number of ophthalmologists or opticians
or both are being controlled for. Within the constraints of these models,
therefore, increases in income could result in a novement by consumers
from optometrists to ophthalmologists or opticians only if the latter eye
professionals increased their workloads. In regression 3 the numbers of
ophthalmologists and optometrists are allowed to vary and this qualif i-
cation does not apply.

        251n a one—tailed test.

        26su the ophthalmologist variable is included in the demand equa-
tion   without the optician variable, the coefficient is negative but the

t—statistic is less than one (in absolute value). These results are not

presented in Table 1.


             mean number of visual exams     supplied by optometrists by state
averaged 1,063. The mean number     of   eyeglasses provided by state in visual

.zam   units averaged 3,310. It should not be    assumed, however, that   ophthal-
mologists supply exclusively medical services and do not dispense corrective
l.asea • About 22 percent of practicing ophthalmologists employ opticians
or optical fitters.     (91htha]mo1ogyManpower, op. cit.)
         28Puche and Xxamer,   op. Cit., p.   3]. The per capita income   coeffi-

cients    in their location equations were generally unstable because of
 ulticollinearity.
         29
           See page 2.

         30Fucha and )ramr, op.     cit.; and   Martin   ?eldstein, The Rising

Price    of Physicians' Serrices, Review of Economics and Statistics,

No.   52, May   1970, pp. 121—33.
