               NBER Working Paper Series




        A SURVEY OF RECENT RESEARCH IN HEALTH ECONOMICS


                       Michael Grossmarl*




                   Working Paper No. 129




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                          March 1976


                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for coents only.     They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.
This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

Research for this paper was supported by a grant to NBER from
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

*City University of New York Graduate School, and NBER.
                          A SURVEY OP RECENT RESEAH IN HEALTH ECONOMICS

                                          Michael Grossman


        In   this   survey of recent research in health economics, I concentrate on
studies that have appeared since 1971 or are in progress. The survey reflects
in part my own research interests and biases and is not meant to be cotnr,rehen—
give.    Four topics are covered:         (1) demand   for adults' health and medical
care; (2) effects of health on labor supply and wage rates; (3) demand for
children's     health and medical care;      and (4) selected topics pertaining to the
supply side of the medical care market.


                     I.    Demand for Adults' Health and     Medical   Care

        Most recent studies of the demand for adults' health and              medical care
have   adopted the model that I constructed to study this subject (12, 13]. A

fundamental    proposition     of this   model is that what   consurters demand when they

purchase     medical services are not these      services per   se but rather good health.
Based   on this proposition, one should derive the demand curve for medical care
fr the interaction between the production function of health and the                 demand

curve for    health. Within the context of Becker's household production func-

tion framework      (3],   I treat health as a durable item. Thus, indivjduals in-

herit an initial      stock   of health capital that depreciates with age and        can be
increased    by investment. By definition, net investment in the stock of health

equals gross investment minus       depreciation.      Direct inputs into the production

of   gross investments in health include the n time of the consumer, medical

care, proper diet, exercise, recreation, housing, quality of the environment,

and other factors as well.

        In the model, consumers     demand health for t reasons. As a consumption
dity, it directly enters their utility functions, or put differently,
                                         —2—

illness is a source of disutility. As an investment coumodity, it determines

the total amount   of   time available for work   in   the market sector of the econ-   0
omy,   where consers produce money earnings, and for work in the normiarket or
household sector, where they produce coodities that enter their utility
functions. The investment motive for demanding health is present because an
increase in the stock of health lowers the amount of time lost from market
and nonmarket activities due to illness and injury. I develop in detail two
extreme versions of this general demand for health model: a pure investment
version and a   pure consumption version. In the former, health does not enter

the    utility function directly, while in the latter, the monetary rate of
return on an investment in health equals zero.
        One of the main advantages of the model is that it makes strong pre-
dictions about the effects of shifts in variables other than income and the
price of medical care on the. quantities of health and medical care demanded.
These predictions are based on the proposition that the shadow price of
health    depends on many   variables   besides the   price   of medical care. In

particular,    the shadow price rises with age if       the rate of depreciation on

the    stock of health rises over the life cycle, and it falls with years of
formal schooling completed if more schooling makes a person a more efficient
producer of health. In general, an increase in the shadow price of health
vould lower the quantity of health demanded. If, however, the price elas-

ticity of demand for health were less than one, then the quantity of medical
care demanded would rise. Thus, in using this framework to study the demand
for medical care, an economist does not have to ignore variables, such as
attitudes, perceptions, demographic characteristics, and schooling, that non—
economists might consider to be important. Rather, one can make predictions
about the effects of these variables in an economic context.
                                        —3—


         In my   initial empirical application of this approach [13], using data

 for individuals who had finished    their   formal schooling, I estimated gross

 investment production functions and diand curves for health and medical

 care.    The data source was a 1963 health interview survey conducted by the
National Opinion Research Center and the Center for Health Administration
Studies of the University of Chicago. I measured health capital by individ-
uals' self-evaluation of their health status as excellent, good, fair, or
poor; and I measured the healthy time output of health capital either by the
complement of the number of restricted—activity days due to illness and in—
jury or by the complement of the number of work—loss days. To check the
results obtained with these indexes of health, I also examined variations      in
death    rates across states of the Un.ited States. In my empirical work, I
focused on the effects of age, schooling, the value of time (measured by the
wage rate), and property income on the quantities of health and medical care
demanded. Although not all its theoretical predictions were fulfilled,
enough were to suggest that the model provides a viable framework for under-
standing variations in health levels and medical care utilization.
         During the past few years, several other persons and I have extended the
above framework both theoretically and empirically. One class of extensions
deal with the properties of the demand function for medical care. Using my
basic approach, Phelps (26] has developed a model of the joint determination
of the demand for medical care and the demand for health insurance under tin—
certainty (random illness). He shows that the introduction of uncertainty
does not alter the basic properties of the demand curve for medical care that
I derive from my model. Newhouse and Phelps [22, 23] employ my pure invest—
ment framework as the point of departure for estimating demand curves for
various types of medical care. In their model, the ncminal price of care
                                            —a —


and   the coinsurance rate associated with a         conswer's      health insurance policy,
as   well as the quantity of        care, are endogenous    variables. Acton (1, 2]                  0
stresses that two         of the most important   time   inputs   in   the health production

process   are travel time to the usual sources of medical care and waiting                    time

in   physicians' offices or in clinics. Me          finds   that the quantity of medical
care demanded is negatively related to the amount of travel or waiting time
required   to   obtain a unit of care in several low income samples of New York
City residents.
        Currently, Newhouse, Phelps, Acton, and           their   colleagues at the Rand
Corporation are employing the above framework to estimate demand curves in
their   Health Insurance Study (211. In this study, which is similar in de-
sign to the Income Maintenance Experiments, various forms of national health
insurance are        being   offered to a sample of aproxixnate1y 5,000        families   in
six   cities. The a.ims of the study are to measure the impact of national

health insurance        on utilization of medical care, to        obtain   precise estimates
of demand   parametersin addition to the price elasticity, and                to   measure the
effect of increased utilization on health outcomes.
        A second class of extensions is concerned with the role of the spouse's
characteristics in the production of a person's health. Typically, married
aen devote most of their time to market production, while their wives devote

aost   of their time to nonmarket production. Based on this division of labor

within    the   family,   Joyce   (16], Fuchs (7], Grossman arid Benham (14], and

Grossman (11] suggest that wives' time should be an important input in the

production      of   husbands'   health.   In the last   reference,    I argue that, if an

increase in wives' schooling raises their           nonmarket productivity, then         it

wouldraise the quantity of husbands' health demanded. (This argnment
aBses either that the value of time is held constant or that the percent—
age increase     in nozarket productivity due to schooling exceeds the
                                                                                                     0
                                               —5-

 percentage increase in the value of time.)           npirically,    I find that wives'

 schooling     has approximately     the same effect on husbands' health as husbands'

 schooling in a high income sample [11]. Currently, Colic [53 is investi-

 gating the role of wives' schooling in the demand           curves for   husbands' and
 wives' health and medical care.

         A third class of extensions is concerned with a detailed investigation

 of   the relationship between years       of formal schooling completed and       adults'
 health. In my        initial   work [12, 13],, I modeled and tested the   notion    that
 an          in schooling should cause health to rise. Specifically, the
      increase

efficiency with which individuals transform medical care and other inputs
into better health should rise with schooling. This would tend to create a
positive     correlation between schoolinq and the quantity of health demanded.

Within the context of the household production function approach to consumer

behavior,     there   are,   however, compelling   reasons for treating the    amount of
schooling persons acauire and         their   health at early stages   in their life
cycle, as     well as their health as adults, as       endogenous variables.       For
instance,     it is reasonable     to assume that healthier students are re effi-
cient   producers of additions to the stock of knowledge or human capital via
formal schooling. If so, then they would           tend   to increase the quantity of
investment in knowledge they demand and the number of years they attend
school. Given a full life cycle nde1 of decisionmaking, even when an
 dult's age, income, value of time, and spouse's characteristics are held
constant,     an observed positive correlation between own schooling and health
would not necessarily imply a causal relationship that runs from schooling
to health.
        In   Grossman   [11) I   develop a methodological   framework that   can   be used
to introduce and discuss alternative explanaio of              the observed   positive
                                         —6-

 correlation between schooling and adults' health. In the theoretical section
 of this study, I formulate a recursive system whose principal equations are
 demand curves for children's health, schooling, and adults' health. I then
 show how this system generates causal relationships from schooling to health
and from health to schooling. In addition, this system generates relation-
ships from third variables, such as genetic endowment, physical and mental
ability, aridparents' characteristics, to both health arid schooling. Existing
estimates of the effect of schooling on health are based on data sets that con-
tain information on current health of persons who have completed their formal
schooling. These data sets do not, however, have measures of health at early
stages in the life cycle and have only limited information on potential third
variables. My theoretical analysis stresses that current and past health
should be positively correlated and that healthier students should have an in-
centive to attend school for longer periods of time. Therefore, the coeffi-
cient of schooling in a regression with current health as the dependent vari-

able would be biased upward if past health were     not   included in the regression.

Similarly,   the schooling coefficient would   be biased if relevant third vari-

ables   were omitted from the health function.
        pirically,    I use the NBER-Thorndike sample to obtain   an unbiased   esti-
sate of the effect of schooling on current subjective health status. My pro-
cedure is to include past subjective health status and third variables in a
wiltiple regression analysis of current health, with these variables held

constant, schooling   has   a positive and significant effect on current health.
Using a similar methodology Manhejm (18] examines the effect of schooling on
the probability of   survival in a longitudinal sample of males in California.

He   finds a positive effect of schooling on survival, with past health and
background variables held constant.
                                            —7-

         A   final class of extensions applies the quality—quantity scdel devel-
oped   by Becker and      Lewis [41 to   the market for physicians' services. Gold-

man and Grossman (lOJ argue that differences in quality are a distinguishing

characteristic       of this market. The study has     two purposes.   The first is to

develop      a methodology for   the estimation of hedonic      fee functions and de-
mand functions for the quantity and quality of physicians' services. The
second is to apply the methodology to analyze the demand for pediatric care
 (care rendered      to children by    all physicians) in a sample of New York City
residents.        In this sample detailed information on physicians' characteris-

tics, such as experience, specialty, board certification status, and member-

ship in professional        societies,   is combined with data on fees, family   char-
acteristics of patients, and          number of visits. By examining the relationship
between      fees and   physicians'   characteristics, one can estimate the quality

of care received by each child in the sample and the quality-adjusted price

paid   by his or her parents..
         In our   theoretical   model, we stress the effects of income, the value

of   time, and    the quality-adjusted    price of pediatric services on the quan-
tity (visits)      and quality of services demanded. Since consumers have the
option to trade quality for visits, these effects are somewhat different
than those discussed in other studies of the demand for medical care with
..icrodata sets. It is shown that the price of quality relative to the
price of visits (the relative price of quality) is directly related to the
quality—adjusted price of a visit and inversely related to the Ufixedu
costs of a visit. Fixed costs are costs that are independent of quality
and are defined as the sum of (1)         transportation   cost per visit and (2)
travel   timeto the physician's office and waiting time in the office evalu-
ated at the opportunity cost of the mother's time.
                                     —8—


      Since the relative price of quality     is a positive function of quality—
                                                                                    Q
 adjusted    price, consumers should substitute away from quality   and toward
visits as quality—adjusted price rises. Although visits need not rise abso—

lutely, the ratio of visits to quality should be positively related to

quality-adjustedprice. Since the relative price of quality is a negative
function of fixed costs of a visit, an increase in these costs would cause
consumers to substitute quality for visits. In suxrrnary, fixed costs and
quality—adjusted price should have opposite signs in the demand curve for
quality. In addition, visits should be more sensitive to      variations in

fixed costs than to variations in quality—adjusted price.

      The empirical work in the paper is based on a special sample of New
York City residents conducted by the New York City Department of Health in
1965—66   (the Mindlin-Densen survey). Estimates of quality and quality—
adjusted price of pediatric care are obtained from an ordinary least squares        0
regression   analysis of the usual fee of pediatric services rendered by   pri-

aary care physicians in private practice in their of fices. These fees were
reported by mothers of children in the sample, who also were asked to iden-
tify by name   all primary care physicians in private practice who examined
their children during the survey period. Characteristics of these physi—
ciazis were obtained from the American Medical Association or New York State
Medical Directories.
      Differences in characteristics among physicians are assumed to reflect
differences in quality or productivity. Therefore, by regressing usual fee
on these characteristics, we   obtain   an estimate of quality from the predicted
value of usual fee for a given observation and an estimate of quality-adjusted
price from the regression residual. These estimates serve as inputs into the
Ccutation of demand functions for visits and quality.
                                           —9-


         The demand functions are fitted by two—stage least squares with quality-
adjusted price treated as an endogenous variable. This procedure is followed
for two reasons. First, we argue that variation in quality—adjusted price
in a cross sect.ton can     be   traced   in   part   to   imperfect information due   to costs
of    search. Since equilibrium      search     time should increase and equilibrium

quality—adjusted price should decrease as the quantity of pediatric                  services
demanded increases, it would be inappropriate to estimate demand functions
by ordinary least squares. Second, our preliminary estimate of quality—
adjusted price is likely to contain errors of measurement. By introducing a
set of instrumental variables (equivalent to estimation by two—stage least
squares), we reduce these errors. In addition to the exogenous variables in

the demand    functions,   the instrumental variables include proxies for search

and   information.
        The major empirical results are as follows:
         (1) Variations in usual fee associated with physicians' characteristics
are   consistent   with the hypothesis that these characteristics reflect differ-

ences in quality. In particular, non—board certified pediatricians charge

higher fees than general practitioners, and                board   certified pediatricians

charge   higher fees than non—board certified pediatricians. Fees are also
sensitive    to the number of years in which physicians have been in private
practice, to the number of memberships in recognized special societies, and
to the place of medical education.
         (2) Quality-adjusted price has a negative and statistically significant

regression   coefficient in the demand         curve   for   quality. The same variable
has   an insignificant negative regression coefficient in the demand curve for
visits. At the point of means, the absolute value of the elasticity of
quality with respect to quality—adjusted price (.08) exceeds the absolute
                                          — 10   —




value   of the elasticity of visits with respect to quality—adjusted price (.06).

This    is   consistent with our   hypothesis that     consumers should substitute visits

for quality as quality—adjusted price rises.

         (3) An increase in the fixed costs       of   a visit simultaneously reduces

nber of visits and        increase   quality per visit. In the demand curve          for
visits, the absolute value of the slope coefficient of fixed costs exceeds

that    of   quality—adjusted price. This same result emerges when elasticities

at the mean are compared. Both         results   support our   prediction   that fixed

costs    should be a re important determinant of visits than quality-adjusted
price.


                   II. Effects of Health on Labor Sutly and Wage Rates
         Several persons have tested the     hypotheses     that exogenous improvements

in health should raise market produetivity, measured by the wage rate, and
hou1d also increase the amount of time allocated to work in the market.                       0
Grossman      and Benham [14), for example, estimate the effects of health on
labor supply and wage rates in the context of fully specified structural
 quations for these two components of earnings. We also examine how the
estimated effects of health on labor market behavior are altered              when   health
is made an endogenous variable. The npirical results confirm the two hypoth—
 eses   and suggest that    the   effect of health on productivity    is    strengthened

when health is treated as an endogenous variable.

         It is worth considering      the role of health in the    supply side of labor

 in some     detail.   My treatnent of health capital (12, 13]      assumes    that an in-
 crease in the stock of health increases the total amount of           available     time

 for work in the market and for household production during any specified time
 interval, say a year. With the market wage rate and norunarket productivity
 held constant, it would not be optimal for a consumer to allocate all of this
                                            — 1.1   —




 additional time to household production. If such   plan were followed, then
                                                             a

 the ratio of consumption time to market goods would rise, which would cause
 the wage rate to exceed the value of the marginal product of consumption time.
 Based on this argument, health should have a positive effect on the amount of
 time supplied to the market.
         If health   is viewed as an exogenous variable,         then its effect on      labor

Supply reflects a pure income effect. With the market wage rate and non—

market productivity held constant, an increase in health would raise ful]. in—

come, defined as earnings plus property (nonearrlings) income plus the mone-

tary value of time spent in consumption. Since healthier persons would have

more full income, their dnand for cosmodities and their derived demand for

market   goods would expand. In      order to purchase additional goods,          they   would

spend more time at work in the market. Although both property incoce and
health influence hours of work by means of a pure income effect, these ef-
fects go in opposite directions. This difference arises because an increase

in   property income has no     effect on the amount of consumption time associated

with   a given amount of   working time. On the other hand, an increase in

health   has no effect on the amount of consumption of market goods associated
with a given amount of     working time.

        I stress the above    analysis   because of the well—known difficulties asso-

ciated with the use of property (noneazmings) income to estimate pure income

effects on labor     supply   in the cross section. The availability of health

measures in data sets such as      the Parnes sample, the Survey of Economic
Opportunity,   and the Income    Dynamics    Panel might   allow   one to refine existing
estimates of these effects. To be specific let L be              annual leisure   time,    t

be working time, s be sick time, w be total time, and w be the hourly wage
rate. As an identity
                                        — 12     —




                         —t+t+s           .                                             (1)    0
Suppose that    the demand curve for    leisure       time is given by


                          t—a0+a1w+a28,                                                 (2)




where the coefficient of s is negative and less than             one   in absolute value.

Equations     (1) and (2) imply a labor supply        curve   of the form

                                                      (a2+l) s .                        (3)
                          t——a0—a1w—

The hypothesis that     I am suggesting is that b E        a2 + 1 is significantly less

than one in a statistical sense.

        The   above framework   is also relevant in isolating the pure effect of

norimarket    productivity variations on labor supply. This follows because in-
dexes of nomnarket productivity, such as years of formal schooling completed,
should be closely related to health. In a simple model suppose than an in-
dividual with no property income maximizes a utility function of the form

                         u(x, z) — u(x,       a t),                                     (4)


where   x is consumption of market goods, L is leisure (normarket) time, and a
is a measure of nonxnarket productivity. Equation (4)              i an elementary   version
of the household production function model in which the home—produced cood—
ity (z) depends on time alone.
        Associated with equation (4)     is a demand      curve for leisure time of the
form (say)

                                                                                        (5)
                         lnt—b0+b1lnv+b2lna.
                                                  — 13 —




 In terms of basic parameters, one can show                   -




                                 b1—(l—k) (n—a)                                            (6)

                                 b2—k+ (1—k) a—i,                                          (7)


 where   kis the share of leisure in full income, a is the elasticity of substi-
 tution in constrnption between x and t, and n is the full income elasticity of
 demand for t.        Note that k n + (1      —   k) a is the uncompensated price elasticity
 of   demand   for z:

                     3lnz
                      lnalwfixedkfl+(1)a.                                                  (8)




Therefore,      b2
                     .    0     as c 1. That is,       with the wage rate held constant, an
increase in noarket productivity would increase the demand for leisure time
 (would reduce the supply of hours of work) if the uncompensated price elas-
ticity of z exceeded one.
         At   the empirical level, nonmarket productivity can         be   measured by school-
ing.     This framework can be expanded to estimate pure income effects with sick
time, With sick time held            other health variables could be added to
                                     constant,

the supply function as proxies for nonmarket productivity.

                         III.   Demand   for Children's Health and Medical Care
         In   the literature on the      economics of fertility and optim family size,
a distinction is         made   between the quantity and the quality of children. Stud-
ies by Friedman and Leibowitz [6], Goldman and Grosan [10], and Inman [15]
stress   that   children's health is one aspect of their quality. In a            broad   sense,
the aims of all three studies are            to derive and estimate demand curves    for
                                                — 14   —




pediatric care frc the interaction between the demand and production func—
tiens of children's health. The study by Goldman and Grosan was described
                                                                                                          0
in Section I. Friedman and Leibowitz (6] assume that mothers' schooling is
a positive      correlate of efficiency in the production of healthy children.

In their model, parents transfer human                 (health) and non-human       capital to
                                                                                                          a
their children. They postulate diminishing returns in the case of invest-

sent    in human    capital    but not in the case of investment in physical capital.

It follows that an increase in efficiency in health production would increase

the quantity       of   pediatric care demanded.           Empirically, they find that         mothers'

schooling     has a     positive and     very   significant effect on pediatric visits.

         Irsnan    (15) assumes that the        child health production function has            three
direct    inputs: parents' time,           preventive pediatric visits, and curative
pediatric visits.            He postulates that the relative productivities of these

inputs should depend on mother's schooling. He finds some evidence in favor                               0
of   this proposition in a sample of black children in Washington, D.C. The

members    of the sample were given a thorough               ear,   nose,   and   throat   exaxnina—


tion;    and Inxnan uses the results of the examination as measures of                      health.

Eta    estimates of demand curves for            the   three health care inputs reveal that
an increase        in its relative productivity increases the quantity of the input

that    is demanded.
         In   general    I   think that much more      work can be done on determinants of
children's        health and   medical    care utilization. Research in this area is

related    to theoretical        and   empirical studies of interactions between fertil-
ity and infant mortality by O'Hara (24], Lewit (17], and Williams (27].

                                           IV. The Supply       Side

         Many     persons have pointed out that physicians play a rather unique role                      0
in the market        for medical       care services. This has lead to theoretical
                                           — 15   —




 discussions     and empirical estirrates of the availability effect.          By this is
meant the notion      that the physician   can directly influence the demand      for   his

 or   her services. In    their interstate model      of the market for physicians'
 services, Fuchs and     Kramer   (9] report that the    elasticity of   physicians' vis-
its per capita with      respect to physicians per capita is approximately egual

to .4.     This estimate is obtained from a demand curve for visits         in.which in—

me and the ney price of a visit are held constant. This finding is not
direct    evidence in favor of the availability effect. For example, the travel,

waiting,    and inconvenience costs of     obtaining physicians' services should

fallas the number of physicians per capita rises. Yet many persons would
argue that the elasticity is too large to be explained entirely by this fac-
tor.    Moreover, in a study that controls for travel and         waiting time, May (19]
finds a    statistically significant availability effect. His estimate, however,

is    only half as large as that of    Fuchs and Kramer.

        Pauly (25] hypothesizes that better       educated consumers should be less

susceptible      to demand manipulation   by physicians. Hetests this proposition
by estimating separate     demand   curves for physicians' visits for each of three
education groups. The individual is the unit of observation, but each demand
curve includes physicians per capita       in the     county of residence as an inde—
pendent   variable. Pauly reports that      the size of the availability effect
f&fls   as education rises.

        The relatively high cost of the physician input has stimulated analyses
of   the market for paramedical personnel (health workers excluding physicians).
Using   states   of the United States as the units of observation, Monheit (20]
examines the effects of licensure on wage rates of registered nurses            relative

to wage rates of practical nurses and on number of RN's employed relative to
ninber of PN's. Although all states        had   some form of licensura by 1960,
                                          —    -

 flonheit draws   a   distinction between states in which licensure is
                                                                            mandato, and
 states j which       it is perzn.issjve. His estimates are in the corite..,ct
                                                                                of a si—
 ultaneous equations SUpply—demand odej. for the two         types   of   personnel,   On
 the deitand side, his main result is that mandatory
                                                          RN licensure raises the
relative wage of RN's. On the supply side, his main result is
                                                               that mandatory
PN licensure lowers the relative
                                 number of PN', He also finds that the elms—
ticity of substitution between RN's and
                                        PU's is greater than one.
        Fuchs [8] analyzes quality_adjusted
                                                wage rates of health workers in 1959
and in 1969 and trends between
                                    these two years. He reports a rapid increase
in wage rates in the 1960's,
                                  particularly for RN's and PN's,
                                                                      Currently, he
is   examining the
                 determ.inants of wage rates in hospitals as opposed to
                                                                         other
health settings and the responsiveness of the hospital
                                                        indust-y to wage
diffe.rentjais




                                                                                            0




                                                                                            0
                                   — 17   —




                                  ?ootnotes

      *
       City University of New York Graduate School and National Bureau of Eco—
nonic Research. Research for the paper was supported by   a grant fr the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to the National Bureau of Econic Research.
This paper has not undergone the review accorded official NBER publications;
in particular, it has not yet been suziitted for approval by the Board of
Directors.
                                                — 18    —




                                              References


1.   Acton, Jan P. Dnand for Health Care Among the Urban Poor, with SDecial
              phasis on the Role of Tiine.                   In The Role of Health Insurance in
               the Health Servjces Sector, edited by Richard Rosett. New York:
              Columbia University Press for the NBER, 1976.

2. Acton, Jan P.          Nomonetary Factors in the Dnand for Medical Care: Some
              bapirical Evidence.             Journal       of Political Econony, 83, No. 3
               (June    1975).


3.   Becker,    Gary S.      A   Theory of     the Allocation of Time.        Econcirtic Journal,

               75,   No. 299 (September        1965).


4.   Becker, Gary S., and Lewis, H. Gregg. "0r the Interaction between the
                                  Quality   of Children.         Journal of Political Economy,
               Quantity and

               81, No. 2, Part II (March/April l93).
                                                                                                    o
5.   Colle,    Ann Dukes.         Effects of Wives' Sch hug on Efficiency in Health

               Production.         Ph.D. dissertation, ity University of New           York.

               In progress.

6.   Friedman, Bernard,          and Leibowitz, Arleen.           The Bequest Motive in Hwnan

               Capital and       the Health Care    of      Children.   Unpublished paper, 1975.

7. Fuchs, VictorR.               Some Econic Aspects of Mortality in Developed Coun-

               tries.      In The Econ.ics of Health and Medical Care, edited by

               Mark   Penman.       London:     MacMillan, 1974.

8. Fuchs, Victor R.          Are Health Workers Underpaid?               NBER Working Paper
               No. 108, 1975.

                                                                                                    C
                                        — 19    —




 9. Fuchs, Victor R., and Kramer, Marcia J. Determinants of Exoenditureg for
             Physicians' Services     in   the ønited States 1948—68. Washington and
             New York: National Center for Health Services Research and Develop—
             sent and National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.

10. Goldman, Fred, and Grossman, Michael.             The Demand for Pediatric Care:
             An Hedonic Approach.       Presented at the annual meetings of the
             Western   Economic   Association, San Diego, California, June 1975.
11.   Grossman, Michael.     The Correlation Between Health and        Schooling.      In

             Household   Production   and Consumntion, edited by Nestor E. Terleckyj.

            New York: Colwnbia University Press for the National Bureau of

            Economic    Research, 1976.

12. Grossman, Michael.       0n the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for
            Bealth.N     Journal of Political       Economy, 8O   No. 2 (March/April
            1972).

13. Grossman, Michael. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and nirical
            estiaation. New York: Columbia University Press for the
            National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.

14. Grossman, Michael, and Benham, Lee.             Health, Hours, and Wages.   In
            Penman, 1974.

15. Inman, Robert P.       The Family Provision of Children's Health: An Economic
            Analysis.      In Roaett,   1976.


16. Joyce, Jon M.       Health and the Demand for Medical Care in Households.
            Unpublished paper, 1972.

17. Levit, Eugene N.       Experience and the Demand for Healthy Infants.           Ph.D.
            diesertation, City University of New York. In progress.
                                           — 20    —




18. Manheim, Larry M.           Health,   Health Practices, and     Socioeconomic Status:     0
           The Role of Educatiort.               Ph.D. dissertation, University of

           California at Berkeley, 1975.


19. May, 3.    Joel.    9jtilization of Health Services and the Availability of

              Rasources.         In iy in Health Services, edited by Ronald

              Andersen, Joanna       Kravits,    and Odin W. Anderson. Cambridge,

              Massachusetts: Ballinger Publishing Company, 1975.


20. Monheit, Alan C.            An Econom.ic Analysis of State Licensing of Nursing

              Labor.     Ph.D.     dissertation, City University of New York,

              1975.


21. Newbouse,    Joseph    P.      Plan of Analysis of Experimental Data for the

              Health Insurance Study.             Mimeographed. Santa Monica: The

              Rand    Corporation,    1973.


22. Newbouse, Joseph P., and Phelps, Charles E.                 New Estimates of Price and

              Income Elasticities of Medical Care Services.              In Rosett, 1976.

23. Newhouse,    Joseph    P., and Phelps, Charles E.           Price and Income Elas—

              ticities    for. Medical Care Services.          In Penman, 1974.


24. O'Hara,    Donald 3.         MicroeconomiC Aspects of the Demographic Transition.

              Journal of political Economy, 83, No. 6 (December 1975).


25. Pauly, Mark V.         The Role of Demand Creation in the Provision of Health

              Care    Services.      Presented at the annual meetings of the American

              Economic    Association     and    the   Health Economics Research Organiza-

              tion, Dallas, Texas, December 1975.

 26. Phelps, Charles E. "Demand            for   Reimbursement Insurance." In Rosett, 1976.

 27. Williams, Anne D. "Fertility and Reproductive Loss." Ph.D. dissertation,

               University of Chicago, 1976.
