                      NBER Working Paper Series




                 TOWARD A MORE GENERAL THEORY OF REGULATION



                                Sam Peltzman*




                          Working Paper No. 133




          CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
                      AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
            National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
         204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                                 April 1976



                       Preliminary; not for quotation.

      NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
      number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
      written permission of the author.

       This report has not undergone the review accorded official
       NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
       for approval by the Board of Directors.

 This study has been supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation
 to the National Bureau of Economic Research for research in law and economics.

*Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago, and NBER.
               TOWARD A MORE GENERAL THEORY OF REGULATION*

                                 by

                             Sam Peltzman
            Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago
               and National Bureau of Economic Research


        George Stigler's work on the theory of regulation is one of those

rare contributions--rare for the rest of us, though not for him-—which

force a fundamental change in the way important problems are analyzed.

Stigler's influence will be clear in this paper.    There is perhaps

no more telling evidence of this influence than that its basic motivation

was my dissatisfaction with some of Stigler's conclusions. (it was a

dissatisfaction that Stigler shared, since I can report that we simul-

taneously reached one of the conclusions elaborated here--that regulatory

agencies will not exclusively serve a single economic interest.) My

intellectual debt to Stigler is so great that this paper emerges as an

extension and generalization of his pioneering work.

        What Stigler accomplished in his Theory of Economic Regulation

was to crystallize a revisionism in the economic analysis of regulation

that he had helped launch in his and Claire Friedland's work on electric

utilities.1 The revisionism had its genesis in a growing disenchantment




        *This study has been supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research for research in law
and economics. The paper is not an official Bureau publication since it has
not yet undergone the full critical re'view accorded Bureau piblicationS,
 including review by the Bureau's Board of Directors. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.


        1G. J. Stigler, The Theory of Economic Regulation, 2 Bell J.
of Econ. and Mgt. Science 3 (1971) and G. J. Stigler and C. Friedland,
What Can Regulators Regulate? The Case of Electricity, 5 J. of Law and
Econ. 1 (1962).
                                   2


with the usefulness of the traditional role of regulation in economic analy-

sis as a deus ex machina which eliminated one or another unfortunate alloca-

tive consequence of market failure. The creeping recognition that regulation

seemed seldom to actually work this way, and that it may have even engendered

more resource misallocation than it cured, forced attention to the influence

which the regulatory powers of the state could have on the distribution of

wealth as well as on allocative efficiency. Since the political process

does not usually provide the dichotomous treatment of resource allocation

and wealth diribution so beloved by welfare economists, it as an easy

step to seek explanation for the failure of the traditional analysis to

predict the allocative effects of regulation in the dominance of political

pressure for redistribution on the regulatory process. This focus on

regulation as a powerful engine for redistribution shows clearly in such

works as Jordan's Producer Protection and PosnerTs Taxation by Regulation.2

The common role of regulation in this literature is as a fulcrum upon

which contending interests seek to exercise leverage in their pursuit of

wealth. A coon, though not universal,3 conclusiop has become that, as

between the two main countending interests in regulatory processes, the pro-

ducer interesb tends to prevnil over the consumer interest.

        In one sense, Stigler's work provides a theoretical foundation for

this "producer protection" view. However, its scope is much more general.

It is ultimately a theory of the optimum size of effective political



        2
         W. A. Jordan, Producer Protection, Prior Market Structure and the
Effects of Government Regulation, 15 J. Law and Econ. 151 (1972) and
R. A. Posner, Taxation by Regulation, 2 Bell J. of Econ. and Mgi. Science
22 (1971).


        Posner, op. cit., is an important exception.
                                    3


coalitions   set within the framework of a general model of the political

process. Stigler seems to have realized that the earlier "consu.mer pro-

tection" model comes perilously close to treating regulation as a free

good. In that model the existence of market failure is sufficient to

generate a demand for regulation, though there is no mention of the

mechanism that makes that demand effective. Then, in a crude reversal

of Say's Iw, the demand is supplied costlessly by the political process.

Since the good, regulation, is not in fact free and demand for it is not automa-

tically synthesized, Stigler sees the task of a positive economics of

regulation as specifying the arguments underlying the supply and demand

for regulation.

        The way he does this abstracts almost completely from pure alloca-

tion questions. The essential commodity being transacted in the political

market is a transfer of wealth, with constituents on the demand side and

their politicalreprsentatives on the supply side. Viewed in this way,

the market here, as elsewhere, will distribute more of the good to those

whose effective demand is highest. For Stigler, the question of which

group will lave the highest effective demand translates very quickly

into a question of numbers. In this view, "producer protection" rep-

resents the dominance of a small group with a large per capita stake

over the large group (consumers) with more diffused interests. The

central question for the theory then becotries to explain this regularity

of small group dominance in the regulatory process (and indeed the politi-

cal process generally). The way the question is posed already foreshadows

one of the results of the theory. For in Stigler's model, unlike most

market models, there are many bidders, but only one is successful. There

is essentially a political auction in which the high bidder receives the
                                       J4




right   to tax   the wealth of everyone else, and the theory seeks to discover

why the successful bidder is a numerically compact group. The answer lies

essentially in the relationship of group size to the costs of using the

political process.

          To summarize the argument briefly, the size of the dominant group

is limited in the first instance by the absence of something like ordinary-

market-ol1ar voting in politics. Voting is infrequent and concerned with

a package of issues. In the case of a particular issue, the voter must

spend resources to inform himself about its implications for his wealth

ani   which politician is likely to stand on which side of the issue. That
information cost will have to offset prospective gains, and a voter with

a small per capita stake will not, therefore, incur it. In consequence the

numerically large, diffuse interest group is unlikely to be an effective

bidder, and a policy inimical to the interest of a numerical majority

will not be automatically rejected. A second major limit on effective

group size arises from costs of organization. It is not enough for the

successful group to recognize its interests; it must organize to translate

this interest into support for the politician who will implement it.

This mns not only mobilizing its own vote, but contributing resources

to the support of the appropriate political party or policy: to finance

campaigns, to persuade other voters to support or at least not oppose

the policy or candidate, perhaps occasionally to bribe those in office.

While there may be some economies of scale in this organization of

support and neutralization d opposition, these must be limited. The

larger the group that seeks the transfer, the narrower the base of the

opposition and the greater are the per capita stakes that determine the

strength of opposition, so lobbying and campaigning costs will rise faster
                                   5



than group size. The cost of overcoming "free riders" will also rise

faster than group size. This diseconomy of scale in providing resources

then acts as another limit to the size of the group that will ultimately

dominate the political process.

        In suis, Stigler is asserting a law of diminishing returns to

group size in politics: Beyond some point it becomes counterproductive

to dilute the per capita transfer. Since the total transfer is endogenous,

there is a corollary thatdirninishing returns apply to the transfer as well,

due both to the opposition provoked by the transfer and to the demand this

opposition exerts on resources to quiet it.

        Stigler does not himself rormalize this model, and my first task

will be to do just this. My simplified formal version of his model pro-

duces a result to which Stigler gave only passing recognition, namely

that the costs of using the political process limit not only the size of

the dominant group but also their gains. This is at one level, a detail,

which is the way Stigler treated it, but a detail with some important

implications--for entry into regulation, and for the price-output structure

that emerges from regulation. The main task of the paper is to derive

these implications from a generalization of Stigler's model.


A Stiglerian Model of Regulation

        I begin with the presumption that what is basically at stake in

regulatory processes is a transfer of wealth. The transfer, as Stigler

points out, will rarely be in cash, but rather in the form of a regulated

pricej entry restricticn, etc. I shall ignore that detail here, and the

resulting model applies to any political wealth redistribution. A parti-

cularizationto price and entry regulation comes later. I treat the relevant
                                      6


political process as if control of the relevant taxing power rests on direct

voting, though this too is meant only for simplification. Though appoint-

ment of a regulatory body may lie effectively with a legislature, a com-

mittee thereof, or an executive, the electorate's receptivity to these

intermediaries ought to be affected by the performance of their appointees.

With Stigler, I assume that beneficiaries pay with both votes and dollars.

However, again as a simplifiation, I assume that the productivity of the

dollars to a politician lies in mitigation of opposition. A more general

model might make "dollars" (broadly defined to include, for example, em-

ployment of former regulators) a source of direct as well as indirect

utility to the regulator.     In this model, though, direct political support--

"votes"--is the object sought directly by the regulator.             More particularly

he seeks to maximize net votes or a majority in his favor. There is no

presumption that the marginal utility of a majority vanishes at one.

Greater majorities are assumed to imply greater security of tenure, more

logrolling possibilities, greater deference from legislative budget com-

mittees, etc. The crucial decision that the regulator (or would-be regu-

lator) must make in this model is the numerical size of the group he (pro-

mises) favors, and thus implicitly the size of the group he taxes. At

this stage,I retain Stigler1s presumption that the agency confers benefits

on a single victorious group, and the essential purpose of the model is

to elaborate the limits on this group's size.

        To put this formally, the regulator wants to maximize a majority

M, generated by



(1)                         M = n   1' -   (N   -
                                                    n)   .   h   ,

                                                                                         .
                                         7

where

        n = number of potential voters in the beneficiary group

        C =   (net)   probability that a beneficiary will grant support
        N     total number of potential voters

        h =   (net)   probability that he who is taxed (every non-n) opposes.

        Note that, because both gainers and losers face transaction and

infon'riation costs, f and h are not either zero or unity, but depend

on the amount   of    the group memberts gain or loss. There are similar costs

facing the regulator, so he cannot exclude nonsupporting beneficiaries.

At this stage, I assume that gains and losses are equal per capita within

groups. This nondiscrimination assumption serves both to simplify the

problem and to force Stigler's result of a single politically dominant

economic interest, but the assumption is subseently dropped. I ajso

assume that ignorance does not lead to perverse or biased voting. If a

beneficiary, for example, does not know enough to vote for his benefactor,

his voting decision is not biased for or against the benefactor. Either he

does not vote, or he decides how to vote by tossing a fair coin. In either

case, the f in (1) will be zero, and M will be the (same) difference

between votes for and votes against. With nonparticipation by the ignorant

f (or h) is simply       the   probability that a beneficiary (or loser) votes,

while with random voting by the ignorant f is the difference between the

probability of a favorable and unfavorable vote by the beneficiary.

        The probability of support may now be specified as



(2)                                  ff(g)
                                              8



where,    g is the per capita net benefit, and is



                                        T -_K- C(n)
()                                  g =



with

         T =    total   dollar amount transferred to the beneficiary group

         K =    dollars spent by beneficiaries in campaign funds, lobbying,
                etc., to mitigate opposition

       C(n) =   cost of organizing both direct support of beneficiaries and
                efforts to mitigate opposition. This organization cost in-
                creases with n, but we place no restrictions on the shape
                of the rnarnal cost curve.

it is assumed that (2) holds for any subset of the electorate, in the sense

that any coalition of size n faces the same costs of organization and

has members with the same responsiveness to benefits. Thus, the number

of votes in support depends on n in two offsetting ways: a larger n

provides a brder base for support, but dilutes the net gain per member

and so the probability of a member's support.

          As a further simplification I assume that the regulator chooses

K as well as T. The process could be modeled with the benefitted group

itself determining the appropriate K, but in doing so it would be moti-

vated by the same forces affecting a regulator who would ask K as a price

for conferring the benefit. Thus, Itreat it as a detail whether the
beneficiaries "bid" a K and "ask" a T, or whether the regulator asks
a K and bids a T.
          The transfer is assumed generated by a tax at the ra t on the
wealth (B) of each member            outside the benefitted group, so




(5)                       T =   t   . B(N   - n)   ,   or   t = B(N
                                                                      n)
                                                 9


    For application to problems of regulation, B can be thought of as a

    typical consumer's surplus and t a regulated price if producers are

    beneficiaries, or B might be a producer's surplus and t the difference

    between the surplus maximizing price and the regulated price where consumers

    are beneficiaries. At this level of generality, though, I simply treat B

    as a negative function of              Opposition is assumed generated by the tax rate

    and mitigated by voter education expenditures per capita (z), so


    (6)                                h =     h(t,      z)




    (7)                                z=K/(N-n)


    In keeping with Stigler's model, I assume that, in the relevant range,

    benefits are subject to   decreasing        returns so that

p
    (8)                           tg
                                       >   o         f        < 0



    (unless specified otheise subscripts wilt denote                partial, or where appropriate,
    otalderivativesfromhereon) Acomplemeitaryassumptjon is made for z:



    (9)                           hz <0, hzz >0

    (opposition is measured in positive units), and there are assumed to be

    increasing political costs to taxation:




                   treatment is   less
                                    innocent than it appears. It implicibty rules.
    ut a "pure"   transfer--i.e.,one with no allocative effects. There may be forms
    of wealth whose supply is totally inelastic with respect to taxes, but, as a
    general matter, these cannot be preswned to suffice the demands of the political
    process--or even yield costless taxes, once tax administration and evasion costs
    are allowed for. The general proposition that every tax affects the wealth base
    being taxed has important implications for the evaluation of the whole range of
    government redistributive policies. See Gary Becker's comments on this article.
                                                     10




                                                                                                        .
(9a)                               ht>0          ,
                                                      htt>0

        In this characterization of the political process, then, office

holders or candidates to replace them must pick the size (n) of the

group they will benefit, the amount (K) they will ask that group to

spend for mitigating opposition and the amount (T) they will transfer

to the beneficiary group. The necessary conditions for these choices

to yield the naximu majority, the presumed goal for the office seeker,

are



(io)               M    = 0 =    -(g   +   m)f       +    f   -
                                                                   ht (B +tBt -         h   .   z + h



                                                                                                        S
(11)                        MT = 0 =             -
                                                      ht
                                           fg                 (B   +tBt       )




(12)
                                 MK=O=_fg_hz

where

        m =   C,       the marginal cost of group organization.

Combining (l0)-(l2) and miking use of the definitions yields the following

solution for n



(13)                         =
                                             +h           g( -      m)    •

                                                                                  fg1

where

        a = average cost of            organization                (C/n).
                                          11



Thus, if there are constant or increasing organization costs (a - m < 0),

the bracketed term is less than one. We are unprepared yet to say much

more than that political wealth maximizationdistributes benefits to a frac-

tion of the electorate, and since we have ruled out net gains to regula-

tion, no other result would make sense.

            Before some forces affecting the size of this ratio are elaborated.

it is worth dwelling on (ii) for a moment. This condition--essentially

that the marginal political return from a transfer must eqia1 the marginal

political cost of the associated tax--has an important subsidiary implica-

tion. Since both fg and ht are positive, an interior maximum can occur

                                      is also positive. This term is the marginal
only if the term (B +          tBt)
product of t in raising revenue from a member of the losing group.            That


it must be positive implies that these losers must be taxed less than the

interests of the winners would dictate (a revenue maximizing tax--i.e.,

B +
      tBt   =   0).
            This result is portrayed in Figure 1. The function R(t) is

(ht/fg) With diminishing returns in g and increasing costs in t,

      is positive and increasing in the relevant range. The marginal revenue

                             is decreasing in t, and the revenue maximizing tax is
from t, (B +          tB),
t     where this marginal revenue is zero. However, with R(t) positive at

       t > 0 t          cannot be a political equilibrium. The equilibrium, from

(ii), must occur at something like ta <tm

            Thus we have an important first principle of regulation: even 1±

a single economic interest gets all the benefits of regulation, these must

be less than a perfect broker for the group would obtain. The best or-

ganized cartel will yield less to the membership if the government organizes

it than if it were (could be) organized privately. This principle is inde-

pendent of organization or campaigning costs, but rests on the heed the
                                  12



political process must pay to marginal oppositi. (Condition (11) holds

even if K and C are assumed zero.) It suggests that what the 'capture"

literature treats as an ad hoc detail--that "the political process automa-

tically admits powerful outsiders to the industry's councils" 5--is in fact

integral to regulatory processes. The principle also suggests that failure

of regulation to maximize cartel profits need not, as Posner has suggested,

arise as an efficient substitute for other forms of taxation Even if

more efficient substitutes exist and are used, a rational regulator will

still tax cartel profits to secure his own position.

         This logic may be pushed a step further. It will pay the rational

regulator to exploitdifferences within the group that, taken as a whole,

either wins or loses. The ability to do this may be constrained by "due

process" considerations, but not typically to the point that a uniform tax

must be levied or gain transferred to each member of a group. Therefore,

the regulator's choice problem is not limited to selecting the appropriate

size of an interest group to benefit or tax; it includes selection of an

appropriate structure of benefits and costs. Once we drop the simplifica-

tion of uniform taxes (prices), the identification of regulation with any

 single economic interest can no longer be maintained as a general proposi-

 tion.

         To see this, consider the following restricted problems The regu-

 lator has decided on the total wealth that must be transferred to one




         5tigler, supra n. 1 at 7.


         Posner,   supra, n. 2.
                   13




    Dollars
     or H


              B

                             R(t)




I



                                B + tBt
                  ta                      tax rate


                  Figure 1
I
                                              11i.




economic interest (say producers) fron another, so that both T and n

are data. However, he desires minimization of opposition (0) from con-

sumers by exploiting differences among them in per capita wealth or the

responsiveness of wealth to taxes (i.e., differences in the height and

elasticity of their demands) or in their voting sensitivity to taxes.

Assume that the (N - n)      consumers can be separated into 2 groups of

size P1 and P2 respectively so that the last term in (1) may be written



(i1i)                            0 =
                                       P1h1
                                                     +
                                                         P2h2
                                                                  .       (Subscripts   denote groups here.)



To simplify still further, treat z as fixed and equal for both groups.

Minimization of (itt) then involves forming the Lagrangian


(15)            L =
                      P1h1
                             +
                                 P2h2
                                          +   (T         -
                                                             t1B1P1
                                                                      -
                                                                          t2B2P2)   ,




where the term in parentheses is the constraint that the sum of' sub group

taxes is fixed, and setting the first partials with respect to t1, t2

and 7. equal to zero. The resulting expression for the opposition mini-

mizing t1 is (primes denote derivatives)


                                          TB'                h'


                                 =
(16)
                                     : :h)B,lpll
                                     1k                      2 P2B2


The denominator is negative, but only the last two terms in the numerator

are negative. This means that a netive t1 cannot be ruled out. Thus

if one group of consumers has sufficiently large per capita demand (B2),

sufficiently low demand elasticity (Bk) and tax responsiveness (h)

relative to the other group, the latter may become part of the winning
                                     15



group (get a subsidized price). On a similar argurnent, some producers

may be taxed even if most are benefitted. The regulator!s constituency

thus cannot in general be limited to one economic interest.

        The structure of (16) shows that t1 is affected not only by some

obvious characteristics of that group (its wealth and voting response to

t1) but also by characteristics of the other group. I shall return to this

subsequently, for (16) hints at some important implications for the structure

of prices emerging fromigulation--e.g., that this will be the resultant

of forces pushing both for and against profit-maximizing price discrimination.

        I want now   to   return to (1O)-(13) and discuss some forces affect-

ing the size of the winning group. The Stigler model leads, after all, to

more than the near truism that n/N is less than one; it more nearly

asserts that the ratio is close to zero. So let us examine the effect of

three variables whose importance the Stigler model asserts--support, opposi-

tion and organization costs.

        In general, if x represents a variable affecting choice of n

(and T and K), we want to determine the vector of total derivatives:

[dn/dx, dT/dx, dK/x]. This can be found by solving



(17)                         [M][di/dx] =   -[   ]




where

        [Mj] = matrix of cross partial derivatives, i, j = n, T, K

        [Ma] = vector of the cross-partials of          w.r.t. x.

I now treat three simple cases:

        1. A parametric shift in the support function, f, (which leaves

f' ui&ffected). From (lO)-(12) we obtain
                                         16



                                                                               .
                                                      1

                                     M        =
(18)

                                     MKf

and from (ii) and the second order condition for a maximum M (that    [M1]
be negative definite), we obtain the following sign conditions




(19)                        sign dn/df =          sign    C
where

            =   cofactor   of

Since      > 0 by a.second-order condition for a maximum, dn/df > 0--

i.e., anincreasein the probability of support for a given g increases

the size of the winning group. Or, as Stigler iight wish to put it, the dif-

ficulty of translating the transfer into votes leads the regulator to con-

centrate benefits. For the other variables we have



 (20)                           sign dT/df =      sign    CflT




and



 (21.)                          sign dK/df =      sign    C
which are uncertain and negative resctive1y. The underlying reasons

 may be seen by writing out the co-factors



                                               - MT
                                                                               S
 (22)                 CnT =                                 M1]
                                              17



p
    (23)                    CK =           MTK -
                                   {MTfl           MK   MTT]



    MTK > 0, because an increase in K reduces opposition and makes          an   increase
    in T more attractive. M
                                   nK < 0, because an increase in K also dilutes
    the net in, and makes concentration of the transfer on a smaller group

    more attractive. MTT, M are both negative, becise of diminishing

    returns. This leaves MT, whose sign is ambiguous: an inrease in n

    dilutes the gain to the winners, which would induce an increase in T.

    But the increae in n also concentrates the opposition, and this pushes

    for a reduction in T. The only restriction that can be imposed (from the

    second-order conditions) is (MT +         M)    < 0, which is enough to imply

    C < 0 and dK/df < 0, but is insufficient to predict the sign of CnT
     nK
    If buying   off   a more concentrated opposition is sufficiently important to

    render Tn < o         then   dT/df < 0.

            2. A parametric shift in the opposition function, h. This yields

    precisely the same result as a shift in support (the vector of the relevant

    cross-partials is the same as t1 right-hand side of (19)), and this sym-

    metry between the effects of support and opposition is perhaps one of the

    chief insights of Stiglerts model. If a more effective political support

    technology (a rise in f) induces a more numerous winning group, a more

    effective opposition technology must lead the regulator to permit a larger

    group to escape taxation as well. Some losers will then be made winners

    when there is a rise in opposition. This is bett.er stated in the reverse.

    The difficulty of translating a tax into political opposition (a low h)

    induces the regulator to tax the many and thus to concentrate his favor on

    a few. Hence the filtering of information through the noise of a political
                                         18



process that forces consideration of many programs simultaneously acts

unambiguously, as Stigler intuited, to restrict the size of the

winning group. This filtering must be done by both winners and losers,

and this makes it simultaneously unattractive to spread the benefits

and attractive to spread the losses over large numbers.

           3. A parametric shift in the cost of organizing a group for

political support. Stigler argues that the cost of organizing support

(e.g., the cost of overcoming the "free rider" problem) also restricts n.

However, on closer inspection, this is not obvious. Consider a rise in the

C(n) of (3) which, for simplicity, leaves marginal cost unchanged. Then,

focusing only   on     dn/dC,   we obtain



(2U)            sign   dn/.C    sign(MC +              +
                                              MTCCTO       MKCCflK)



This will be ambiguous for reasons apart from ambiguity               aboit   CT. Stigler's
argument focuses essentially on M, which is indeed negative and induces

a smaller n. However, because of diminishing returns to per capita gains,

a rise in C will lead to an offsetting decrease in K (MKC                     < 0). On
balance,   this fall in K requires a rise in n (CflK < 0). That is, if

K is reduced, restoring optimum effectiveness of lobbying and education

efforts requires concentration of these efforts on a smaller group of

losers. To obtain Stigler's result, one iust conjecture thatthis sort

of secondary effect is outweighed by the initial impulse to concentrate

gains to offset the effect of increased organization costs.

           It is well to summarize the results of this formalization of Stigler's

model:

           1. With a few ambiguities, the thrust of         imrfect       information

abit both the gains and losses of regulatory decisions and costs of
                                    19



organizing for political favors is to restrict the size of the winning

group.

         2. But this winning group will not obtainen a gross gain thraigh

political action as great as is within the power of the political process

to grant it.

         3. Moreover, even if groups organize according to an economic in-

terest (producers v. consumers), political entrepreneurship will produce a

coalition which admits members of the losing group into the charmed circle.

         I now apply these principles specifically to price-entry regulation,

and derive implications for the price-profits outccirie and the demand for

new regulation.


The Politics of Price-Entry Regulation

         A generalization of the Stiglerian model of political transfers

just discussed would be to write the politician's objective function as:



(25)                            =
                                    M(W1, w2)



where W. = wealth of group i, and where M > 0, but where we assume

no intergroup dependencies, so that M =         0.   This is then maximized

subject to a constraint on total wealth (V):



(26)                     V =    + w2 = v(w1, w2)



where V. > 0, but where V < 0. That is, the total wealth to be dis-

tributed is limited: rarket failures aside, one group's wealth can be in-

creased only by decreasing the other's. Let us now suppose that the two

groups vying to achieve benefits or mitigate losses from the political
                                              20


process are consumers and producers, and that the process is constrained

to provide these gains and costs through the setting of a mimum or

minimum price together with control of entry. In this case, we can

specialize the majority generating function (25) as



(21)                                      =   i (p,   it)



where

             p =   price   of the good

               =   wealth   of producers,          < 0 and              > 0.

The implicit assumption here is that the powers of the state are sufficient

 to, on the one hand, enforce competition, so that any ir > 0 translates into

political support, and on the other, to ban sale of the good or price it

 out of existence, so that any consumer surplus provides some votes or

 stills some opposition. A somewhat more elegant, though not necessarily

more insightful formulation would define (27) with respect to an anarchistic

 reference point. I retain the Stiglerian assumption that the political

 returns to higher             or lower p are diminishing (M < 0, M <


        7M < 0 is not, of course, strictly implied by diminishing returns,
          pp
and we shall see later that so strict a condition is unnecessary. 1±' we have
                                                      surplus, rather than
the simple function M = M(s), where S = consumer's

p, and S =J'Q(p)dp, where Q(p) is the demand curve, and Q(p')                                  0,

 then diminishing political returns requires M55 < 0. However, this is re-
 lated to M    by
            pp
                                Mpp =MS         pp
                                                      +S2M
                                                        p  SS

where

                            S = -Q < 0 and S                =
                                                                -Q >   0   .




Thus           may be positive even if                  < 0, but               < 0 is sufficient for
       <0.
                                             21



I will also assume no intergroup political effects
                                                                      (such as envy or vin-

dictiveness), so           =   0.   The relevant constraint here is given by cost

and demand conditions, summarized by the profit function



(28)                                     =   f(p,   c)


where c =c(Q) = production costs as a function of quantity (Q),                          and

where over the range we shall be interested in, f > 0 and f                            < 0,
                                                                    p—            pp
and, of course,      < 0. The formal problem for a successful regulator

then is to maximize (I assume sufficient competition for the regulator1s

office) the Lagrangian



(29)                           L = M(p, ir) +       rr   -
                                                             f(p,   c))



with respect to p,   'iT    and     .,   which yields



(30)                                 -=M=-
This says that the marginal political product of a dollar of profits

(Mr) must equal the marginal political product of a price cut (_M)

that also costs a dollar of profits (f is the dollar profit loss per

dollar price reduction). This result requires f > 0 (since

   > 0); which is merely a concrete application of the result in (11).

That is poll tical equilibrium will not result in the monopoly or cartel-

profit maximizing price (f =             0).      The solution is shown graphically

in Figure 2, where (27) is represented as a series of iso-majority curves

(M.M.) obeying the assumed signs for first and second derivatives. Poli-

tical equilibrium occurs at tangency (A) between the profithilland an iso—
                                    22




majority curve. On this formulation, pure "producer protection" can be

rational only in the absence of any marginal consumer opposition to higher

prices (MM. are all horizontal) and pure "consumer protectiont' requires

no marginal support for higher profits.

        This analysis says nothing about whether A in Figure 2 is anything

more than trivially different from either top or bottom of the profit-hill.

To make the analysis meaningful, we must either derive the appropriate

political power function (the shape of the M.M.) or focus on the effects

of changes in the underlying economic constraints. In the remainder of the

paper I take the latter tack.   That is, I set aside the question of who

gets what share of the spoils to focus on the implications of the result

that the spoils will in fact be shared. For example, note one implication

of (30) for entry in regulation. Either natiraIly monopolistic or naturally

competitive industries are more politically attractive to regulate than

an oligopolistic hybrid. The inducement to regulate is the change in the

level of M.M occasioned thereby. For an oligopoly with a price already

intermediate between the competitive and monopoly price, the political

gain from moving to A will be smaller in general than if the pre-

regulation price is either at the top or bottom of the profit hill.

This may help explain such phenomena as the concurrence of regulation

of ostensible "natural monopolies" like railroads, utilities and telephones

with that of seemingly competitive industries like trucking, airlines,

taxicabs, barbers and agriculture. It may also rationalize the twin focus

of antitrust on reducing concentration and protecting small businessmen,

and the delay until comparatively recent times in applying the Sherman Act

to less than the most concentrated industries. However, the model does not

explain the dilatoriness of the government in regulating a gamut of

unconcentrated retail and manufacturing markets.
                           23




       71
    (Profits




p                          M3




               A




                                  71 =. f(p, c)




               P                              Price
                   0



                       Figure 2
                                      21.




          There is also implicit here a connection between regulation and

productivity   and growth. Reduction in costs or growth in demand will

increase the total surplus (the height of the profit-hill in figure 2) over

which a regulator might have control, and, pan passu, the political payoff

for its redistribution.8 I have seen this point made before only in connec-

tion with welfare programs,9 and it deserves a systematic test. However,

the association of new regulation with industries where demand and/or produc-

tivity is growing rapidly is frequent enough to be suggestive (electricity

and telephones in the early 20th century, trucking and airlines in the 1930's

and 191i.O's, natural gas in the 1950's, automobiles and drugs in the 1960's).



          Some interesting implications for the pattern of regulatory choice

can be derived from a more formal treatment of the interaction between

productivity and growth and rational political choice. Consider a market           I
already   subject to regulation and in a political equilibrium such as A

in Figure 2. Then consider the effects on this equilibrium of a parametric

shift, dx, in either the cost or demand function. To obtain the effect

of the shift on the p.     T[   configuration generated by regulation, we must




              is easiest to see for a constant cost competitive industry where
demand increases. In that case, the no-regulation majority is unaffected by
the increased demand (p and r are the same) but the gain to regulating the
industry and moving to a majority maximizing (p,i-r) is increased. I demonstrate
below that a similar result obtains for more complicated cases.

        9See W. Allen Walls' discussion in James Tobin and W. Allen Wallis,
Welfare Programs: An Economic Appraisal at 514. (1968).
                                             25



solve


                                    dp/dx

(31)
                           [L] d'ir/dc
                                                   =   - [Lu]

                                    dVdx


where   i, j    denotes p, r or .             In    the case of a (marginal) cost

shift, we obtain



(32)
                                  —(M
                                    pp
                                         -
                                                  pp
                                                       )-f2M
                                                           pirr

The denominator is positive by a necessary condition for a maximum, s the

sign of (32) depends on that of the numerator, which is positive° This

is hardly surprising, since a rise in marginal cost leads to the same re-

suit without regulation. However, the insight provided by (32) is that

the price increase has distinct "political" and "economic" components.

The first term in the numerator (-7.f) is essentially a "substitution

effect" akinto that facing an unregulated firm. A rise in marginal cost

makes a higher price profitable. The second term is a "political wealth"

effect: the surplus to be disposed of has shrunk, and this forces the

regulator to reduce his purchases of political support. However, the

usual marginal conditions fai1iar from consumer theory are applicable

here. The regulator will, in general, not force the entire adjustment




                < 0, from (30);
           '.
                                         -c <          0; f > 0, since profits are
below a maximum; M < 0 by assumption; and


                                  fpx =-Qc
                                        pQx
                                            >0
                                    26


 onto one group. In particular, consumers will be called on to buffer

 some of the producer losses. To see this more clearly, abstact from the

 substitution effect by assuming a change in fi.xed cost only, so         =   0.
 Then the profit hill in Figure 2 shifts down by a constant to

 leaving the profit-maximizing price unchanged, but increasing the

 political-equilibrium price and buffering the fall in   profits   that would

 otherwise occur.   Of' course, as is the case in consumer choice, one
                                                                      II
 cannot rule out "inferiority" of price decreases or profit increases.

 But the "normal" purely political component of the response to cost changes

 involves consumers shielding producers from some of the effects of cost

 increases and producers sharing some of their gains from cost reductions.




          '1Such inferiority is in fact essentially ruled out here by the absence of

 intergroup dependencies. This plays the same role here as utility indepen-

dence does in ruling out inferior goods in consumer choice theory. The

closest analogy to the conventional consumer choice problem would be where

the regulator-always sets a marginal price equal to (a constant) marginal

cost and then merely allocates the resulting surplus among producers and

consumers by fashioning a suitable two-part or declining-marginal price

scheme. In this case, the surplus is the regulator's "income" which can         be
used to purchase the "goods" producer or consumer support at a price of $1.
If the utility (votes) of the two goods is independent, declining marg±nal

utility will   assure that both are normal.

          This analogue helps illuminate the attraction of regulation to

markets with growing productivity and demand. The increased surplus, which

is the regulator's income, generates a larger utility (vote) gain from moving

from either corner (monopoly or competition) to the vote maximum,     again   o
long as there are diminishing political returns to both producer and consumer

wealth.
                                                        27

              The case of a shift in demand is more complex, because the demand

    function enters indirectly into the M function: M depends on the

    relationship between price and consumer surplus, which depends on the

    height of demand. Formally, a change in demand, dy, yields



                                  —  —f
                                     py +M                    +fy              fF.i
                                                                                   prir
    /\33)'
                                  dy
                                     —
                                          -(Mpp     -   f
                                                        py

                                                            pp
                                                                 )
                                                                     - f2      71'Tr




    Again,   the first term of the tiumerator is a profit-maximizing "su.bstitu-

    tion" effect which is positive2 and the last term a political wealth

    effect which is, in this case negative (fy > 0). The middle term rep-

    resents the effect of the demand shift on political "tastestt--i.e., on

    the slope of the M.M. in Figure 2, but this effect is ambiguous.3 For

    example, if a rise in consumer income raises the payoff to price reduc-

    tions,             < 0,    and the political-wealth effect is reinforced. Ignoring.

    this taste change, the results are symmetric with those of a cost change.
                                                                            lLi
    Consider      a rise in demand such that f                       =    0.           The political wealth effect
                                                              py


             1gnoring, as usual, any offsetting changes in the slope of demand.
             13
                  In   particular
                                     M
                                               Ms
                                                        S=           -QMs

    where S        again denotes the underlying                  consumer surp]ns. So
                                     Ii
                                         py
                                              =-QMSSy
                                                   S -MQ
                                                      Sy
    Since M5, Q               and S > 0, while                       < 0, the sign of M is ambiguous.

             .1
             This requires an appropriate change in the slope of the demand
    curve, since

                                           =   (p   -            .             +
I                                    fpy                CQ)          Qpy

    So some Qpy < 0 is required for                              =   0.
                                     28


will nevertheless induce a price reduction because the airninishing politi-

cal returns to both profit increases and price decreases make a combination

of the two the best strategy for political "spending" of more wealth.

        What emerges from this discussion is more a working hypothesis than

an a priori conclusion about the nature of price and profit adjustment

under regulation. If the political wealth effect is empirically important, it

will be manifested in attenuation of price changes when demand changes, and

their amplification when costs change; vice versa for profit changes. in

the case of the latter, the wealth-effect components of the counterparts

to (32) and (33) may be written


                                           f

                                     2/          rTr
                                 1pIM\PP         -?.fPP


(c:;\                        —   ________________
                                      I
                        dy
                                 l+f2i I

                                    p1vj
                                                  n'Tr

                                                 _'.f pp
                                       \pp

These are both smaller absolutely than what would obtain under pure pro-

ducer protection (which yields simply f or fy)• We can then sunmarize

the interaction between cost and demand changes and regulatory utility

maximization as follows: Define variables nt and pt as the difference

between regulated and profit maximizing profits and prices respectively.

The purely political effects of changes in underlying economic conditions

are then for dpt/dx and dTr'/dx     > 0;       dp'/dy and dir'/dy < 0. Among the

empirical implications of these forces would be:

        1. Regulation will tend to be more heavily weighted toward "pro-

ducer protection" in depressions and toward ttconsumer protection" in
                                         29


)   expansions.    Thus, for example, it is not useful to view events like the

    Robinson-Patman Act and the NRA as "inconsistent" with the intent of anti-

    trust legislation; this intent is endogenous. Similar arguments apply to

    the structure of taxes (the corporate-personal tax mix should offset changes

    in the share of GNP earned by capital), tariffs (more free trade when de—

    mand grows or costs fall), etc.

             2. Government intervention and regulation are both normal goods.

    Though this generalization has exceptions, the difference between the no-

    regulation iso-majority curve and the regulatory equilibrium (i.e., the

    incentive to regulate) grows with the level of demand. As a further

    generalization, the income elasticity of producer protection ought to be

    less than that of consumer protection. This follcs fran the negative

    wealth effect of demand growth on equilibrium price, which makes for an

    increased consumer share of the total surplus as demand (income) increases.

              3.   The tendency of regulation to change prices infrequently, some-
    times   called "regulatory lag" ought to be stronger when demand changes than
    when costs change. This follows from the opposing wealth and substitution

    effects in the case of a shift in demand (but not in the case of a cost

    change). Here failure to change a price can be interpreted to mean that

    the opposing effects offset one another.

              1. Some reexamination of studies, such as Stigler and Friedland's,

    which show regulation to be ineffective is called for. In the first place

    the result ought to be sensitive to the dynamics of supply and demand. In

    a growing, technologically progressive industry, producer protection ought

    to yield to consumer protection over time, even if, on average, there is

    no effect. (stigler and Friedland's data do show some secular trend toward
                                  30


lower prices)5 Secondly, deviations about the zero mean effect should be

systematic: high cost, low demand markets will have prices elevated by

regulation and low cost high demand markets will have prices reduced.

Finally, as a generalization of (2), entry of regulation is not exogenous.

It should occur first in the low cost high demand markets. This last point

indicates some of the complexity engendered by the interaction of the static

and dynamic aspects of the model: whether entry of' regulation into any

market raises or lowers prices depends on whether the market was initially

competitive or monopolistic. Once that initial adjustment has been made,

subsequent cost and demand chnges will govern any redistribution from the

initial position.

        5. If regulationisevaluatedagainsta zero-profit (fair rate of

return) benchmark, we might be tempted to conclude that positive profits

imply a "captured" regulator and thereby expect a positive correlation

between prices ar1 profitability. In fact the observed correlation ought

to be negative. Whatever its source-—increased demand or lower costs--an

increase in the profithill of Figure 2 generates a political incentive to

move toward a combination involving higher profits and lower prices.

Thus, quite apart from any private profit maximizing incentives toward

this configuration, the most profitable regulated firms ought to have

the lowest prices. More precisely, the gap between the profitmaximizing

and regulated price will be positively correlated with the gap between

the former and the "fair-rate—of-return" price.



       15
         Stigler and Friedland, What Can Regulators Regulate?, p., 7. Their
estimate is that regulation had no effect on electricity rates in 1912,
and lowered prices by about 10 percent in 1937.
                                               31


        6. The model also yields predictions on the bias of regulation.

Briefly, elastic demand and economies of scale create a bias favorable

to consumers. The reason is that these sorts of demand and cost condi-

tions enhance the consumer surplus gained while mitigating the producer

surplus lost due to a price reduction. To see this formally, first intro-

duce a parameter, w, into the slope of the demand curve at equilibrium,

so that a positive dw implies a less elastic demand. By appropriate

reformulation of the right—hand side of (31), we obtain the vector



                    L
                      pw
                                       Mpw -f                      Mpw -fpw
(36)                L                      M
                      Trw                      7fi.J




                    L                      -fw                         0



where we set f = 0          (i.e., sume that the less elastic demand passes

through the initial price quantity combination). Both                      Mpw and
are positive: A less elastic demand reduces the consumer surplus and vote

productivity of a price reduction, while it enhances the profitability
                                                           16
and vote productivity of a price increase.                      The signs of the relevant

total derivatives, then become




                                           =
       l6Again starting from                     -QMs,     we get Mpw =     M.ss     S and
S > 0, so with M
               SS
                  < 0, M > 0. Since
                                      pw


                                f = (p     - C         )(Q + w) + Q
                                 p                 Q     p




and with .. < 0,   -).f        > 0.
                          pw
                                       32


(37)                   sign dP/dw = sign            > 0

                                                                                       .
(38)                sign   d7T/dw =   sign   fj •
                                                    L   > 0



That is, a less elastic demand induces the regulator to "relocate"toward

the northeast on any iso-majority curve in Figure 2.

        For the scale-economies case, introduce a parameter, v, into

marginal cost and assume that a negative dv leaves profits at the old

equUibrium unchanged. That is, if there is a lower maTginal cost in the

neighborhood of equilibrium, it is sufficiently higher            at   lower outputs

to leave total costs unchanged. This sort of characterization of in-

creased scale economies implies the vector



                                                              P

(39)                   L                                          0


                       LX                     V



The term,        is positive.    The diseconomies of smaller outputs when

dv < 0 make a price increase less profitable (and so a price decrease

more attractive politically).     This renders the derivatives, dP/dv and

d7r/dv, both positive, so more scale economies induce a move to the

southwest on any iso-majority curve.

        Pending a systematic test of the empirical relevance of these

propositions, I point out potential pitfalls. The long history of "pro-

producer" regulation of agriculture (price supports, marketing restric-

tions, etc.) seems consistent with the model, given the conventional.
                                                                                       .
                                  33


wisdom about low supply and demand elasticities in this sector. However,

the cartelization of airlirs, trucking, railroads, and taxicabs where

there are either constant or decreaLng costs is obviously troublesome.

A more general problem is how to distinguish the political incentives here

from corresponding profit-maximizing incentives which push in the same

direction, if we want to use the result to predict the behavior of estab-

lished regulators rather than the entry pattern in regulation)7

        7. Finally, I note an implication for the theory of finance.

Regulation should reduce conventional measures of owner risk. By buf-

fering the firm against demand and cost changes, the variability of pro-

fits (and stock prices) should be lower than otherwise. To the extent

that the cost and demand changesare economy-wide, regulation should reduce

systematic as well as diversifiable risk.

        There is no obvious risk pattern among currently regulated firms:

electric, gas and telephone utility stocks rank among the least risky while

airline stocks are among the most risky. However, in one case of new

regulation (of product quality), I found that both total and systematic

risk of drug stocks decreased substantially after regulation)8 A crude

test on railroad and utility stock prices shows the same pattern, though




       17As an example of the kind of entry pattern that can be predicted,
consider a competitive industry with inelastic demand and supply. The
political equilibrium here is closer to the monopoly equilibrium than it
is with elastic demand and supply. Hence such an industry is more likely
to attract regulation thanone withela.stic demand and supply. Similarly
a natural monopoly with elastic demand and supply makes an inviting target
for regulation.

       l8See S. Peltzman, The Benefits and Costs of New Drug Regulation, in
R. Landau,ed., Regulating New Drugs, 1973 at 205-206.
                                      3i.



the effect is weak. I correlated annual (December to December) changes in

the log of the Standard and Poor's or Cowles indexes of railroad and utility

stock price indices9with those of the industrial index (which I treat as a

diversified portfolio of stocks of unregulated firm.) for equal periods

spanning the onset of regulation. I took 1887 as the first year of rail-

road regulation, ard 1907 as the start of utility regulation. (New York

began regulatirg that year.) The indexes of systematic risk (estimated

as the regression coefficient on industrial stock price changes) were,

with standard errors in parentheses,


                                              Before       After
                                            Regulation   Regulation

        Railroads                              .71.         .56
        (1871-86, 1887-1902)                  (.2Ii)       (.17)

        Utilities
        (1871-1906, 1907-)2)                   .67          .60
                                                                                S
                                              (.12)        (.10)


The total risk of these stocks relative to industrials (the ratio of standard

deviations of annual changes) were.


                                              Before        After
                                            Regulation    Regulation

        Rails                                  1.16          .85

        Utilities                               .97


All of the differences go in the right direction, but none are significant.

The main point of this exercise is simply to hint what further research

might be useful.




       tandard and Poor's Corp., Security Price Index record (1971).
                                    35

The Structure of Regulated Prices

        I have argued that the rational regulator will not levy a uniform

tax nor distribute benefits equally. Rather, he will seek a structure of

costs and benefits that maximizes political returns. This search for

political advantage will in turn lead the regulator to suppress some

economic forces that might otherwise affect the price structure. For

example, the cost of serving a group of customers or their elasticity of

demand will have a differert impact under regulation than it will in an

unregulated market because of the absence of political constraints in the

latter case. The substitution of political or economic criteria in the

price Lormulation process has several interesting implications which I shall

elaborate. It is at the heart of the pervasive tendency of regulation to

engage in cross-subsidization--i.e., the dissipation of producr rents on sales

to some customers by setting below cost pricesto others. We shall see that

this cross—subsidization follows a systematic pattern in which high cost

customer groups are subsidized by low cost customers. Further, this pat-

tern of price discrimination emerges from a process in which conventional

profit maximizing price discrimination as well as other economic forces

leading to price differences are attenuated.

        A convenient starting point for this analysis is the problem first

set out in equations (l)+)-(l6), where the regulator seeks a tax structure

to minimize opposition. Here I want to consider the effect on the resulting

tax structure when a change occurs of the type that would ordinarily lead

the gainers to seek a change in only one of the two tax rates. As an

example, suppose per capita wealth rises for one group only. In the

price regulation analogue to this problem, this would lead to a rise in

one group's demand, and a profit maximizing monopolist might then raise
                                          36

that group's price, but not the other group's price. Under regulation,

however, no such specializa±ion of a tax increase will be tolerated, be-

cause this would violate the basic principle that opposition from the two

groups must be equated at the margin.

        This point can be demonstrated formally with the same framework

used previously. Specifically let there be a parameter shift, dx, in

the wealth of group 1 only. Then trace the effects of this shift on t1

and t2. These effects are obtained by solving


                                                                        -1
               dt1/dx                                   L11L12L1

(ho)           dt2/dx
                             =   - [Lu,   L2, L] L21L22L2

                                                        L1L2L

where the subscripts 1, 2 on the r.h.s. refer to t1 and t2. This has

the following relevant solutions


                    dt
(l)          sign        =
                             sign[-L           L -   L             L]

                    dt
                         =                                   . L11
(12)         sign            sign[L                  L2 -                L2]


The sign of (li-i) is ambiguous, since the first term in brackets is positive

while the second is negative. The first term reflects the ability of the

regulator to both maintainrevenues and limit opposition by raising taxes

on the now wealthier group 1 individuals, while the second term is a

political wealth effect which induces lower tax rates. The more iht.eresting

result is that the sign of (L2) is unambiguously negative. This occurs
                                         37

    first   because of the incentive to substitute higher taxes on group 1, which

    creates the ambiguity in (1ii) and which in ()42) requires an offsetting decrease

    in t2 to maintain equilibrium. This incentive to a lower t2 is rein-

    forced by the political wealth effect. The analysis assumes no interde-

    pendencies between the two groupst political responsiveness or wealth

    (i.e., L12 is assumed to be zero). Thus what emerges here is that the

    regulatorts striving for minimum opposition by equating opposition at the

    margin leads him to spread effects of economic forces which are local to

    all groups. This common element in the tax structure is provided by the

    wealth effect which leads the regulator to buy more of both relevant trgoodstt

    (less opposition from group 1 and from group 2).

              This result can be applied to the regulation of prices by suitably

    generalizing   the analysis of a single price summarized in Figure 2.     That
P   is, assume that there are two separable groups of buyers,   so that the
    majority   generating functim (27) is



                                 M =
    (1i3)                              M(p1,   p2, 71)




    with M1,       < 0. The distinction between the two groups is economic

    rather than political, in that I assume only that there are cost and/or

    demand differences. Thus customers whom the regulator might wish to single

    out for benefits can be scattered among both groups, and p1 and p2

    can be regarded as averages from another price structure conditioned by

    political forces. I suppress this structure here only to highlight the

    difference between a regulated and unregulated market's response to common

    economic forces. The cost/demand differences also give rise to the new

    profit function
                                          38

(14k)                                =
                                                   p2, c)   .




With     no loss of generality, I assume that it costs nothing to produce the

product for group 2, so c =        cost of production for group 1. Otherwise

the properties of (I41l) and its simpler counterpart (28) are the same

(f1, 2       o   f, f22< o f < 0). Again, to make the problem non-
trivial, I rule out cross—group effects, so



                           M12 =MLi M          =f =0
                                             2ir     12



           We may now proceed to trace out the implications for the structure

of regulated prices if there is a change of the sort that would lead, in

an unregulated market, to a change solely of one group's price. As an

example, let group l's demand increase, so that, with independent demands and

costs, the profit maximizing or short-run competitive price would rise for that

group alone. The general problem now facing the regulator is to choose

the set (p1, p2, ii, ) which maximizes the Igrangian



                  L =
                        M(p1, p2 7T) + (ir - f(p1, p2, c))


(Note that we are dropping the restrictionin equations (l1i-)-(16) and (li-O)-

(11-2) of fixed "tax    receipts"--here   profits--transferred to winners.) The

first-order conditions for a maximum here are similar to (30); specifically



                              ----=M =-
                               M         M



                                                                                  I
(11.6)




So both p1 and p2 will be held below the pifit-rnaximizing level
                                               39


    (, 2       > 0). Now let there be a parameter shift, dy, in group l's

    demand, and   let   us see what effect this has on p1 and p2. Consequently,

    we solve



                                   i1   =                  -l




    where   i, j = p1, p2, 71,     ).. The   left hand side of p4-7) is a vector of

    total derivatives; the first term on the right is a row-vector of partial

    derivatives, and the second term is a matrix of partial derivatives. To

    present the results in a manageable fashim, I define the following vari-

    ables, and indicate their signs:



                           A =
                                 22      -   M22) - f      .

                                                               M] > 0
    (by second-order conditions for a maximum);



                           B =
                                 f1     M .    (M22
                                                      -
                                                          f22)   > 0



    (by second order conditions and f1 > 0);



                             C =                                > 0
                                   f2    M(M11

    (by second-order conditions and f2 > 0). I then show the results for

    the signs of dPdy and dP2/dy by components.




I
                                              140


(148)       sign       = sign:


                                    M
                                         Ly
                                                  A?         ("taste"   shift)
                                              •    A > 0
                                   -Xf                       ("substitution")


                                   -±'        B < 0          ("political wealth")




(1i9)       sign       =   sign:

                                                            (taste   shift)

                                   +).f •          f2   < 0 (substitution)




Theiesults in (li.8) are
                                   -f         C<0           (political wealth)

                           similar to those in (33), where we              analyzed   the
                                                                                            .
effects of a shift in demand on a single price. There is a change in

consumer surplus with ambiguous effects on the responsiveness of group 1

to price reductions (i.e., its "tastes" for price reductions). There is

a substitution effect, showing that it is "cheaper" for the regulator to

collect transfers in the form of higher prices to the higher demand group.

Finally there is a political wealth effect, showing that the regulator

will use the expanded opportunity locus to shield group 1 from the full

substitution effect.

        The more interesting result is (149), since group 2 would be un-

affected in an unregulated market. Apart from the ambiguous "taste"

effect, there are two forces under regulation leading this group to

benefit from the higher demand of group 1. First, there is the converse
                                       11.1




    of   the substitution effect. If it is now more attractive to tax group 1,

    then for any given tax receipt, the price to group 2 will be lower. Second,

    there is the same wealth effect that assists group 1. The regulator dis-

    tributes the gains me possible by the higher demand partly in, the form

    of higher profits,20partly in the form of a lower price to group 1 and

    partly in the form of a lower price to group 2. All the margins in (k6)

    not just one or twc require adjustment when one group's demand increases

    and thereby increases the wealth available to the regulator.

             This result is illustrated in Figure 3, where I focus on the

    structure of prices. Each of the curves labeled M is a locus of

    price combinations consistent with a constant level of support or oppo-

    sition from ccnsumers. These are negatively sloped, indicating that the

    regulator can maintain the fixed support level by trading lower prices to

    one 'oup for higher prices to another. The M index increases toward

    the origin, since lower prices are preferred by both groups. For sirn-

    plicity, I assume diminishing political returns to price reduction, so

    the M are convex from above. The point A is the combination profit

    maximizing prices, but the rational regulator wishes to set lower prices

    than these. The frontier DGC     shows the p1, p2 combinations which

    yield the desired level of producer wealth. It is negatively sloped

    since f1 and f2 are both positive (or zero at D and C respectively),

    and concave from above, since both f11 and 22 are negative. The




           20'Ihe result for the wealth component of d7r/dy is a more complex
    analogue to (35) with the same properties.



I
            11.2




                                         .
Price to
Group 1


                      B




                          A



                                         .
                      C


                      F




                              Price to
                              Group 2



           Figure 3




                                         .
                                     1.3




equilibrium at G is defined by the first two conditions in (16). Con-

sider now the special case where the regulator desires to keep profits

fixed and the group 1 demand increases. If p1 at G exceeds marginal

cost, the profit frontier will shift outward over a range of prices in

the neighborhood of G. That is, with l's higher demand, the same profit

can be generated by a lower p1 holding p2 constant, or by a lower p2

holding p1 constant. (For simplicity, I have assumed that the p1 at

C also exceeds marginal cost, so that the frontier shifts out over the

entire relevant range.) It is this shift to EHG'F that produces a

"wealth effect" toward a lower p1, p2 set, though there will also be

a change in the slope of the frontier which will offset the incentive

toward a lower p1.

        The implication here is that, not only will the average level of

prices under regulation be below what it would be in pure monopoly, but

the structure of relative prices will depart from that in either pure

monopoly or competition. The important contribution of politics is to

suppress economically important distinctions and substitute for these a

common element in all prices. On the demand side, this means that regu-

lators will tax   profits   by atenuating profitable price discrimination.

Discrimination is not eliminated, because there is a force--the substitution

effect--unifying the interests of a discriminating monopoly and the regu-

lator.21 It is countered by the wealth effect, so the empirical importance



       2j
         In                                .
            the case ol a pure change in l's elasticity of demand--i.e.,
a change in the slope but not the height of demand--the relevant total
derivatives of P1 and P2 are opposite, because only a substitution
effect is at work.
of this effect will determine that of the unique political effect on the

price structure. Equations ()-i-8) and (19) do shed this further light:

the term, f, is proportional to the difference between price and mar-

ginal cost. So, the political element in pricing should be most prominent

the more profitable the regulated firm.

          Except that this last result does not hold, the case of a change in

costs is similar to that of a change in demand. Specifically, a rise in

the marginal cost of serving group 1 leads in addition to the conventional

substitution effect raising p1/p2, to a wealth effect raising both
                                                                           p1
and p2.
          This incentive to reward or tax all customers for the peculiar

characteristics of some has interesting implications for the structure of

regulated prices. Not only will profit-maximizing price discrimination

be discouraged, but a peculiar form of price discrimination will replace

it. This is usually referred to as "cross-subsidization" and, to the extent

that this is not just anothei name for ordinary price discrimination, it

connotes a structure in which an unprofitably low price for some is paid

for from profits on sales to others. This sort of phenomenon seems dif-

ficult to reconcile with the producer protection view of regulation. Why,

after all, would a surface transportation cartel wish to perpetuate un-

profitable passenger train or short haul rail freight service? So far

such questions have received no satisfactory answer, and the phenomenon

tends to be viewed as "a process of ad hoc pacification' of vocal con-

sumer groups.
                22                                       .   .
                     Our model suggests that the process is in fact systematic:




       22George Hilton, The Basic Behavior of Regulatory Commissions, 62
Am. Econ. Rev. )9 (May, 1972).
                                   11.5




holding demand constant, the higher cost customers will receive the lower

price-margLnal cost ratios. Their peculiarly high costs will be spread

among all customer groups by a rational regulator. Thus we need not appeal

to adhoc judgments atout the political power of, say, train passengers or

short haul freight users to explain the pattern of cross-subsidization.

Instead, the model implies that we should oterve either a higher level

of costs (say for short hauls compared to long hauls) or more rapid in-

creases in costs (for passengers compared to freight) for the subsidized

group. More generally, the model sheds light on the tendency of regulation

to produce rate "averaging" across dissimilar customer groups--e.g.,

charging similar electricity rates to rural and urban customers (which

benefits the former) or similar auto insurance rates to rural and urban

customers (which benefits the latter). The common element in these price

structures is their suppression of cost differences.

        I used this sort of model to rationalize differences in the price

structure under government ownership and regulation. This required an assump-

tion that purely political forces will be more prominent in the former

regime.23 It will take further empirical work to show whether the political

impulse to uniform treatment of customers also affects regulated rates sys-

tematically. I can illustrate some of the promise and pitfalls by appli-

cation to the airline rate structure. Keeler estimated price-marginal

cost ratios for standard coach service in 29 regulated city-pair maricets

as of l9oo.   He found that the most prominent cost difference in airline



        2'
         3. Peltzman, Pricing in Public and Private Enterprises: Electric
Utilities in the United States, iii- J. Law and Econ. (1971).


       2 E.    Keeler, Airline Regulation and Market Performance 3   Bell
J. of Econ. and £vgt. Science 2 (1972).
service is distance related. Since major elements of cost are constant

per flight, the per mile marginal cost falls continuously with a flightts

distance. My model woud imply that effective CAB regulatin would convert

this cost structure into a price structure whereby price/marginal cost

rises continuosly with distance--i.e., the fare-distance taper would be

less severe than the cost-distance taper. One immediate pioblem is that

profit maxi.inizing discrimination would imply a similar price structure,

since ground alternatives are more competitive over shorter distances.

However, especially for standard coach service, where individualbusiness

travel tends to predominate over family and vacation travel (for which

airlines offer discounts), the viability of ground altermtives is res-

tricted. Gronau estimates that, for plausible values of time, airlines

will essentiallymonopolize the relevant market for distances over 600

miies.2 This implies that a profit-maximizing fare structure would have

price/marginal cost ratios rising substantially more sharply with distance

up to 600 miles than beyond. My model implies no such break, or at least

a continual increase in this ratio in the over 6oo mile sesents.

        ToOrt these forces out, I regressed the log of Keeler's estirrte

of price/ marginal cost (P — MC)   on two distance variables: the log of

distance if the city pair is less than 6oo miles apart and zero (i.e.,

one mile) otherwise (B1) and log of distance if the distance exceeds

6oo miles, zero otherwise (D2). From Gronau's results, profit maximization

implies that the coefficient of D1 is positive, while that of D2 is

zero. Poltical support maximization implies that both coefficients are




       25R Gronau, The Effect of Traveling Time on the Demand for Passenger
Transportation, 78 J. Pol. Econ. 2 (1910).
                                              ".7


positive,        and, in the extreme, equal. The result is



                           P -   Mc = -.66 + .l7]J +          .17D2
                                              (3.71) 4.I'.9)


                                 = .69        S.E. X 100 =


(t-ratios        in parentheses). If the log of per-mile cost is regressed on

and D2, the corresponding coefficients are both - .26.                 This association of

a continuous increase in P -             MC   with a continuous distance economy is strong

support for the political support maximization model against simple profit

maximization. The CAB essentially ignores the strength of ground competition

for a particular flight, and simply spreads the same part (about 2/3) of

flight's distance related economy among all fares.

            Now the pitfall: Keeler has recently updated his cost estimates to

19714..26    There has been no important change in airline technology: per-mile

costs still fall continuously with distance (the 19714. elasticity is -.22).

There has been, though, a major change in the fare structure. For the 19714.

data, the P -        M,   distance relationship is


                          P—MC=.Ii.l- .OlD - .OlD
                                              (.23)1      (.68)2


                           R2 =    .33    S.E.      x 100 =   '..l7.
The CAB has recently espoused the desirability of cost-based fares, and, more

importantly, it hes implemented them: the fare - and cost-distance gradients



            26
          See Civil Aeronautics Board Practices and Procedures, U.S. Senate
Committee on the Judiciary, 9I4th Cong., 1st Sess., 58 (1975).
are now essentially identical. To get there, the CAB has permitted fares

on the longest flights in the sample to rise by under 30 per cent between

1968 and 1975, while those on the shortest have more than doubled. By l97I1,

much of the price-discrimination, at least on coach service, had vanished.27

This implies that the CAB has been sacrificing producer and, incterxns of my

model, political wealth to the ghost of Pareto. I will not pretend that my

model offers any insight into this recent behavior, however well it seems to

explain matters up to 1968.28 Perhaps, though, it does help exp1in recent




       27The range of the P -   MC   variable was .7   in   1968 and .16 in 197k.


        28e promise and pitfalls of the model are also illustrated by sur-
face freight rates. The cost structure here isLmilar to air-—a negative
cost/mi1e.i'ace taper. This is most pronounced for rails, and they have
experienced the most profound effects of the resulting political incentives:
short-haul rates sometimes below marginal cost, regulatory inhibitions on
elimination of such services and, recently, bankruptcies among short-haul
specialists. This all appears consistent with the basic model, except that
a simple extension should have firms and consumers treated similarly. That
is, the firms in this industry happen to be crudely separable by an economic
criterion--average length of freight haul. Maximization of political sport
from producers would then appear to require spreading some of the profit ef-
fects of high cost short.-haul service to the long-haul specialists. Indeed
the ICC has the power to do this by regulating divisions of joint rates.
However, it has obviously not been sufficiently diligent in its use of the
power to prevent striking differences in the prosperity of long- and bhort-
haul specialists; differences which appear superficially greater than those
that might be expected without regulation of iates and exit. This suggests
two problems: (l)why are the ICC's incentives to weld a coalition so much
stronger in the case of consumers than producers? (2) What accounts for
the difference between the ICC and CAB willingness to endanger the consumer
coalition by permitting economic efficiency criteria to intrude in the rate
structure?
        There is finally a problem of appropriate units. A prime example of
cost-based cross subsidization is first-class postage. The rate here ignores
distance-related costs entirely, and so results in price/marginal cost
dec1inin with distance. The model can only hint at why weight happens to
be the relevant unit for the Postal Service and distance for the ICC and
CAB. One way by which a regulator can suppress cost differences is to ig-
nore them entirely. However, in deciding which kinds ofdif±'erences to ignore,
he must also take account of the implications for profits. Hence my con-
jecture would have to be that weight-related costs are more important than
distance—related costs in determining first—class postal service profits
and vice versa for transportation. A further implication would then be
that price/marginal cost infirstclass postal service would be negatively
related to marginal cost/pound, holding distance constant.
                                           11.9




    Congressional and ecutive initiatives to reduce the CAB's regulatory
              29
    powers.

              The intra-group equilibrium aspects of the model reveal some impli-

    cations for entry——both of regulators and regulated firms. First there is

    a clear incentive for regulators to limit entry (or seek the power to do

    so) quite apart from considerations of the producer interest. This stems

    directly from the fact that the politically appropriate price structure is

    invariably discriminatory (in the economic sense) when costs differ among

    customers. The proverbial "cream skimming" entrant must be prevented from

    serving the low cost customers and thereby preventing the xgulator from

    spreading the low costs to others. On the other hand, we can expect the

    regulator to be more tolerant of entry which dampens the enthusiasm of

    producers for demand-based price discrimination. The regulator seeks to
P   suppress       the full effects of differences in the elasticity of demand, and
    his way can be eased bypermittirigentry into low-elasticity market segments.
    This last argument has more force in industries, like banking, where the
    primary    regulatory control is over entry rather than price. In these cases,

    the regulator uses the entry control to produce indirectly the desired price

    structure. A testable implication would be that more entry is permitted in

    banking, say, the larger the gap between interest rates on small and large

    loans.

               The obverse of the previous argument is that entry of regulation

    is more attractive the more disparate the price structure. This is inde-

    pendent of the pre-regulatory market stmcture. Competitively determined,

    cost-based price differentials create an opportunity for political gain




               2ee U.S. Senate, op. cit. and U.S. Department o± Transportation,
    Aviation Act of 1975 (1975).
                                       50




through entry and/or price regulation designed to suppress the effects of

cost differences, just as discriminating monopoly invites political sup-

pression of the effects of demand elasticity differences.

         In summary, the same forces that make regulators seek a broad-based

coalition operate on the price structure. Opportunities for increasing pro-

ducer wealth by price discrimination are not ignored, but they are never

fully exploted. To do this would narrow the cnsumer base of the coalition.

The uniquely political contribution to a price structure is to force a

more uniform treatment of consumers than the unregulated market by weakening

the link between prices and cost and demand conditions.




Concluding Remarks

         This paper is concerned more with the design than the implementation

of a research strategy. Much of the recent ork in the theory of regulation

has focused on political poer relationships: which groupswillhave the

muscle to extract gains from there regulatory process. I have largely

begged this issue. In my general model, every identifiable group contains

winrers and losers, and even %there all the winners are in one group they

end up short-changed. This sort of result can hardly illuminate the nature

of the underlying power relationships, but that shortcoming is purposeful.

          In the way I have chosen to model the regulatory process, these

power   relationships   play a role analogous to tastes in consumer choice

theory. They shape the regulator's utility function. It has proved a

hily rewarding research strater for consumer choice theorists precisely

to beg questions of taste fonnation and concentrate instead on the be-

haviorale±'feCtsof changes in constraints in a regime of stable tastes.

With some qualification, there is an analogous history in production theory.
                                    51



I am suggesting here that the theory of politics has something to learn

 from this experience. Even if we can do no more than derive the most

general properties of political power functions, there is much to learn

about political behavior in a world where the constraints do change. And

the specific contribution of economics to this venture will be enhanced if

the constraints are those already familiarto economists. I have tried to

show here how the most familiar sort of supply-demand apparatus can be

converted into a constraint onregulatory behavior. Once this is accom-

plished the equally familiar analytics of supply-demand changes yield

refutable implications about a wide range of regulatory behavior: when

regulation will occur, liw it will modify the unregulated price structure,

even how it will change the division of the gains over time (with no change

in relative political strengths).

        Of coures, no student of George Stigler can view the derivation of

refttable implications as more than a first step. The usefulness of the

model developed here awaits tests of these implications, of which the

present paper is nearly devoid. The limited progress we have made in ex-

ploring political "tastes" is my main ground for optimism about the fruit-

fulness of a return to a mare familiar theoretical mode.3°




       30
          Some specification of power relationships is unavoidable. It is
implicit, as Stigler has pointed out to me, in the choice of groups for which
the model's regulator acts as broker. For example, why not posit a political
redistribution between electricity producers and peanut vendors? Also, most
of the results of the model are driven by "normality" of the political-wealth
effect. Normality, in this context, is a specific assumption aboutpower (inter)
relationships.
