The Demand for Pediatric Care: An
Hedonic Approach

Fred Goldman
Columbia University School of Public Health and National Bureau of Economic Research

Michael Grossman
City University of New York Graduate School and National Bureau of Economic Research

When the quality of a good varies, quantity in physical units may be a
very misleading measure of total consumption. In this paper it is argued
that differences in quality are a distinguishing feature of the market for
physicians' services. We develop a model to analyze properties of demand

functions for the quantity and quality of physicians' services and apply
the model to study the demand for pediatric care—physicians' services
rendered to children. The theoretical model of quantity-quality substitution provides a framework for demand analysis whenever the market for a
good is distinguished by a quality component.

When the quality of a good varies, quantity in physical units may be a very

misleading measure of total consumption. This point long has been
This is a condensed version of Goldman and Grossman (1976). The longer version is
available on request. Grossman's research was supported by PHS grant 5-POl-HS00451
from the National Center for Health Services Research, Health Resources Association,
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. Goldman's research was supported by
PHS grant RO1-HS02562 from the National Center for Health Services Research, HRA,
to Columbia University School of Public Health. A preliminary version of this paper was
presented at the fiftieth annual conference of the Western Economic Association, San
Diego, California, June 1975. We owe a special debt to Ann Dukes Colic for discussing
in detail many points in the paper with us and for providing us with "high-powered"
computer programming assistance. We also would like to thank Gary S. Becker, Barry R.

Chiswick, Linda Nasif Edwards, Isaac Ehrlich, Martin Feldstein, Victor R. Fuchs,
Malcolm Galatin, Gilbert R. Ghez, Donald F. Gordon, Reuben Gronau, Lee Lillard,
Robert Lipscy, Robert T. Michael, Sam Peltzman, Anne D. Williams, RobertJ. Willis,
and a referee for helpful comments and suggestions; Kathleen V. McNally and Christine
Wilson for research assistance; and Rowland L. Mindlin, M.D., for generously making
the data available for this study. This paper has not yet undergone the review accorded
official NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval by
the Board of Directors.
[Journalof Political Economy, 1978, vol. 86, no. 2, pt. 1]

1978 by The University of Chicago. All rights reserved. 0022-3808J78/8602-0004$ol.79

259

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

26o

recognized in the literature on hedonic price functions and has served as
the rationale for estimates of the quality of automobiles and houses based

on the imputed value of these goods.' In this paper it is argued that
differences in quality are a distinguishing feature of the market for
physicians' services. Quality differences among physicians can be traced

in turn to their different levels of investment in human capital. For
instance, medical schooling, internships, and residency training programs
can differ in quality; and physicians may or may not obtain board certification in a specialty, faculty status, and memberships in peer professional societies. Not only do consumers choose physicians from among a

broad array of physician quality, they also may substitute quality for
quantity in the production of medical services in particular and health in
general.
The model that we develop below is used to analyze properties of the
demand functions for quantity and quality. It is then applied to study the
demand for pediatric care—physicians' services rendered to children.2
The theoretical model of quantity—quality substitution provides a framework for demand analysis whenever the market for a good is distinguished
by a quality component. The analysis is developed within the household
production framework of consumer behavior and assumes that parents
both demand and produce quality children, where children's health is one

aspect of their quality. Thus, the demand curves for pediatric care are
derived from the interaction between the demand and production functions of children's health. In the analysis, we emphasize the effects of income, the price of pediatric services, and the time costs of obtaining these

services on the quantity (measured in terms of visits) and quality of
services demanded.
The strategy of fitting separate demand curves for quality and visits has
not been pursued in existing studies of the demand for physicians' services.
Instead, one finds in these studies either biased estimates of the visit equation or estimates of demand functions in which the dependent variable is
number of visits multiplied by a proxy for quality.3 These procedures do

not distinguish between the quality and visit demand curves that we
emphasize. In particular, we demonstrate theoretically and empirically
that the ratio of quality to visits varies with income and with the physician
fee and time price components of pediatric care. Thus, in analyzing the
impact of government policies such as direct cash subsidies, national health
1
See, for example, Griliches 1961; Muth 1969; Cowling and Rayner 1970; Griliches
1971; Triplett 1971; Rosen 1974; King 1975; Ohta and Griliches 1975; and Straszheim

1975.
2 Our

model of the demand for quantity and quality is an extension of work by

Houthakker (1952—53); Theil (1952—53); and especially Becker and Lewis (1973).
See, for example, Fuchs and Kramer 1972; Grossman 1972; Newhouse and Phelps
1974, 1976; Holtmann and Olsen 1974; Acton 1975, 1976; Feldman 1975; Phelps 1975;

and Inman 1976.

THE DEMAND FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

261

or reductions in travel and waiting time via increases in the
supply of medical practitioners, it is important to account for the separate
effects of these policies on the demand for visits and quality.
insurance,

I. The Model
A. Analytical Framework

Let the utility function of parents be given by

'I' =

'V(h,

z),

(1)

where h stands for child health and z stands for all other commodities in
the utility function and may be interpreted as parents' standard of living.
The production function of child health has as inputs number of visits to
physicians (v), quality per visit (q), and vector of additional variables

(y):
h=

q,y).
(2)
Here, quality per visit is assumed to be the same for all visits by a given
family. Arguments in they vector include genetic endowment and age of
the child, parental characteristics such as level of schooling, and random
variations in health due to, say, illness.
The quality variable in the production function is assumed to measure
variations in productivity among physicians. These variations reflect
experience, vintage, and model effects commonly found in the literature
on hedonic price functions. Quality and visits enter the production function as separate variables, so that pediatric services depend on q and v but
are not simply given as the product of these two variables.5 Substitution
of equation (2) into equation (1) yields a derived utility function of the
h(v,

form

U=

U(v, q, z),

(3)

'The model is static, and it is assumed that the year is the relevant period of time
throughout the analysis. For models of child health that emphasize intertemporal considerations, see Friedman and Leibowitz (1975) and Grossman (1975). In the Context
of a life-cycle model, it is natural to think of h as the stock of health, but the stock Concept

is not important for the analysis in this paper. In a more complete specification of the
production function, length of time spent by the physician with the patient per visit
would be an additional input. For a theoretical analysis of the role of this input, see
Goldman and Grossman (1976).
The above treatment follows Becker and Lewis (1973) and Willis (1973), who

assume that number of children and quality per child are separate variables in the
parents' utility function. More generally, Houthakker (1952—53) and Theil (1952—53)
make this assumption with regard to the quality and quantity of any good. In addition,
Rosen (1968) postulates that the labor input demanded by firms depends on employment
and hours per person, but that this input is not simply the product of employment and
average hours.

262

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

where the exogenousy vector has been suppressed for simplicity. Note that
v and q are separate variables in the derived utility function because they
are separate variables in the health production function.
Parents maximize utility subject to a "full" income budget constraint.

To develop the nature of this constraint, let pv denote expenditures in
terms of payment to the physician for pediatric services, where p is the
average price of a visit. Price and total expenditures depend on quality.
In particular,
(4)

Hence is the given (quality-adjusted) price of one unit of vq.
Expenses in addition tovq are required to obtain pediatric care because
of transportation costs (c dollars per visit) and travel time (t1 hours per
visit) that must be incurred to reach the physician's office and return and
waiting time in the office (t2 hours per visit). Since the mother typically
is responsible for taking the child to the physician, the opportunity cost of
1 hour of travel and waiting time is evaluated at her hourly wage rate (w).
The sum of foregone earnings per visit and transportation cost per visit
may be interpreted as the "fixed cost" of a visit (cost that is independent
of quality) :6

c + w(t1 + 2)•
If the price of z =

$1.00,

(5)

the budget constraint may be written as

S = z + vq + v(wt1 + wt2 + c).

(6)

According to equation (6), outlays on q, v, and z exhaust full income (S),
defined as family property (nonearnings) income plus husband's earnings

plus wife's earnings when all of her available time is allocated to the
market.
First-order conditions for the optimal amounts of z, q, and v are
(7)
Uq

= Av,

(8)

and

= 1(q

+f),

(9)

6
Throughout the analysis it is assumed that there is no fixed cost of quality (cost that
is independent of visits). Such a cost would arise if consumers had imperfect information
about the quality of pediatric care and allocated time to the acquisition of information
about quality. The weaker assumption that the fixed cost of quality is small relative to
that of visits would not modify the basic analysis. In Section II, search to acquire informa-

tion about quality-adjusted price () is introduced and analyzed, although this search
process does not introduce a fixed cost of quality.

263

THE DEMANI) FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

u (i = z, q, v) is the marginal utility of the ith argument in the
utility function and . is the marginal utility of income. Equations (8) and
(9) contain definitions of the "shadow prices" of quality and visits:
where

1rq,

ir=fq+f.

(10)
(11)

As Becker and Lewis (1973) emphasize, the shadow price of quality rises
with visits, and the shadow price of visits rises with quality. In equilibrium
the marginal rate of substitution between quality and visits must equal
the price of quality relative to the price of visits:
U

It

q+f

'12

Condition (12) is used to examine the effects of changes in income, fixed

cost, and quality-adjusted price on the equilibrium amounts of quality
and visits.
B. Comparative Static Analysis

Based on the above framework, the structural demand curves for quality
and number of pediatric visits are as follows:

Ev = ,iE(R/1r) — (1 — /c)öEir +kqavqEltq,
(13)
(14)
Eq = llqE(RIlt) + kvcri,qEltv — (1 — kq)öqEIrq,
where the symbol E denotes the logarithmic differential operator d ln.
Definitions of all other symbols in equations (13) and (14), as well as
additional symbols that are used in the comparative static analysis, are
given in table 1. Since the shadow prices of quality and visits are endogenous, the framework also contains the following reduced-form demand
curves:
Ev = 0ES + iEf + eEi,
(15)

Eq = qES +

qEf+

(16)

As Becker and Lewis (1973) stress, reduced-form income elasticities
might differ significantly from structural income elasticities in a model in

which consumers can trade quality and quantity. Structural or "pure"
income elasticities are obtained by varying income evaluated at shadow
prices (R), with shadow prices and, therefore, a price level of shadow
prices (n) held constant. On the other hand, reduced form or "observed"
income elasticities are obtained by varying money full income (5), with
quality-adjusted price () and fixed cost per visit (f) held constant. One
source of the difference between the two sets of elasticities is that a 1 percent increase in S will increase real income evaluated at shadow prices

,.

q

El'
C4

1,,

SI,

Eq

1),

r

S

n

a,,
- ...

a,,,,

E
R

kg

R

g

Symbol

Money income evaluated at shadow prices
Share of R spent on visits
Share of R spent on quality
Share of R spent on z
Price level OfIT,, and ir.., in differential form
Real income evaluated at shadow prices
Allen partial elasticitiesof substitution in utility function
Weighted average of o,, and a,,,
Weighted average of a,,, and a,,,,
Ratio of a,,, to 0,,,
Pure income elasticity ofvisits
Pure income elasticity of quality
Share of physician cost in shadow price of a visit
Ratio ofii,, to
Observed income elasticity of visits
Observed income elasticity of quality
Ratio of,, to
Compensated fixed-cost elasticity of visits
Compensated fixed-cost elasticity of quality
Compensated quality-adjusted price elasticityof visits
Compensated quality-adjustedprice elasticity of quality
Uncompensated fixed-cost elasticity of visits
Uncompensated fixed-cost elasticity of quality
Uncompensated quality-adjusted price elasticity of visits
Uncompensated quality-adjusted price elasticity of quality

Verbal Definition

qlr,,/R

Eq/E,6

Ev/E6

Eq/Ef

Eq/Es
Ei'/Ef

f
S'f

SI ,6
S,

5, 6

R4,f
R*,f

R4,

Eo/Ef
Eq/El
Ev/Efi

IS,f

17, ITq, 171,

IT, 1Tq 77•,,

Variables Held
Constant
(Where Relevant)

Ev/ES
Eq/ES

7),,f7),,

Ev/ER*
Eq/ER*

See Allen 1964
—
(k,,a,,,, + k,,a,,,)/(l
k,,)
—
(k,a,,,, + k,,a,,,,)/(l
kg)

R/ir

k,,EIT,,

z/R

+ k,,EIT,,

+ V7T,, + qir,,

VIT,,/R

Z

Mathematical Definition

DEFINITION OF SYMBOLS IN COMPARATIVESTATIC ANALYSIS

TABLE I

THE DEMAND FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

265

TABLE 2
COMPARATIVE STATIC FORMULAS

Elasticity

Equation

Income:

— kq)' = ,.[(1 — kgorq) — sr(1 — ki,)5r]
Dq(1 — kq)' = 7q[(l — kqa,,q) — r'(l — kq)&qJ

Compensated price:
Dç6, = —(1 — k)(l

= (I

—
s)ä,,
— s)
[krarq( I — kgu,.g) + (I — k,,) (I — kg) &s&g]

= kqcycq(l — kqacg) + s(1 — k.,)(l — kq)t55,&q — s(l — k)&
De1 = kgarg( I — kqO'cq) + .c( I — k,,) (1 — kq)f55,äg — (I — kg)äq

Uncompensated price:
—

(vf/S)

(17)
(18)
(19)
(20)
(21)
(22)

= 4ig — (Vf/S)q

(23)
(24)

ig = — (tq/S)q

(25)
(26)

= — (vh/S)i0 . . .

NOTE.—D = (I — kqas,q) —
tkg(l — k.)a,( I — k0)dq. Note that D and (I — kc.) must be greater
than zero by the second-order conditions for the maaimization of utility. Note also that ö is a weightrd
average of the Allen partial elasticities of substitution in the utility function between v and qand between
v

and z (O.,q and as,,). Similarly, âg is a weighted average of 05g and Og, and both as, and aq are positive by

definition.

(Rut) by only 1 — kg percent, where kg is the share of q in R. This factor
reflects the dependence of the shadow price of quality on visits and the
dependence of the shadow price of visits on quality. A potentially more
important source of the difference between pure and observed income
elasticities is that the relative price of quality (lrq/itv) could vary with S.
Formulas (17) and (18) in table 2 show how the observed income
elasticities are related to the pure income elasticities. From these formulas

the ratio of observed income elasticities (t = iq/) would equal the
corresponding ratio of pure income elasticities (r = qq/i0) j

r = (l/s) = n,

(27)

where s is the share of physician cost in the shadow price of a visit [s =

(q + f)] and n is the ratio of the subscripted Allen partial elasticities of
substitution in consumption (n = a11/o). When the production function
is homothetic, r exceeds i.8 Even if the pure income elasticity of quality
From (17) and (l8),f = r[(1 — kgo,g) — r '(I — kg)&gJ/[(l — kgc7.,g) — sr(l — ks,)&s,J.
In obtaining this condition,
f r as kga,.q[(I/sr) — rs] k,a,.z[(nr) --Sc]
we use the relationship between kg and k,, : kg = sk,,, which can be derived by noting
kg/k, = qi.q/ Pit, = qt'/[v(,q + f)J = q/6q + f) = s. In analyzing the relationship
Hence,

0.

between r and f,we assume that °qs ag0 and a are positive. It is well known that at

least two of these partial elasticities of substitution must be positive. Condition (27) for
equality between r and f is sufficient but not necessary.
The utility function in our model is "weakly separable" in v and q. Given separability, r and n would equal unity if the production function were homothetic, and f
would be smaller than r (see Goldman and Uzawa 1964 and Muth 1966). Note that the
formulas in the text of Section II (in notes 7, 9) are not derived under the assumption
that the utility function is weakly separable. Thus, the formulas are more general than
those that would obtain under the assumption of weak separability.

266

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

exceeded that of visits, the presence of a fixed-cost component in the total
cost of a visit would cause the relative price of quality to rise with income
as long as r were less than 1/s. Here a substitution effect in favor of v and
away from q would accompany a seemingly pure change in money income.

In addition to quality and visits, the relative price of quality depends
on the quality-adjusted price of pediatric care () and the fixed cost of a

visit (f). An increase in increases the shadow prices of both quality
and visits. The percentage increase in the shadow price of quality would,
however, exceed that of visits due to the presence of the fixed-cost component in the total cost of a visit. Thus, the relative price of quality would
rise with, and consumers would substitute away from quality and toward
visits. Of course, the price of visits would rise relative to the price of parents'
standard of living, so that v would fall relative to z. Although visits need
not rise absolutely, the ratio of visits to quality would be positively related
to quality-adjusted price. A rise in the fixed cost of a visit would cause the

relative price of quality to fall and would lead consumers to substitute
quality for visits. Consequently, the variablesf and would have opposite
effects on the demand for quality. In addition, visits would be more
sensitive to a percentage change in fixed cost than an identical percentage
change in quality-adjusted price.

The preceding predictions pertain to compensated (utility or real
income constant) fixed cost and quality-adjusted price elasticities of visits
and quality. These elasticities are given by equations (19)—(22), in table 2.
It follows that the compensated fixed-cost elasticity of visits () is negative. Additionally, under fairly weak restrictions, the compensated fixedcost elasticity of quality (q) is positive, the absolute value of the compensated quality-adjusted price elasticity of quality (eq) exceeds that of

visits (), and the absolute value of 4 exceeds that of

Instead of
analyzing compensated price elasticities that hold utility or real income
evaluated at shadow prices (R* = R/ir) constant, one can analyze uncompensated price elasticities that hold money full income constant (see
eqq. [23]—[26] in table 2). Given estimates of the uncompensated elasticities, the observed income elasticities, and the shares of total fixed cost and
total pediatric cost in income, one can use these formulas to solve for the
compensated price elasticities. Such computations are made in Section
III below.
° According to equation (20), the compensated fixed-cost elasticity of quality () is
positive given the weak restriction that visits and quality are net substitutes (o > 0).
We impose this restriction in our analysis of substitution effects. The signs of the compensated quality-adjusted price elasticity of visits and quality (e and e) arc ambiguous,
although Theil (1952—53) shows that the sum of these two elasticities must be negative.

From equations (21) and (22), the difference between e and e is
D(e,,

Eq) = k,,(l

—

s2)a9 + k,o,,,(n — s).

Since a is less than one, the first term on the right-hand side of this equation must be

THE DEMANI) FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

267

In summary, the comparative static analysis shows that the reducedform demand curve for visits has very different properties than the reduced-

form demand curve for quality. In percentage terms, the responsiveness
of visits to income exceeds that of quality, visits fall and quality rises as the
fixed cost of a visit rises, and quality-adjusted price increases have a larger
negative impact on quality than on visits. Due to these significant variations in parameters between the two demand curves, it is crucial to obtain
separate estimates of each. Suppose, for example, that the quality-adjusted
price faced by consumers were to decline due to the enactment of national
health insurance. According to our analysis, this would increase demand
for services from "high-quality" physicians (specialists) relative to "lowquality" physicians (general practitioners). Consequently, in analyzing
the effect of national health insurance on the cost of physicians' services,
one would have to take account of these shifts in demand for various kinds
of physicians.

II. Empirical Implementation of the Model
The data source used to estimate demand functions for the quantity and
quality of pediatric care is the Mindlin-Densen (MD) study, titled "Medical Care of Infants and Preschool Children." This is a longitudinal and
cross-sectional survey covering 21 months in the period 1965—66. Geographically, the MD study encompasses two contiguous health districts in
The key
the Bronx, New York City—Mott Haven and
variables in the MD survey are annual number of office visits to physicians
by the sample children, characteristics of those physicians, and their usual

fees. Characteristics of physicians are available because mothers were
positive. Given a weakly separable utility function in i and q and a homothetic production function, n would equal one, so that the second term on the right-hand side also would
be positive. More generally, the equation would be positive unless n were much smaller
than s (unless aq. were much smaller than a). To compare the responsiveness of visits
to fixed cost with its responsiveness to quality-adjusted price, subtract eq. (21) from eq.
(19):
(2s — I)(l — k) a,,.
— E,.) = kgorq(l — k5a,,5) — s(l — k,,)(I — kq)rãq
The

first two terms on the right-hand side of this equation are negative, and the

third term is nonpositive ifs 1/2. Thus, the absolute value of the difference between

r and c, would be positive given s 1/2 and might be positive even ifs > 1/2. For

s>

1/2, the sign of the difference between ç. and E,, is ambiguous because a 1 percent increase in would cause a larger percentage increase in the shadow price of a visit
f) than would a 1 percent increase inf. Since, however, an increase inj raises
(ir,, =
the shadow price of quality (,,q = pr), while an increase in! does not, we view the case in
as an unlikely one.
which e, >
The study was conducted by Paul Densen, then Deputy Administrator, New York
City Health Services Administration, and Rowland L. Mindlin, M.D., then Assistant
Commissioner of Health, Bureau of Maternal and Child Health, New York City Department of Health. For complete descriptions of the study, see Goldman (1975) and Goldman
and Grossman (1976).

268

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

asked to identify by name all physicians in private practice who examined

their children during the study period. Information on these physicians
was obtained from the American Medical Association and New York
State medical directories. If a source of pediatric care other than a physician in private practice was reported, the physician who rendered the care
was not identified. We emphasize the demand for private pediatric care,
measured by office visits and quality per visit, and include in the empirical
analysis only those families whose children used at least one private-care
source.
Customarily, one would assume no variation in quality-adjusted price
in a cross section, particularly when all its members live in the same city.
The existence of imperfect information due to costs of search is, however,

a basic characteristic of the medical care market and therefore a basic
source of cross-sectional variation in the quality-adjusted price of pediatric
care.11 Since equilibrium search time increases and equilibrium quality-

adjusted price decreases as quality and visits increase, it would be inappropriate to estimate demand functions by ordinary least squares.'2
Consequently, the demand functions in Section III are fitted by two-stage

least squares, with quality-adjusted price treated as an endogenous
variable.

The econometric methodology that is used to estimate quality and
quality-adjusted price may be outlined as follows. Begin with the definiA related source of quality-adjusted price variation is the existence of a trade-off
between money price and waiting time. Since the implications of this type of price variation are similar to those due to imperfect information, we do not deal with the money
price—waiting trade-off. For analyses that emphasize this trade-off, see Nichols, Smolensky,
and Tideman (1971); and Acton (1975, 1976). For evidence in support of the cost-ofsearch hypothesis, see Newhouse and Sloan (1972). Using New York City data, they
report a coefficient of variation of 33 percent for the fee of a first visit to a general practitioner and a coefficient of variation of 22 percent for the fee of a first visit to an internist.
Coefficients of variation for fees of subsequent visits are 20 and 23 percent, respectively.
For a good summary of sources of price variation in the medical care market, see Newhouse and Phelps (1974). One source mentioned by these authors, the existence of health
insurance, is treated in our empirical work but is not discussed here.
12
Formally, to take account of the endogeneity of quality-adjusted price, let the price
function be p = q( T, K, u), where T is the total amount of time spent in search, K is
a vector of exogenous variables whose arguments include efficiency in search and the
initial or preexisting amount of information about the pediatric care market, and u is a
vector of unmeasured determinants of or a disturbance term. By allocating more time
to search activities, consumers can find lower quality-adjusted prices
T < 0). They

would maximize the following Lagrange function with respect to z, q, v, and T: L =
U(v, q, z) + A(S — 6oq —

— wT).

First-order conditions are u, = A,

Av,

Uq
= A(q +f), and —qv(ø6/T) = w. With w, K, and u held constant, an exogenous

increase in q or ii would cause T to rise and therefore would cause to fall. Note that if
physicians engage in price discrimination according to patient characteristics such as race
and income and these characteristics can be measured, they would be included in the K

vector in the price function. Note also that the first-order conditions for the optimal
amounts of q and v obtained in Section I are not altered, although is an endogenous
variable. This follows because T and therefore are held constant when the optimal
amount of q or v is selected.

THE DEMAND FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

269

tion of price per visit or observed fee given in equation (4) and take
natural logarithms:

lnp=lnq+lnj.

(28)

Let the natural logarithm of the quality of pediatric care produced by
physicians be a linear function of a vector (X) ofphysicians' characteristics:

in q =

aX.

(29)

Arguments in the X vector affect productivity of physicians and include
variables such as number of years of experience, type of specialty, board
certification status, quality of medical school training, and memberships
in professional societies. Substitution of equation (29) into equation (28)
yields an hedonic fee function:
lnp = aX + in.
(30)
Estimation of equation (30) by regression methods allows one to compute
both the natural logarithm of quality from the predicted value of fee for
a given observation and a preliminary estimate of quality-adjusted price
from the regression residual. These computations serve as inputs into the
estimation of two-stage least-squares demand functions. A full discussion
of the econometric methodology is contained in Goldman and Grossman
(1976). Space limitations prevent us from incorporating this discussion in
the present paper. Definitions of all variables in the hedonic fee function
and an estimate of this function are presented in the Appendix.
The demand functions for quality and visits are specified as

VISITS =

b0

+ b1 QUALPRICE + b2 FAMINC

+ b3 TRFIXED + b4AC + b5NC + b6HO (31)
+ b7HSI + b8HS2 + b9HS3 + b10SM
QUAL =

c0

+ c1 QUALPRICE

c2 FAMINC

+ c3 TRFIXED + c4AC + c5NC + c6HO
+ C7HS1 + c8HS2 + c9HS3 + c10SM.

(32)

Table 3 contains definitions of the variables in these equations. In cases
where the child saw more than one physician during the year, quality per
visit is defined as a weighted average of quality of each source where the
weights are the percentage of visits to that source. A preliminary estimate
of quality-adjusted price is obtained directly from the hedonic price func-

tion when there is only one source. When there is more than one, the
preliminary estimate is computed as

Q.UALPRICE =

ic Q.UALPRICE1,

where

k=

(QUAL1)(VISITS1)/

(QUAL,)(VISITS1).

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

270
TABLE 3

DEFINITION OF VARIABLES IN DEMAND FUNCTIONS

Definition

Variable

VISITS
QUAL
QUALPRICE
FAMINC*

TT
C

TRFIXED
AC

NC
HS

HO

SM
BLACKt
SPANISHt
AREAt

LCt

LBNCt
LNYNBt

Annual number of pediatric office visits to physicians in private
practice by study child
Quality pcr visit
Quality-adjusted price
Predicted family income
Potential hourly wage rate of mother
Round-trip travel time per visit to usual source of private care
Round-trip transportation cost per visit to usual source of private

care

Fixed travel cost per visit: TRFIXED = C + \VTT
Age of study child
Number of children in the family
Evaluation of study child's health by mother: HSl = I if health
is poor, HS2 = 1 if health is fair, HS3 = 1 if health is good,
omitted class if health is excellent
Study child hospitalized during the year =
Years of formal schooling completed by mother

Mother is black =
Mother is Puerto Rican or Latin American =
Mother resides in Most Haven =

Number of years mother has resided at Current address

Number of years mother resided in the Bronx but at addresses
other than the current one
Number of years mother resided in New York City but not in
the Bronx

texl for a more detailed definition.
Predictor variable of quality-adjosted price in firsl stage.
t• See

As has been indicated previously, demand functions are estimated by
two-stage least squares, with quality-adjusted price treated as an endogenous variable. This technique not only eliminates simultaneous equations bias but also reduces biases due to measurement errOr in the preliminary estimate of quality-adjusted price. In addition to the exogenous
variables in the demand functions, the last six variables in table 3 serve
as instrumental variables to predict quality-adjusted price in the first
stage. Here it is assumed that these additional variables measure efficiency
in search and the family's knowledge of the pediatric-care market. They

might also reflect price discrimination by physicians due to patient
characteristics. No information on price was obtained in the MD survey
if the mother reported health insurance coverage for pediatric office visits,
To examine the impact of insurance on the quantity-quality trade-off, we
assume that the insured have a policy with a 25 percent coinsurance rate.
Their quality-adjusted price is set equal to 25 percent of the mean quality-

adjusted price in the uninsured sample. We have experimented with
alternative coinsurance rates of 0, 20, and 50 percent and have found that
the results in Section III are not sensitive to these alternative rates.1 3
Since the MD survey preceded the enactment of Medicaid and private health insurance typically did not cover office visits to physicians in the mid-1960s, only 10 percent

THE DEMAN1) FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

271

Besides the effect of quality-adjusted price, we emphasize empirically
the impacts of fixed cost and income. There are no measures of waiting
time and mother's actual or potential hourly wage rate in the MD survey.
The wage is derived from Fuchs's (1968) calculations of hourly wage rates
of women aged 20—34 by race and years of formal schooling completed.1

The fixed-cost variable in the demand functions is fixed travel cost per
visit (TRFIXED).15 It differs from the fixed-cost variable defined in
Section I by the monetary value of waiting time (WTW): FIXED =
TRFIXED + WTW. Given the linear demand specification, the regression coefficient of TRFIXED should equal that of WTW if both were
entered as separate variables. Therefore, the coefficient of TRFIXED
would be an unbiased estimate of the coefficient of FIXED if TRFIXED
and WTW were uncorrelated. Employing an independent estimate of
waiting time, we compute the fixed-cost elasticity based on the mean of
FIXED and the slope coefficient of TRFIXED in Section 111.16 Finally,
the measure of permanent income used is based on a regression of reported
family income on father's schooling, race, ethnicity, area of residence, and
the presence of the father in the household.

III. Empirical Estimates
The second stages of two-stage least-squares estimates of demand functions for quality and visits are presented in table 41 Income has a positive
regression coefficient in each demand curve and is statistically significant
at conventional levels. As shown in table 5, A, the income elasticity of visits
of the sample families had health insurance for pediatric visits. Note that the technique
for the estimation of demand functions would be identical with two-stage least squares if
the insured were omitted. Since they are not excluded, it may be viewed as a "quasi"
two-stage technique, although we refer to the demand functions as two-stage least-squares
estimates in Section III.
14 Even if some women did not work in the labor force, our procedure would bejustified
if the value of nonmarket time depended on race or schooling. The MD sample contains
information on labor force status of the mother, but there are not enough observations in
the study sample to estimate separate demand functions by labor force status.

In cases where there is more than one usual source, travel time is defined as a
weighted average of travel time to each source, where the weights are the percentage of
visits to that source. A similar comment applies to transportation cost.
16 TRFIXED and \VT\\' probably are positively correlated because both depend in
part on the wage rate. Consequently, the slope coefficient of TRFIXED might overestimate that of FIXED. By computing fixed-cost elasticities at the mean of TRFIXED
and at the mean of FIXED, we provide lower- and upper-limit estimates of the elasticity.
17 When two-stage least-squares estimation is employed, the ratios of regression coefficients to their standard errors do not have Student's i-distribution but do have an asymptotic normal distribution. Therefore, the 1-test is an asymptotic one. The unadjusted coefficients of multiple determination (R2) in table 3 should be interpreted with caution.
\Ve forced the R2 to fall between zero and one by using the variance in predicted qualityadjusted price in computing them. Ve used this procedure to get a rough approximation
of "explanatory power."

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

272
TABLE 4

TWO-STAGE LEAST-SQUARES ESTIMATES OF DEMAND CURVES
FOR VISITS AND QUALITY

DEMAND CURVE FOR Vtsrrs*

VARIABLE

QUALPRICE
FAMING
TRFIXED
AC

NC
HO
HS1

HS2 .

HS3
SM
CONSTANT
R2

Regression
Coefficient

Asymptotic
1-Ratio

Regression
Coefficient

Asymptotic
1-Ratio

—.071

—.46
8.11
—1.42
—8.71
—2.14

—1.581

—4.31

.254
.935
.270
—.055
4.709
9.669

6.42

.135
.

DEMAND CURVE FOR QUALITYt

— .280

—1.218
—.604
1.920
.911
3.468
.203
.192
— .696

.264

2.49
.42
3.81

.39
1.90

...
...

—1.310
.079
—.317
.948
.158

1.98
.81

—.08
2.56
1.86

—.60
.06
—1.32

...
.

NOTE—Sample size is 568. See table 3 for definitions of all variables.
Dependent variable is annual number of pediatric visits to physicians in private practice.
Dependent variable is quality per visit. All coefficients except constant are multiplied by 100.
Endogenous.

t

is much larger than the income elasticity of quality. When combined
sample mean values of income, quality, and visits are used to compute
these elasticities, the income elasticity of visits is 1.32 and the income
elasticity of quality is 0.16. Similar conclusions emerge when the computations are based on mean values of Mott Haven residents or mean values
of Westchester residents.
The finding that visits are more responsive to income than quality might

appear to be a counterintuitive one. Yet in our theoretical analysis we
showed that the presence of a fixed-cost component in the total cost of a
visit would tend to cause the ratio of the observed income elasticity of
quality to the observed income elasticity of visits to be less than the corresponding ratio of pure income elasticities (see eq. [27]). Of course the
income elasticities in table 5 are observed, rather than pure, income
elasticities. In the sample, fixed travel cost accounts for 23 percent of the
total cost of a visit exclusive of waiting cost on average. Using an indepen-

dent figure on waiting time per visit from Aday and Andersen (1975),
we estimate that the share of fixed cost in the total cost of a visit equals 33
percent. Therefore, the ratio of observed income elasticities would tend to
fall short of the ratio of pure income elasticities unless the pure income
elasticity of quality were one and one-half times as large as that of visits.
In the special case in which pure incJTle elasticities were the same, the
observed income elasticity of quality would be smaller than that of visits.
According to the results in table 4, an increase in the fixed travel cost of
a visit simultaneously reduces number of visits and increases quality per
visit. These results support our hypothesis that an increase in fixed cost per

THE DEMAND FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

273

TABLE 5
ESTIMATES OF INCOME, UNCOMPENSATED PRICE ELASTICITIES,
AND COMPENSATED PRICE ELASTICITIES

-

Elasticity

A. Income:
Income elasticity of visits ()
Income elasticity of quality ()
B. Iincompensated price:
Quality-adjusted price elasticity of

visits (j)

Quality-adjusted price elasticity of
quality (ig)
Fixed travel-cost elasticity of Visits (i,,')
Fixed travel-cost elasticity of quality

(q')

Fixed-cost

elasticity of visits ()

Fixed-cost elasticity of quality (ag) . . ..

Combined
Sample
Means

Mott Haven Westchester
Means*
Meanst

1.318
.162

1.557

.114

1.267
.182

— .060

— .114

— .049

— .088
— .071

— .099
— .099

— .083
— .065

.016
—.117
.024

.013
—.165
.021

.017
—.107
.027

—.032

—.086

—.020

— .085

— .097

— .079

— .062

— .091

— .056

.017
—.103

.014

.018

—.153

—.092

.026

.022

.029

C. Compensated price:

Quality-adjusted price elasticity of
Visits (i,)
Quality-adjustcd price elasticity of
quality (Eq)
travel-cost elasticity of visits

Fixed

(,')

Fixed travel-cost elasticity of quality

(d'

Fixed-cost elasticity of visits ()
Fixed-cost elasticity of quality () . . . .

are for 179 Moo Haven residents in the regressions in table 4.
f Means arc for 389 Westchester residents in the regressions in table 4.
* Means

visit lowers the relative price of quality and leads consumers to substitute
quality for visits. The coefficient of TRFIXED in the demand function
for visits is statistically significant at the 8 percent level of confidence on a
one-tailed test. The coefficient of the same variable in the demand function for quality is significant at the 2.5 percent level of confidence on a

one-tailed test. The estimated fixed cost effects are not due to multicollinearity between TRFIXED and mother's schooling. When the latter
variable is omitted from the regressions, the coefficient of TRFIXED in
the visit function equals —0.268(1 = —1.35). The corresponding coefficient in the quality function equals 0.915(1 = 1.94).
Quality-adjusted price has a negative and statistically significant regression coefficient in the demand curve for quality. The same variable
has an insignificant negative regression coefficient in the demand curve for
visits. In our theoretical analysis we showed that an increase in qualityadjusted price raises the relative price of quality and causes the ratio of
quality to visits to fall. If one accepts the null hypothesis that qualityadjusted price has no impact on visits, then the findings are consistent with
this prediction.

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

274

Since the point estimate of the effect of quality-adjusted price on visits
is negative, it is worth examining tile behavior of the quality-visit ratio

based on the quality-adjusted price elasticities of quality and visits

).

This analysis also enables us to explore the proposition that
(q and
the absolute value of the fixed-cost elasticity of visits should exceed the
absolute value of the quality-adjusted price elasticity of visits. According
to the uncompensated (money income constant) price elasticities comexceeds
(0.088 vs.
puted at combined sample means in table 5, B,
0.060). Moreover, the absolute value of the fixed travel-cost elasticity
= 0.071) also exceeds f.. Similar conclusions emerge when \Vestchester means are employed to compute the elasticities. When, however,
exceeds both IqI and
Mott Haven means are employed,
was
indicated
previously,
the
fixed
travel-cost elasticities may underAs
estimate the relevant fixed-cost elasticities ( and q) due to the absence
of a measure of waiting time per visit in the MD survey. Using Aday and
Andersen's (1975) estimate of waiting time per visit, we have calculated
these elasticities by using the mean of FIXED and the regression coefficient of TRFIXED. This raises the absolute value of the fixed cost
elasticity of visits from 0.060 to 0.117 and raises the numerical value of the
corresponding elasticity of quality from 0.016 to 0.024 at the combined
sample means. At I\Iott Haven, Westchester, or combined sample means,

II

.

kV

exceeds

Our predictions concerning the relative magnitudes of price elasticities

pertain to compensated (utility or real income constant) rather than to
uncompensated price elasticities. Estimates of compensated price elasticities are shown in table 5, C. These estimates are derived from equations
(23)—(26) in table 2. The figures in the table provide dramatic evidence

in favor of all our hypotheses. Regardless of the means on which the
and
elasticities are based, ICqI is greater than . In addition, both
The
comparisons
in
table
5,
C
differ
somewhat
are greater than
from those in 5, B because the income elasticity of visits is much larger
than that of quality. Moreover, theshare of total pediatric cost in income,
while small in an absolute sense, is approximately twice as large as the
share of total fixed cost.

Several recent studies have established the importance of mother's
schooling as a positive correlate of efficiency in the production of healthy

children.'8 Michael (1972) has described the impact of a "neutral"
improvement in efficiency in the production of all household commodities.19 With money income held constant, the demand for inputs associated
with a given commodity would rise, fall, or remain the same as the income

'

19

See, for

example, Friedman and Leibowitz 1975 and Grossman 1975.

A neutral improvement in efficiency is one that raises all marginal products in all

production functions by the same percentage. The analysis of the role of mother's schooling would have to be modified if the improvement in efficiency associated with it were

not neutral.

THE DEMAND FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

275

elasticity of the commodity were greater than, less than, or equal to one.
We have found that the income elasticity of visits is greater than one and
the income elasticity of quality is less than one. Therefore, an increase in

mother's schooling should increase visits and lower quality, which is
consistent with the schooling coefficients reported in table 4•20

IV. Summary and Implications
In this paper we have developed a model of quantity-quality substitution
and have used it to study the demand for pediatric care. The power of our
theoretical model lies in its ability to make predictions about magnitudes,

as well as signs of various effects. Compare our approach with that of
others. Inman (1976) regresses number of visits on the shadow price of a
visit (7r) and other variables but omits the shadow price of quality (ltq).
Since ire, and lrq are likely to be positively correlated and since an increase
in lrq should raise visits (v), his calculation of the effect ofr0 on v probably
is biased downward in absolute value. Fuchs and Kramer (1972), Newhouse and Phelps (1974, 1976), and Feldman (1975) regress the product
of quality and visits on quality-adjusted price. This approach does not
distinguish variations in the ratio of visits to quality due to variations in
income, fixed cost, or quality-adjusted price.
Specifically, we predict that the ratio of quality to visits falls as income
and quality-adjusted price rise, and rises as the fixed cost of a visit rises.
Moreover, visits are more responsive to a 1 percent change in fixed cost
than to a 1 percent change in quality-adjusted price. These predictions
are supported by the empirical analysis. They hold for price elasticities
whether money income or real income (utility) is held constant.
Consider the implications of the foregoing analysis for government
policies designed to increase the utilization of physicians' services, such as
national health insurance or direct cash subsidies. Various proposals for
comprehensive national health insurance have been pending in the United
States Congress for the past 8 years. Recently, it has been recommended
that coverage be limited to maternal and pediatric care.21 Since our findings indicate that private pediatric visits are very sensitive to income, it
might be more efficient to increase these visits by means of direct cash
subsidies rather than by means of national health insurance. According
20 For a discussion of the effects of other variables in the demand functions, see Goldman and Grossman (1976).
21 See the Maternal and Child Comprehensive Health Bill of 1976 introduced by
Congressman James H. Scheuer of New York. A full treatment of the merits of such
legislation would take account of the impact of pediatric care on health outcomes and of
the effect of the legislation on the rate of inflation in the medical care market. This treatment is beyond our scope, and we take as given the goal of increased utilization of pediatric care. It should also be realized that our results pertain to the demand for pediatric
care by a relatively low income sample of New York City residents. Although they might
not generalize to the behavior of all families in the population, they are very relevant in
the analysis of government policies that are aimed at the urban poor.

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

276

to our results, such a policy would lower the ratio of quality to visits de-

manded. If national health insurance is adopted, then the form of the
insurance might have a significant impact on the quantity-quality mix
demanded. A policy that pays a fixed percentage of the fee of a visit (that
is, a policy with a positive coinsurance rate) would lower quality-adjusted

price and cause a substitution of quality for visits. A policy that pays a
fixed amount of the fee of a visit may be viewed as a policy that reduces
the fixed cost of a visit. Therefore, such a policy would cause a substitution

toward visits and away from quality. The relative merits of alternative
forms of national health insurance depend in part on the relative effects
of quality and visits on child health outcomes. This topic deserves high
priority on an agenda for future research.
Appendix
Table Al contains definitions of all variables in the hedonic fee function and the
estimated function. There is no a priori reason to choose a particular specification
of the hedonic fee function. We have experimented with several and have chosen
the semilogarithmic function because of its widespread use in the literature (e.g.,
Griliches 1971). The use of a linear function does not alter our basic results. Moreover, demand functions based on alternative specifications of the hedonic fee
function do not differ from those reported in the text.
TABLE Al
ORDINARY LEAST SQUARES ESTIMATE OF HEDONIC PRICE
FUNCTION FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

Moi-r HAVEN
VARIABLE

Regression
Coefficient

WESTCHESTER

1-Ratio

Regression
Coefficient

1-Ratio

—.005
.0001

—1.66
1.58

Years since physician gradu-

ated from medical school

(experience)
Square of experience
Primary practice in pediatrics
= 1*

Primary practice in internal
medicine = l
Primary practice in obstetricsgynecology = 1

Primary practice in surgery

=

1

Primary practice in another
specialty = 1'
Board certification in pediatrics = 1
Board certification in internal
medicine = I

Board certification in obstetries-gynecology = 1
Board certification in surgery
=1

Board certification in another
specialty = 1

—.017

.0004

—4.37

4.08

.015

.18

.263

5.79

—.020

—.21

.051

.69

.340

3.29

.041

.43

—.054

—.32

.102

.92

.120

1.03

—.017

—.24

.247

4.18

.135

3.96

— .079

— .44

.196

.81

— .006

— .03

— .057

— .55

.166

1.03

.775

3.14

.169

1.48

.095

1.15

—-

THE DEMAND FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

277

TABLE Al (Continurd)
Morr HAVEN

Regression
Coefficient

VARIABLE

Primary practice in pediatrics

WESTCHESTER

1-Ratio

Regression
Coefficient
— .007

1-Ratio

dummy x experience ....

— .002

— .60

medicine dummy x experience
Primary practice in obstetrics-

.005

1.41

.0003

.13

—.014

—3.61

—.0004

—.14

— .003

— .69

.002

.79

Primary practice in internal

gynecology dummy x experience

Primary practice in surgery
dummy x experience ....
Primary practice in another
specialty dummy x experience
Memberships in organizations
recognized as special societies by American Medical
Association

Appointment on medical
school faculty = I
Medical education received in
New York City = I

.002
— .0000

a foreign country =

1

...

Physician does not talk to

—0

.013

.48

.028

1.81

—.137

—1.28

—.034

—1.02

— .041

—1.02

.005

.28

.068

2.31

—.025

—1.22

— .124

—2.75

.032

.51

.002

.04

.006

.25

— .071

— .97

— .013

— .29

Medical education received in
.

.28

—3.93

mother in her own language

=

lt

Mother usually does not talk
enough to physician = 1 .

Mother bothered that she usually does not talk enough to

physician =

CONSTANT
R2

I

1.752

...

1.752

.180

...

NoTE—Dependent variable is natural logarithm of usual fee charged by physician for a pediatric office
visit. Sample size is 1,687; R5 is unadjusted coefficient of multiple determination.
* Omitted class is primary practice in general practice.
t Only mothers who do not speak English were asked whether the physician talks to them in their own
language.
Constrained to be the same in the two areas.

The fee regression is run across all usual sources of pediatric care reported by
mothers in the study and control groups of the MD survey. The usual source, as
opposed to the actual source, is the physician who normally provides pediatric

care to the family.22 If each mother reported a single usual source and each mother
used a different physician, the number of usual sources, number of physicians, and

number of families in the regression all would be equal. In fact, these three variables are not equal because some mothers indicated more than one usual source

and different mothers took their children to the same physician. In the actual
22 Mothers of children in the study group were interviewed at least bi-monthly during
an entire year, while mothers of children in the control group were interviewed only once.
Members of the control group are excluded from the demand functions because the dependent variable in the demand curve for visits is annual number of pediatric visits. Since
mothers in the control sample were interviewed only once and were asked about visits in
the last month, an estimate of annual visits for them would be subject to a much larger
variance than an estimate of annual visits for the study group.

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
278
regression there are 443 physicians who account for 1,687 usual sources of care
(observations).23 Fee information was not obtained if the mother said that part
or all of the fee was covered by health insurance. Therefore, these observations
are excluded from the regression.
The independent variables in the regression are designed to measure variations
in productivity among physicians or variations in the quality of pediatric services
that they produce. Productivity differences are traced in turn to experience (age),
vintage, and model effects. Since vintage and experience effects may differ by
specialty, interaction terms between number of years since graduation from medical school and each of the five specialties are used as independent variables. The
first 21 variables in the fee function are used to capture experience, model, and
vintage effects and are taken from the American Medical Association and New
York State medical directories. The last three variables are entered to capture that

part of the demand for pediatric care that is, more properly, a demand for information by mothers about the state of health of their children. Mothers should be willing to pay price premiums to physicians who convey relatively large amounts of
information. In computing the fee function we allow all regression coefficients except

the constant term to vary by area of residence (Mott Haven or Westchester).
This procedure is adopted because of Goldman's (1975) evidence that each area
constitutes a local market for medical care.24
23 A justification for the usual source, rather than the physician, as the basic unit of
observation is that more weight is given in the determination of quality to the characteristics of physicians who provide relatively large amounts of pediatric care. Our procedure

is equivalent to the estimation of an aggregate fee function in which each observation
(physician) is weighted by the square root of the number ofpatients who saw that physician.
24 Detailed discussions of the role of each variable in the hedonic fee function are contained in Steinwald and Sloan (1974) and Goldman (1975). The specific form of the fee

function that we estimate is

In PRICE =

a0

+ Js 1=5 a,1X,,Dj + u,

where D1 equals one for Mott Haven residents and zero for Westchester residents, D2
equals zero for Mott Haven residents and one for Westchester residents, X11 or X2

denotes one of the 24 independent variables in table Al, and u is the regression residual
associated with a given observation. The regression coefficients in table Al are used to
compute quality (QUAL) and the preliminary estimate of quality-adjusted price (QUAL-

PRICE) as

In QUAL =
ln QUALPRICE =

a,jXjjDj,
a0

+ u.

The inclusion of the regression constant (a0) in the logarithm of quality-adjusted price is
consistent with the view that quality is a units-free index, while quality-adjusted price
has the same Units as observed price. Price and income elasticities of demand would not
be altered if the intercept were treated in a different manner. We constrain the regression
constant to be the same in each area because we include area of residence as an exogenous

argument of the quality-adjusted price function (see n. 12). Therefore, a dummy
variable distinguishing market areas is employed as an instrumental variable in
the estimation of demand functions. As we show in Goldman and Grossman (1976),
such variables should be excluded from the hedonic fee function. We have experimented
with alternative treatments of the constant term. When it is not constrained to be the
same in each area, the regression coefficients are not significantly different from those
reported in table Al. As would be expected, demand functions estimated with this alternative fee function are nearly identical with those presented in Section III. For discussions
of the results in table Al, see Goldman (1975) and Goldman and Grossman (1976).

THE DEMAND FOR PEDIATRIC CARE

279

References
Acton, Jan P. "Nonmonetary Factors in the Demand for Medical Services: Some
Empirical Evidence." J.FE. 83, no. 3 (June 1975): 595—6 14.
"Demand for Health Care among the Urban Poor, with Special Emphasis
on the Role of Time." In The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector,

edited by Richard N. Rosett. New York: Neale Watson Acad. Publication (for
Nat. Bur. Econ. Res.), 1976.
Aday, Lu Ann, and Andersen, Ronald. Development of Indices of Access to Medical

Care. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Health Admin., 1975.
Allen, Roy G. D. Mathematical Analysis for Economists. New York: St. Martin's,
1964.

Becker, Gary S., and Lewis, H. Gregg. "On the Interaction between the Quantity
and Quality of Children." In New Economic Approaches to Fertility, edited by
Theodore W. Schultz. Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the National
Bureau of Economic Research and the Population Council. J.P.E. 81, no. 2,
Pt. 2 (March/April 1973): S279—S288.

Cowling, Keith, and Rayner, A. J. "Price, Quality and Market Share." J.P.E.
78, no. 6 (November/December 1970): 1292—1309.

Feldman, Roger. "Price and Quality Differences in the Physicians' Service
Market." Presented at the annual meeting of the Allied Social Science Associations, Dallas, December 1975.

Friedman, Bernard, and Leibowitz, Arleen. "The Bequest Motive in Human
Capital and the Health Care of Children." Unpublished paper. Brown Univ.,
Dept. Econ., 1975.

Fuchs, Victor R. The Service Economy. New York: Columbia Univ. Press (for Nat.
Bur. Econ. Res.), 1968.
Fuchs, Victor R., and Kramer, MarciaJ. Determinants of Expenditures for Physicians'
Services in the United States, 1948—68. Rockville, Md., and New York: Nat. Center

Health Services Res. and Development and Nat. Bur. Econ. Res., 1972.
Goldman, Fred. "An Economic Analysis of Child Health." Ph.D. dissertation,
City Univ. New York, 1975.
Goldman, Fred, and Grossman, Michael. "The Demand for Pediatric Care: An
Hedonic Approach." NBER Working Paper no. 134, April 1976.
Goldman, Steven M., and Uzawa, Hirofumi. "A Note on Separability in Demand
Analysis." Econometrica 32, no. 3 (July 1964): 387—98.
Griliches, Zvi. "Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric Analysis
of Quality Change." In Government Price Statistics, Hearings, U.S. Congress,
Joint Economic Committee. Washington: Government Printing Office, 1961.
ed. Price Indexes and Quality Change: Studies in New Methods of Measurement.

Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1971.
Grossman, Michael. The Demandfor Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.

New York: Columbia Univ. Press (for Nat. Bur. Econ. Res.), 1972.
"The Correlation between Health and Schooling." In Household Production

and Consumption, edited by Nestor E. Terleckyj. New York: Columbia Univ.
Press (for Nat. Bur. Econ. Res.), 1975.

Holtmann, Alphonse G., and Olsen, E. Odgers, Jr. "The Determinants of the
Demand for Physician Visits in a Consumer's Utility Model." Unpublished
paper. State Univ. New York at Binghamton, Dept. Econ., 1974.
Houthakker, Hendrik S. "Compensated Changes in Quantities and Qualities
Consumed." Rev. Econ. Studies 19, no. 3 (1952—53): 155—64.

Inman, Robert P. "The Family Provision of Children's Health: An Economic
Analysis." In The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector, edited by

280

JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

Richard N. Rosett. New York: Neale Watson Acad. Publication (for Nat. Bur.
Econ. Res.), 1976.
King, A. Thomas. "The Demand for Housing: Integrating the Roles ofJourneyto-Work, Neighborhood Quality, and Prices." In Household Production and
Consumption, edited by Nestor E. Terleckyj. New York: Columbia Univ Press
(for Nat. Bur. Econ. Res.), 1975.
Michael, Robert T. The Effect of Education on Efficiency in Consumption. New York:

Columbia Univ. Press (for Nat. Bur. Econ. Res.), 1972.
Muth, Richard F. "Household Production and Consumer Demand Functions."
Econometrica 34, no. 3 (July 1966): 699—708.
Cities and Housing; the Spatial Pattern of Urban Residential Land Use. Chicago:

Univ. Chicago Press, 1969.
Newhouse, Joseph P., and Phelps, Charles E. "Price and Income Elasticities for
Medical Care Services." In The Economics of Health and Medical Care, edited by

Mark Penman. London: Macmillan, 1974.
"New Estimates of Price and Income Elasticites of Medical Care Services."
In The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector, edited by Richard N.

Rosett. New York: Neale Watson Acad. Publication (for Nat. Bur. Econ. Res.),
1976.

Newhouse, Joseph P., and Sloan, Frank A. "Physician Pricing: Monopolistic or
Competitive: Reply." Southern Econ. J. 38, no. 4 (April 1972): 577—80.
Nichols, D.; Smolensky, E.; and Tideman, T. N. "Discrimination by Waiting
Time in Merit Goods." A.E.R. 61, no. 3, Pt. 1 (June 1971): 312—23.
Ohta, Makoto, and Griliches, Zvi. "Automobile Prices Revisited: Extensions of
the Hedonic Hypothesis." In Household Production and Consumption, edited by
Nestor E. Terleckyj. New York: Columbia Univ. Press (for Nat. Bur. Econ.
Res.), 1975.
Phelps, Charles E. "Effects of Insurance on Demand for Medical Care." In Equity
in Health Services: Empirical Analyses in Social Policy, edited by Ronald Andersen,

Joanna Kravits, and Odin \V. Anderson. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger, 1975.
Rosen, Sherwin. "Short-Run Employment Variation on Class I-Railroads in the
U.S., 1947—1963." Econometrica 36, nos. 3—4 (July—October 1968): 511—29.

"Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition." J.P.E. 82, no. 1 (January/February 1974): 34—55.
Steinwald, Bruce, and Sloan, Frank A. "Determinants of Physicians' Fees." J. Bus.
47, no 4 (October 1974): 493—511.
Straszheim, Mahlon R. An Econometric Analysis of the Urban Housing Market. New

York: Columbia Univ. Press (for Nat. Bur. Econ. Res.), 1975.
Theil, Henri. "Qualities, Prices and Budget Enquiries." Rev. Econ. Studies 19, no. 3
(1952—53): 129—47.

Triplett, Jack E. The Theory of Hedonic Quality Measurement and Its Use in Price
Indexes. BLS Staff Paper no. 6. Washington: Dept. Labor, Bur. Labor Statis.,
1971.

Willis, Robert. "A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior."
In New Economic Approaches to Fertility, edited by Theodore W. Schultz. Proceed-

ings of a conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research
and the Population Council. J.P.E. 81, no.2, Pt. 2 (March/April 1973): S14—
S64.

