            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              Price Behavior in Primary
              Manufacturing Industries,
                       1958—73



                     Joel Popkin




                Working Paper No. 136




        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
                1750 New York Avenue, N.W.
                Washington, D.C.    20006




                        June, 1976




     NBER working papers are distributed informally and in
limited number for comments only. They should not be quoted
without written permission.
     This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.
         Price Behavior in Primary Manufacturing Industries, 1958_73*

                              Joel Popkin



                             Introduction


          The U.S. economy is still feeling the consequences of the sharp

acceleration of inflation in 1973—74. While the rate of increase in prices

slowed considerably ——   by half ——   in   1975, the reduced pace is still high

by historical standards and is having a significant effect on the speed

with which policies to reduce unemployment are being adopted. There is

concern that if policies designed to reduce unemployment promptly and

significantly are adopted, they will push inflation rates quickly from

their already high levels back into the double—digit range.

          It is widely accepted that the acceleration of inflation to

rates above 10 percent is attributable directly to the sharp rise in

prices of primary commodities ——      food,   fuel and basic industrial materials.

Studies by Nordhaus and Shoven [1976] and Popkin [1974] show that most of

the acceleration in the Consumer Price Index and GNP deflator during

1973 and 1974 is attributable to the pass—through of the rise in prices

of primary commodities. Such attribution can be accepted regardless of

one's view about the basic causes of inflation. It could be that the

overall price level is not independent of a change in relative prices,



         *This study was supported by a grant from the National Science
Foundation.   An earlier version was presented at meetings of the Eastern
Economic Association, Bloomsburg, Pa., April 17, 1976. I would like to
thank Ronald Bodkin, Avram Kisselgoff, Michael McKee and Joslin DePuy
for their contributions, either direct or by way of comment, to this
paper.
                               —2—

such as that which occurred when prices of primary commodities rose

relative to those of other goods and services. Or it could be that

monetary policy was geared, at least at first, to the validation of the

sharp rise in primary commodity prices, rather than to risking a

decline in output and employment that typically occurs when monetary

tightening is significant.

         Forecasts of a return to double—digit inflation are usually

based on the assumption that commodity inflation will reemerge, rather

than that unit labor costs and unit profits will accelerate.   The term

commodity inflation as used in describing the 1973—74 experience is

loosely applied. In fact there were three components of inflation each

of which is attributable to a different cause. The most widely remarked

component is the rise in prices of farm foods, retail food purchases of

which have a very large weight in the CPI. Based on the 1967 Input—

Output Table, the agricultural industries producing these products have a

weight of 7.1 percent in GNP. The sharp increase during 1973—74 is,

like most large movements in farm prices, attributed to changes in

supply. In 1973—74 worldwide supply of grains was down markedly and

this affected directly, and indirectly through animal feed costs, the

prices of foods as they left the farm.

         The successful imposition of cartel pricing is the reason for

the sharp rise in the price of imported crude oil and competing fuels——

 the second component of the 1973—74 commodity inflation.   The domestic

 crude oil and natural gas industry and coal mining have a weight of 1.2

 percent in GNP; the importation of crude oil and refined petroleum

 products increases this percentage when domestic consumption rather than
                                —3—

production is considered.

         The third element of the recent commodity inflation is concen-

trated in primary commodities other than food and fuel. The composition

of this group requires definition. If defined similarly to food and

fuel, the group would consist of raw commodities like ores, quarry

products, cotton and trees. Many such commodities are owned by firms that do

the initial processing of them, i.e., they are owned by manufacturers of

primary commodities. Few such commodities are priced for the wholesale

price index, and except for a few items, like cotton, for which supply

shifts are important, the prices of the mineral and forestry products re—

flect the derived demand for them. What is in fact meant when reference is

made to the nonfood, nonfuel component of commodity inflation, is the

behavior of those commodities that are produced In the first stages of the

processing of the raw commodities. Such commodities can properly be termed

primary manufactures.   They consist of items like industrial chemicals,

woodpulp, lumber, cement, and steel and aluminum ingots. Their production

requires real fixed capital of which there was some indication of shortage.

The shortage of capital input rather than of the basic raw materials input

is central to the distinction and led to the characterization of the

Industries producing many of these primary manufactures as bottleneck

Industries.

         In 1967 the value of shipments In these Industries was 13.1 percent

of GNP. That their importance exceeds that of raw farm products and raw

fuels reflects the fact that to the value of the raw materials these

Industries consume is added payments to labor, capital and other factors

comprising value added. In 1967 value added accounted for one third of the

value of shipments In these industries.
                               —4—

        It is the price behavior in these primary manufacturing industries

and its implication for general inflation that is the subject of this

paper. The industries comprising primary manufacturing are quite diverse.

They differ with respect to labor and capital intensity, domestic and
                                                                —— consumer
international market structure and the markets that they supply

                                      manufacturing and construction. To
goods manufacturing, producer goods

shed light on the price behavior of the group as a whole it is necessary

to disaggregate the total somewhat. In this study they are broken down

into eight separate industries. The exact definition of each, both in

terms of 4—digit SIC industry and 1—0 cell, is available on request. In

                                         consist of the primary manufacturers
general, the eight separate industries

producing (1) textiles, (2) wood, (3) paper, (4) chemicals, (5) fertilizers,

(6) stone, clay and glass, (7) iron and steel, and (8) nonferrous metals.


                          The Model Framework

         This paper is concerned with the dynamics of price movements in

certain industrial markets; focus will be on the rate of change of prices.

 In the simplest case it can be assumed that a change in price reflects the
                                         another. In other words it is entirely
movement from one equilibrium price to

 explained by shifts in supply and demand curves.   There are many factors

 that cause shifts in demand curves. In most empirical work such shifts are

 attributed to changes in relative prices and income. In a smaller but

 important number of studies changes in stocks of real and financial assets

 have been added. In still more complex descriptions of demand shifts,

 usually associated with demands for durable goods where intertemporal

 considerations are relevant, rates of Interest play a role.
                                —5—
          The specification of the supply function is less clear cut,

particularly with respect to sorting out the various hypotheses about

the structure of markets. The variables that enter the supply function

under the assumption of perfect competition are known because the function

is derived by positing short—run profit maximization. In imperfect markets

the variables that enter the supply function, and the form of their

functional relationship, cannot be determined unambiguously because for

one reason or another, firms in the industry may not be establishing supply

schedules with the objective of achieving short—run profit maximization.

The variables that enter supply functions under both profit maximizing

and nonprofit maximizing assumptions may look similar, so it becomes

difficult to reject many of the hypotheses about price formation.

          When the notion is introduced that any kind of market need not be

in equilibrium, the problems of identification intensify. Upon comparison of

price equations that purport to reflect competitive markets that are not

always in equilibrium because of (1) uncertainty (Arrow [1959] and Debreu

 [1959]), or (2) search costs (Phelps and Winter [1970] and Okun [1975]),

with those reflecting full cost pricing hypotheses in which markups vary

to achieve a target return, it becomes even more difficult to reject hypotheses

about the nature of markets. What follows is a discussion of the determinants

of price behavior in two kinds of markets and how equations that look alike

under various assumptions about market structure may nonetheless be

distinguished, albeit, in most cases, weakly.

          Diagram 1 depicts price changes in a market that behaves compe-

titively and is always in equilibrium. Demand shifts may be attributable
                                 —6—
to factors discussed above. Changes in factor prices shift supply curves

when the market is competitive and the analysis takes place over a time

period long enough for factor inputs to vary. If there are three factors

of production, labor, capital and materials, changes in the position

of the supply curve in price-quantity space will be determined by w, the

change in straight—time labor compensation per unit of time, pm, the

change in materials input prices, and r, the change in the rental price

of capital.

          Diagram 2 depicts a competitive market in which price is not

always in equilibrium. That disequilibria arise is usually attributed to

variable lags on the part of sellers in changing prices. The same variables

shift the supply and demand curves, but price may be other than at

equilibrium. To pursue this case further it is useful to define the

demand curve as reflecting a schedule of orders that will be placed at

various prices and the supply curve as a schedule of production that will

be undertaken in response to various prices.     In equilibrium, production

is equal to incoming orders, and price changes occur as the production

and orders curves shift.

          But if price departs from equilibrium, if, for example, it fails to

rise promptly in response to an increase in demand, orders (net of cancella-

tions) will exceed production. The short run result is some combination of

a build—up in unfilled orders and decline in finished goods inventories

(Eckstein and Frômm [1968]). Prices, of course, would rise. The degree of

disequilibrium is measured by the magnitude of the changes in unfilled orders

and finished goods inventories. The relationship between the degree of

disequilibrium and the amount of price rise needed to eliminate it includes

supply and demand elasticities. If demand and supply curves are characterized

by constant price elasticities (cz for demand,    for supply) the relationship is
    /                                         —7—


                      1e
                                 I\       1




where A               ratio of orders Placed()to Production(XS)at any given

price.J X equals X plus the change in unfilled orders less the change in



                      =          XS = Bps.     In equilibrium xS =       so equilibrium price,



1e =(i)
               In              disequilibrium       = xxS, so p =
                                                                    ()                   Pc'P


          •
              =A           .      So for any quantity disequilibrium gap A, the size of

the price gap to be closed varies inversely with the values of the elastici-

ties of supply and demand.



finished goods inventories. The smaller the elasticity of demand and/or supply,

the larger the gap between the equilibrium and actual price for any given size

of A.

              In deriving the relationship between demand and price change it

was assumed that the elasticities of supply and demand are fixed. In a short

run model of a competitive market such an assumption about the supply curve

is subject to question. A competitive supply curve with a constant elasticity

implies marginal cost is always proportional to average variable cost.'


              2/
                   Price =     marginal    cost = AXa

                   Total   costs = c   + ..(    X


                   Average variable costs =             A   (
                                                     14-a

                   Marginal costs divided by average variable costs = (14-a)


If that Is the case, capital (fixed factor) utilization does not affect the rate

of price change. rcEl;ting from disequilibrium, except, cf ceurse, in the unique

case of vertical margInal cost when capital i fully utilized. However, In the mo
                                   —8—

typical case, because of the law of variable proportions, it is usually
                                                                                 S
                                                                less elastic
assumed that the short—run supply curve becomes increasingly
                                          [1959]). There has been much debate,
as full capacity is approached (Arrow

based on empirical results, about the way in which capacity utilization

should enter price equations ——   level   or change, and the expected sign

of the coefficient. For the competitive case the level is relevant in

explaining price change and the sign of the coefficient should be positive.-'



            For a more general discussion of the appropriate dimensionalitY
of excess demand variables in price change equations see Laidler and
Parkin [1975].

          The foregoing suggests that to explain price change in a market

that behaves competitively requires three sets of variables: (1) changes in

income, relative prices and other variables that effect changes in the orders

(demand) schedule; (2) changes in the prices
                                                 of the variable factors of

production that cause repositioning of the production (supply) curve; and
                                                     demand measures, that
 (3) a set of variables, frequently termed excess

reflect the magnitude of disequilibrium and the price adjustment required

 to eliminate it. Changes in unfilled orders and finished goods inventories

determine the magnitude of the quantity gap at any price.       The rate of

 utilization of capacity must also be included as an explanatory variable

                                                  to the utilization level at
 to put the gap into perspective with respect

 which it is occurring, to test the assumption that the elasticity of the

 supply curve decreases as production approaches capacity.

           Unlike competitive pricing, there is no unambiguous way to describe
                                                                          of
 pricing under conditions of imperfect competition. A typical description

 such behavior is that firms in the industry are assumed to calculate the
                                    —9—

 normal or standard total cost per unit of producing in the range of demand

 they experience normally. If such a basis for pricing is to be practicable

 to the firm, the actual unit cost of producing in this range should be fairly

 constant. This requires that marginal costs be falling and rising slowly

 and that when they are rising, their contribution to raising total unit

 costs is at least partly offset by declining unit fixed costs.

           To normal unit cost is applied a markup..Y Since standard unit


           1/ The introduction of the word "markup" in a discussion of imperfect
 competition should not be interpreted as implying
                                                   markup pricing is a
 hypothesis relating to behavior in such markets. Markup pricing is, of
 course, simply a rule used by firms in the absence of information. What
 distinguishes perfect from imperfect markets, as has been most recently
 demonstrated by de Menu [1974] is whether price is a markup over marginal
 costs (competitive) or average costs.


costs are'likely to vary among firms while price must be roughly similar

among sellers (particularly in homogeneous oligopolistic markets), normal

markups will vary among firms. On average for the industry they will

probably be set so as to achieve some target rate of return on investment.

It is when price behavior appears geared to the achievement of some target

rate of return on Investment that the inference is usually drawn that per-

fect competition does not obtain.

          As long as demand remains In the range consistent with normal unit

costs, price (markup) will not change. When demand moves outside the range

there are three basic possible kinds of behavior. The first is that markups

always behave procycllcly, that they rise when demand exceeds the output

on which normal unit costs were calculated and that they fall when demand
                                —10--


drops below normal output. A second possibility is that markups remain
                                                                  ——   markups
constant even when demand deviates from the normal output range

are neutral cyclicly. The third possibility is that markups rise when

demand is below normal output but fall when demand exceeds normal output;

in other words markups behave anticyclicly.

          There are, of course, variants of these three behavioral possi-

bilities. One may obtain when demand exceeds the normal output range, another

when demand falls below it. Such combinations of behavior are usually referred

to as asymmetries (Schültze and Tryon [1965]). In all there are nine

combinations of the three basic patterns.

          The connection between the achievement of a target rate of return and

the various types of markup behavior needs to be touched upon.' In situations

in which demand exceeds normal output, the selection of procyclical, anti—

cyclical or cyclicly neutral markup behavior depends on the differences

between the elasticities of total revenue and total costs with respect to
                                                            to volume can be
changes in volume.   The elasticity of costs with respect

assumed to be greater than one for changes in volume beyond the normal output

range. The size of the elasticity will depend on the size of fixed costs

relatiVe to variable costs.    If fixed costs are large, their decline will

 likely offset more of the rise in variable costs than if fixed costs are

 small. The elasticity of total revenue with respect to volume will depend

 on the price elasticity of demand.   If it is greater than one a rise

 In total revenue will be associated with an expansion of sales volume.

 Therefore if the price elasticity of demand is large in the range beyond

 normal output and the total cost elasticity, though greater than one, is
                               —11—
small (because fixed costs are large relative to variable costs), it may

be that a reduction in markups will cause absolute profits to be maintained

or even rise. In that case constant or declining markups will be con-

sistent with the achievement of target returns. If total revenue is

inelastic, or less elastic than total costs, a rising markup is required

to achieve the target.

         %hen demand falls below the normal output range it is likely that

average variable costs, and of course, average fixed costs, are rising

with each unit reduction in output. However, total costs may be rising

or falling. Total revenues may also rise or fall in response to a reduction

in sales volume depending on the elasticity of demand. Again it is possible

that procyclical, anticyclical or cyclicly neutral behavior of markups will

be consistent with maintaining target returns.

          The foregoing analysis has assumed that firms continue to strive

for target returns even when demand falls outside the range of normal out-

put. However, if firms in an industry regard such demand shifts as cyclical

and are striving to earn a long run target return, they may not change markups

at all, regardless of the relationship of demand to normal output. In such

instances markups would be cyclicly neutral, but would vary secularly with

changes in the target and the capital—output ratio.



          -1Nordhaus and Godley [1972] found that for the UK manufacturing
sector (excluding food, beverages and tobacco) markups were cyclicly neutral.

          There is no single variable uniquely appropriate for explaining

changes in markups. But any such variable should reflect the relationship of

demand to potential supply. Potential supply can be represented by


                                 + 1FG,t—l
                                       — 12 —


                                                 and the second, the quantity of
where the first term is capacity output
finished goods inventories on hand. Demand consists of unfilled orders

                                                 of the current period:
of the preceding period plus new orders


                                       + NO


                                                             expressed as a ratio to either,
The difference between the last two expressions,
                                                variable proposed as a measure of the
is a measure of excess demand (ED), a

level of markups:
                                                                    +NO             1/
        UO       -'-NO -IFG,t1          —xCt             uo     1         t   —1.
                                                                                    —

                                                     or ______________
          t—l
                    I              X                     I            +XC,t
                        FG,t—l +   c,t                       FG,t—1




                                                              is attributable to the
             This formulation, somewhat modified,
 comments of Black on Eckstein and Fromm [19681.

             The way in which this measure of excess demand (ED) is introduced
                                                     in normal unit costs ——        labor   and
 (along with variables that measure changes
                                                         on the assumption about the
 materials) into price change equations depends

 behavior of markups. If it is assumed that markups change in the same direc-

 tion regardless of whether demand is less than or greater than normal out-
                              the appropriate variable. If it is positive or
 put, the change in ED is
                                                    is that markups behave either pro
 negative and significant the presumption
                                         If the term is not significant markups are
 or anticyclicly, respectively.

 cyclically neutral. Nonhinearities in these relationships may be tested

 by including the level of ED along with the change.
                                      — 13 —


          To test the hypothesis that the behavior of markups depends on

whether demand is greater than or less than normal output, markups could be

posited as a third order function of ED:


           MU =   a   +bED + cED2 + dED3.

Then:            = b         +2cED   4P +   3d(ED) 2 dED
            dt          dt           dt               dt

But such a form is difficult to test in a meaningful way because of multi—

collinearity among the three variables, all of which contain dED. A more

promising avenue is to construct two different variables. One would measure

dED when ED is less than its mean, or less than a range around its mean,
 dt
and be set to zero otherwise. A similar variable would measure dED above the
                                                                dt
range of normal levels of ED.


          In summary it appears that nthtcompetitive and competitive disquilibrium

price change models can be distinguished in two ways. The first is with

respect to the way in which excess demand is introduced and the expected sign

of the coefficient. The target return model appears to call for variables

measuring the change in excess demand. By using such variables, separated

to test for asymmetries, or along with level variables to test for non—j

linearities, the broad spectrum of noncompetitive hypotheses can be evaluated. In

competitive markets price change would appear to be positively related to the

change in unfilled orders and the level of capacity utilization and negatively

to the change in finished goods inventories.

          The second respect in which the models differ is in the form the

supply shifters take. In competitive models, changes in wage rates and
                              —14—
material prices perform this function. In the model of imperfect competition

described above, the role is assumed by changes in standard unit costs,

perhaps separated into unit labor and unit materials cost)' The methods



          1/
           Changes in capital costs are excluded because appropriate
measures have not yet been constructed; the findings of Nadiri [1976] are
                                                                     in
that such a variable plays a very small role, if significant at all,
short—run models of price change.


usually used to estimate changes in standard unit costs are tantamount to

subtracting from the changes in the various factor prices, say, wage—rates,

the trend rates of change in productivity. If the trend in productivity is

constant, the resulting series resembles the wage rate series itself.

Therefore, it is difficult to distinguish markets based on the alternative

uses of factor prices and normal unit factor costs in industries in which

the trend growth of productivity is constant.- Because of this, and the



          2/
           Even when productivity trends change, a rigorously derived
competitive price equation based on a production function with nonconstant
rates of technological progress would produce a productivity—adjusted wage
rate that resembles estimates of standard unit cost derived in the ways
described above.


lack of quarterly unit material cost data, the weighted average of wage rates

and materials prices will be used in all models.

          Four price equations will be estimated. For the competitive

disequilibrium model the equation is:
                                   —15—
                + c1[y(%w) + (ly)%Epm] + 2'FG + .3%&JO +                    + U•
   (1)




         —1/Variables other than commodity and factor prices in this equation
are, of course, deflated. y is the weight of labor costs in the total of
labor and materials costs.


In the noncompetitive case the equations to be tested are:

   (2) %p =     +   ci1[(y)%Aw +               + cz2%ED   + U.
   (P           + i[(y)%1w + (l—y)%Ap] + 2%ED + 3ED + V.

   (4) %p =     +   1[(y)%w + 1Pm] +                         + 63%ED + w.


          2/
                      is a variable measuring the percentage change in ED when

the level of ED is less than ED —.5(std.dev.of ED), zero otherwise.%LED

is a similar measure that takes on nonzero values when ED> +.5(std.dev.of ED)



          Explicit demand shifters are not specified in the equations.

However, in the competitive case, shifts in demand, when there are no

disequilibria, are reflected in the numerator of the capacity utilization

variable. The new orders variable plays a similar role in the target mark-

up equations.

                                    The Data

          The data are taken from five primary sources: Censuses and Annual

Surveys of Manufactures (Census Bureau), monthly series on manufacturers'

inventories, shipments, new and unfilled orders (Census Bureau), component

series of the monthly wholesale price index (Bureau of Labor Statistics),
                               — 16 —

                                                         of Labor
monthly series on employment, hours and earnings (Bureau
Statistics) and components of the monthly idustria1 production index

(Federal Reserve Board). Data at the three and four digit SIC level (six

and eight digit wholesale price index categories) are combined to form

aggregates for each of the eight primary manufacturing sectors. The

four—digit composition of each of the eight sectors is available on

request. For flow variables, the monthly series is seasonally adjusted

and quarterly averages are formed. For stock variables, monthly series

are seasonally adjusted and the observations for the terminal months

of each calendar quarter are used. The series have been constructed for

1958—75 and most are available monthly.

          Some special series and methods of construction of particular

series require further amplification.

          Prices —— The BLS concordance between its eight—digit WPI commodity

codes and the Census Bureau's seven—digit codes is used to select the index

components for each of the eight sectors.   The indexes are combined using

1967 shipments weights from the Census of Manufactures. Shipments among

the four—digit industries in each sector are netted out of the weights,

using Information on Interindustry sales from the 1967 Input—Output table.

A number of series have some missing monthly observations within the length

of the series and/or either begin or end within the sample period.     Missing

monthly observations are interpolated. When a series ends within the sample

period, a substitute is linked in. When a new series is introduced after

 the beginning of the sample period, a weight is allocated to it (by splitting

 a relevant weight) and the new series is linked in. To avoid this procedure
                                — 17 —

as much as possible, six and sometimes four—digit rather than eight—digit

indexes are used; the higher the level of aggregation, the fewer the

discontinuities. When this is done, advantages, both computational and

with respect to introducing judgments about which series are substitutes

for others, are offset to some extent by the Imprecision stemming from

the fact that the four— and six—digit indexes that are used have been

aggregated by BLS, using 1963 rather than 1967 weights.

          Capacity utilization —— The method is that originally used at

the Wharton School. FRB monthly production indexes are plotted and linear

trend lines fitted to their peaks. The trend lines are assumed to reflect

output at capacity in each period. Some judgment Is introduced in setting

the trend line prior to the first peak in the production series and after

the last one.

          Finished goods inventories —— The Census Bureau's monthly survey

of inventories, shipments, new and unfilled orders does not provide data on

inventories by stage—of—fabrication in the detail required by this study.

Such data are available for the end of each calendar year from the Censuses

and Annual Surveys of Manufactures. So, too, are annual data on shipments

and the value of production (shipments plus change in inventories of

finished goods and goods—in—process). Annual shipments data are interpolated

monthly by using the monthly shipments data. The annual value of produc-

tion is Interpolated monthly, using an index that is the product of the

monthly FRB production indexes and the price indexes described above. The

year—end stock of inventories of finished goods and goods—in—process is

then moved forward a month at a time by adding the value of production

and subtracting shipments.
                                — 18 —

Because annual control totals from the Census and Annual Surveys are used,

the resulting stock at the end of year t + 1 ties into the Census data.

Since the production and shipments series used are seasonally adjusted the

implicit seasonal in the derived inventory series is December
                                                                 = 1.00.

The measure just described is of inventories of finished goods and goods—

in—process because only that total can be interpolated by shipments and

production data.

          Average hourly earnings —— These are data for production workers,

and are adjusted by BLS to exclude the effect of overtime and interindustry

shifts. They have been adjusted further for purposes of this study to

incorporate fringe benefits; the average hourly earnings series are multi-

plied by the ratio of labor costs to payrolls for production workers.

These monthly ratios are the linear interpolation of similar ratios,

obtained annually from Censuses and Annual Survey for the years 1957 and

1967—71. The ratio of labor costs to payrolls does have a cyclical

component because fringe payments are related to the number of production

workers employed (full time) rather than to hours worked. The use of the

annual average however appears to eliminate much of the cyclical component.

The basic straight—time wage data —— so adjusted ——   are   published at the two

digit level only. Accordingly the particular series used for each of the

eight sectors had to be estimated based on average hourly earnings and hours

worked and overtime hours data at the three and four digit SIC level.

          Haterials prices —— With the exceptiono the price of cotton in

the textile sector, phosphate in the fertilizer sector, iron ore and coal

in the steel sector, and sand, gravel, and stone in the stone, clay, and

glass sector, the only prices that enter are those of commodities purchased

by the eight sectors from each other and from utilities and the petroleum
                                —19—


industry. Prices for some of the forestry and mineral products purchased

by the eight industries —— copper ore, trees, etc. ——   are   not available;

many forests and mineral deposits are owned by the manufacturers that pro-

cess them. Even if prices for a broader range of crude industrial ma-

terials were available it is likely that, in the absence of cartel ar-

rangements, they would move primarily with demand (derived demand case)

because supply is relatively fixed. Of course, this is not true of

cotton; there are substantial fluctuations in each year's crop. Prices

of purchased services other than labor are ignored as are purchases of

intermediate and finished manufactured goods. The latter are very small,

a reflection of the fact that the 1—0 structure of the U.S. economy is

nearly triangular.

      Deflation —— Each quarter's new orders are deflated by that quarter's

price index, since the WPI components more nearly reflect the prices at

which orders are taken rather than those at which shipments are made. Both

unfilled orders and inventories (finished goods and goods—in—process) at

the end of each quarter are deflated by the average price index for the

quarter. The ratios of unfilled orders and inventories to new orders

are almost always less than one, except in the case of steel. Therefore

the stock of unfilled orders at the end of a quarter reflects primarily

orders placed during the quarter and the finished goods and goods—in—

process inventories, production undertaken during the quarter.
                                    —20—


               Some Preliminary Quantitative Analysis

    The sharp increase in prices of primary manufactured goods that began

in the second half of 1972 amounted to 27 percent before it ended in April

1974. This increase together with those in farm and crude oil prices

comprise the commodity inflation that wreaked havoc on the U.S. economy,

as well as those of other industrialized countries of the free world. One

can argue that because of the exogenous nature of the events in the farm

and crude oil sectors, the tools of economics are not geared to predict

the resulting inflation in those sectors. The same cannot be said of the

rise in prices of primary manufactured goods. It was the unpredicted

nature of this development that would appear to be a major element in the

recent criticisms focusing on the shortcomings of economics.

     It is the purpose of this paper to determine whether, with the help

of hindsight, the inflation in the primary manufacturing sector can be ex-

plained through the use of econometric models.     But not all economic

analysis, particularly forecasting, is based on econometric method. So it

is useful to see whether a less formal analysis of relevant data provides

any hints of the emergence of the inflation in prices of primary manufactured

goods.

   The rate of capacity utilization is usually a key variable in price

forecasts for specific commodity—producing sectors of the economy. Capacity

utilization rates rose to very high levels during 1973—74 ——     virtually    100


percent ——   but   they had done so in 1965—66 as well, without producing a

 significant acceleration of inflation. In Chart 1 are found data on capacity
                                                          constructed as des-
utilization for the primary manufacturing industries,

 cribed above, and those for total manufacturing, as measured by the Wharton
                                       —21—


index. Both series plotted on the chart are deviations from trend calculated

by regressing the log of the capacity utilization rate on a linear time trend.

These data confirm that trend deviations of capacity utilization in primary

manufacturing were only slightly larger than those for total manufacturing

in 1973—74; in 1965—66, trend deviations in both series were about the same.

In both 1973—74 and in 1965—66, trend deviations in both series were positive

and large.

     It Is clear that the full capacity rates of utilization alone cannot

explain the differences in the Inflation in primary prices between 1965—66

and 1973—74 experiences. When capacity utilization nears 100 percent it

will fail to capture the full extent of excess demand, if demand exceeds

potential output. When this happens one would expect inventories of primary

materials ——   finished   goods Inventories of primary producers and materials

and supplies inventories of users of primary materials ——     to   decline, and/or

unfilled orders placed with primary producers to rise.

     In Charts 2 and 3 are plotted trend deviations of unfilled orders—ship-

ments ratios and inventory—shipments ratios (based on finished goods and

goods—in—process inventories of primary manufacturers) for primary manufac-

turers and for the total manufacturing sector. Inventory—shipments ratios

of primary manufacturers show much larger negative deviations from trend in

1973—74 than 1965—66, both absolutely and vis—a—vis manufacturing as a whole.

They were the largest for the entire sample period except for one quarter in

1959 in which steel producers' finished goods Inventories were drawn down by

orders In anticipation of a strike. It is also interesting to note that

while capacity utilization was high in manufacturing as a whole in both
                                     —22—


periods, negative deviations from trend in the inventory—sa]5ratios were

no larger on average during 1973—74 than during 1965—66, so manufacturers

of goods beyond the primary stage were able to keep up with demand without

drawing on inventories.

     Similar signs of the high degree of excess demand facing primary manu-

facturers are found in the behavior of the unfilled orders—shipments ratios

in Chart 2. Except for the effect of the steel strike in 1959, the size of

the positive deviations (from trend) during 1973—74 of the unfilled orders—

shipments ratio for primary manufacturers its trend is unparalleled in the

sample period. Again it is of interest that for manufacturing as a whole

deviations of the ratio from trend were no larger in 1973—74 than in 1965—66.

     When capacity utilization, inventory—shipments ratios and unfilled

orders—shipments ratios are considered jointly, it is clear that in 1973—74

demand for primary commodities exceeded supply by substantially more than

it had at any time during the 1958—72 period.        And it also appears that



        i-"             data are not available that would permit this kind
              Unfortunately,
of analysis for the Korean War period.



in 1973—74 excess demand for primary products was far greater than for other

manufactures —— a situation that was not attendant to the high rates of

capacity utilization in 1965—66.

     The analysis that led to these conclusions could not have been carried

 out with data on inventories, shipments and unfilled orders at the level at

which    they   are published by the Census Bureau. The closest one can come to
                                  —23—


approximating values for the primary industries, as defined in this study,

is to analyze the behavior of shipments, inventories and unfilled orders

for published market classification groupings "construction, ... and other

materials and supplies." These categories are very broad, covering all

manufacturing except finished goods production. And   only   total inventories,

not finished goods inventories, are available for the groupings. Use of

these data, such as they are, to infer behavior in the primary industries

that are included in these broad aggregates turns out to understate the

extent of excess demand primary producers faced.    The data indicate that

the magnitude of the rise in unfilled orders—shipments ratios and decline

in inventory—shipments ratios were only half as large during 1973—74 as

those that obtained for the primary groupings.


                         Regression Results

     Two general comments are appropriate at the Outset —— one about the

sample period, the other about lags. The data required for the analysis

are available beginning in 1958, the first year for which detailed data on

orders, inventories and shipments are obtainable.    The first observation,

however, reflects the lag terms used for the variables in each sector,

with the result that the sample period begins in 1959 in most industries.

 The terminal point is l973—IV. The reason for ending the sample period in

 1973 is to provide extra actual observations with which to compare fore-

 casts generated by each of the four equations for each sector. Thus, con-

 ditional forecasts will be reported for 1974 and 1975, admittedly a rigorous

 period over which to test price equations.
                                     24



    With respect to lags, two different strategies are employed. The first
                                                             price may be affected
relates to the input price variable. The current output
                                          taken place over a considerable period
by changes in input prices that have

of the past..! Firms may adjust their own prices relatively slowly to



        It may even reflect expected future input prices, but this is ig-
nored in the equations tested above, except to the extent past price changes
are proxies for expected future price changes.



changes in factor prices for various reasons:       frequent price changes are

not costless; firms may not mark up existing materials' inventories when

prices rise for materials ordered currently; etc. Indeed wage rates and

materials prices may have different lag structures.       Accordingly, the input

price change variable was inserted as a second order polynomial running

from "t"    to   "t—7". Examination of these Almon lag coefficients, some of

which were negative, and their stability over various time periods, led to

some modifications, unique to each industry.       In general lag terms with

negative or small positive weights were dropped.       In two industries, fertil-

 izers and nonferrous metals, separate lag structures were developed for

materials price and wages. Once the lag terms and their weights were so

 decided, they were combined into one variable.

      The excess demand variables are all measured in t1t11t except for the

 lumber industry. The underlying assumption is that the bulk of the adjust-

 ment to excess demand is based on what has been perceived in the recent

 past, and the recent past is fully summarized
                                                    In the most recent ("t—l")

 behavior   of the excess demand variables. A distributed lag is not deemed

 appropriate.
                   Current values of excess demand variables are used in the
 case of lumber, prices of which appear to adjust very quickly.
                                   —25—


     The results obtained upon estimation of the competitive disequilibrium

and the three target markup models for each of the eight industries are

found in Table 1. Pn analysis of those results by industry follows.


Textiles

     Textile prices appear to be explained best by equation three. All three

variables in the equation are significant at the five percent level. Mark-

ups are procyclical and nonlinear. The markup rises at ancreasing rate

which suggests some underlying target return objective. Over the observed

range of ED it adds between 0.50 and 0.63 percent to price changes, at an

annual rate, accounting on average for one—tenth of the average absolute

change in price. The regression coefficient of the variable measuring

wages and material's prices is less than unity. When the industry is In

equilibrium, with the ED variable at its mean level, prices drift up about

two percent per year, perhaps reflecting increases in the capital—labor

ratio; industry analysts have noted increasing use of capital in textile

manufacturing.


Lumber

     Prices fluctuate more in the lumber industry than in the other seven

primary sectors. Input prices are not significant.          Capacity utilization



     -'The input price index consists only of wages. Tree prices are not
available and their meaning would be unclear since many large lumber com-
panies own their own natural resources.



is clearly significant in the competitive disequilibrium model, while the

disequilibrium measures ——   inventories   and unfilled orders ——   are   not
                                  —26—


significant at the five percent level. None of the excess demand variables

are significant in the other three equations; the input price measure is,

although it has an unacceptably large coefficient. These results suggest

that lumber prices behave quite competitively and are usually close to being

in equilibrium. Over its observed range, capacity utilization contributes

between 0.9 and 1.2 percent to price change, at an annual rate, an average

about one—tenth of the average absolute change in price. The range of con-

tribution is quite small which is reflected in the rather low percentage of

variance explained by the equation. In equilibrium, with capacity utilization

at its mean, prices drift upward at a rate of almost one percent per year.


Paper

     Prices in the paper industry are positively related to input prices,

unfilled orders and capacity utilization in the best result which appears

to be given by the competitive disequilibrium model. A one percent rise in

unfilled orders when capacity utilization is at its observed peak causes

prices to rise at a 0.5 percent annual rate; a one percent decline in

orders when capacity utilization is at its observed low results in virtually

no price change. On average, the demand—related variables account for one—

tenth of the average absolute change in price.


Chemicals

     Chemical prices respond positively to input prices and the level of

ED in the best result which is for equation 3. The level of ED over its

observed range contributes between 0.29 and 0.34 percent at an annual rate,

accounting on average for one—fifth of the average absolute change in
                                  —27—


price. But the range of contribution is obviously quite small so the      result

is similar to a cyclicly neutral outcome. However, prices of many basic

industrial chemicals during most of the sample period were obtained by the

BLS from trade journal sources and may not reflect transactions prices.


Fertilizers

     The best explanation of changes in fertilizer prices is obtained from

equation 3. Input prices are not significant but the change in ED has a

significant negative sign, the level of ED, a significant positive one. The

implication is that the markup rises at an increasing rate. However, con-

tributions of the variables over the observed range of ED are in a very

narrow range either side of zero, so the result is close to cyclicly

neutral price behavior.


Stone, clay and glass

     The results for the stone, clay and glass industry give the most clear

cut outcome of cyclicly neutral price behavior. The only significant vari-

able explaining price change is input price change (the regression coef-

ficients of the Input price variable in all four equations are not signif-

icantly different from unity). Of course, this conclusion refers to the

three component industries as a whole and not to any one specifically.


Steel

     The steel industry Is the only one in which the percentage change in

excess demand is significant with a negative sign —— a strong suggestion of

target return pricing. This result is consistent with the findings of

others. The change in ED is negative and significant at the ten and five

percent level in equations 2 and 3 respectively. In equation 4, the sign of
                                   —28—


the change variable at below_normal—demand levels is negative. However,

the decline in markup for increases in ED over their observed range is

quite small. While the   R2 in the competitive disequilibrium equations are

slightly higher than in the target markup version, the structural estimates

are subject to question, particularly the significant negative sign of the

coefficient for unfilled orders.


Nonferrous metals

     Nonferrous metals prices behave competitively and are best described

by the competitive disequilibrium model. Changes in finished goods inven-

tories are negatively related to price change while the level of capacity

utilization is positively related. A one percent decline in inventories

when capacity utilization is at its observed peak causes prices to rise

at a 0.7 percent annual rate; a one percent rise in inventories when

capacity is at its observed low results in virtually no price change.
                         *   ****
     The foregoing analysis of results in each of the eight sectors has

focused on the findings with respect to structure. The findings are sup-

ported by, in addition to "t" statistics, relatively high R2's for

quarterly price change equations and, more importantly, by standard errors

that are about equal to or less than the average absolute price change

during the sample period in half of the industries analyzed.   However,

structure may change. An important indicator of the stability of structure

is the results obtained when the equations are used to produce forecasts

outside the sample period.
                                  —29—


     The "best" equations in Table 1 for the sample period ending in l973—IV

were used to make conditional forecasts of 1974 and 1975. The results are

found in Table 3. Viewed in the absolute the results are disappointing.

But in the context of the size of the price increases that occurred, the

results are encouraging in one important respect. They indicate the equa-

tion structures, as estimated through 1973, were adequate to forewarn of

price increases in 1974 that were clearly much higher than any that had

occurred during the sample period; in every industry in which "double—digit"

inflation occurred in 1974, double—digit inflation was predicted.

     There is undoubtedly room to improve the analysis reported in this

paper. Further experimentation can be undertaken with respect to the lag

structures and the way in which nonlinearities are introduced. World—wide

demand, real and speculative, for the products of many of these industries

was said to be very strong in 1973 and 1974. It might be fruitful to

include some additional measures of this demand, such as orders for these

products placed abroad by U.S. firms or the price of the various commodities
                                                    1/
in world trade, if appropriate data can be found.        Care must be taken,



         Orders placed by foreigners with U.S. firms are already reflected
in the orders variables in the equations.



however, that the likely high correlation between the demand for primary

commodities in the U.S. and the rest of the world and the effect of such de-

mand on price in 1974 not be taken as the sole basis for inferring a struc-

tural relationship between U.S. and foreign demand during the entire period
                                     —30—

               1/
under study,        These extensions of the study are contemplated for the not—


     1/
        Equations have been estimated by Cooper and Lawrence (1975) for
1950—74 in which the percentage change in world prices of nonferrous metals
are explained asafi tiGnof percentage changes in U.S. industrial produc-
tion, industrial production in the rest of the OECD and a price index of
world exports of manufactured goods. The authors conclude that demand can
go a substantial way in explaining the commodity price boom of 1972—74. But
it does not appear from the sketchy statistics they report that by incor-
porating world demand factors they can explain more of the price boom than
has been explained in the regressions reported abovewhich rely only on demand
variables for the U.S.


too—distant future.


                                  Summy

     The findings reported here indicate that changes in prices of primary

industrial commodities are positively related to changes in demand in six

of the eight industries studied. In the stone, clay and glass sector,

pricing appears to be completely insensitive to demand, while in the steel

 industry price changes vary inversely with changes
                                                       in excess demand. In

 these two industries, the results support the acceptance of the target

 return hypothesis. In three of the industries ——      textiles,   chemicals and

 fertilizers, one of the target return equations fits best but the behavior

 of markups is procyclical. In the remaining three
                                                        industries ——   lumber,

 paper and nonferrous metals, the competitive equation provides the best

 fit. The variables that enter the competitive and target return models,

 and the form in which they enter, differ mainly with respect to whether

 capacity utilization enters price change equations in level or change form.

 But, there is enough similiarity among the variables to preclude rejection

 of either hypothesis when the target return model yields the result that the

 markups behave procyclicly.
                                    —31—


     The results indicate that quantitative analysis ——   econometric   or

noneconometric ——   could have pointed up the impending large rise in the

prices of primary manufactures, if the relevant data for the manufacturing

sector had been available by stage of process classifications, and in par-

ticular for the primary processing stage. The high levels of capacity

utilization for primary processors in 1973—74, accompanied by data reflect-

ing the unprecedented (for 1958—73) rise in unfilled orders—shipment ratio

and decline in finished goods inventories—shipments ratio, seems adequate

to have warned the noneconomettic forecaster that demand was unusually

strong vis—a—vis supply. When these variables are introduced formally,

together with input prices, into equations estimated through 1973 they pro-

vide forecasts of price increases in 1974, which, while considerably below

actual increases, were larger than those of the preceding 15 years by

enough to suggest an unusual burst of increase among prices of primary

manufactures was imminent.
                                     Gv1 I                          — 32 —


                         p



                   c




                              qP    UCTIOI4C)4) OME$ (b)
                         -.
                              COm?ET%Y%'J€ EcLt%ut.i
                               irc.cm

1\ --K
        (Lv)?




         Pt




                Q= bcTIb( ORs()
                C4mPE1ITIU I$UIL kR1rY ?1DPUCTI'J
                ES'flCflM C-6"STN1 EQUAL
-                              FP     oci4rt gr GO4L.
    -
                                    pICG G




              Ft




                   c             crto(C)) 'tRfD)
                   (OYYPtT/7?L/E p/s Qo,L,11c?/aft-1, PRPt)tT7cAJ
                                               C?UtrL PERh1Cr
                       p           P   s'r o c ,' r t: W ThL e//Nc-
                                            CWAC1'11 pôpocrlOftJ
                       s PCEI
                       pjucG G.-M' AS 101L
                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                       .
                                    —         —                        —       I-      I-      —       —           —
                     ci                                        ci      ci      ci      ci      ci      ci          '4)          ci       ci           ci   ci    ci        •.
                              N     N         N                        0'      0'              a'      a'          a'           a'       a'           a'   a'    cii       c'I
                                                       IN      N
                     Lii      a     to                 —       C       ci      C')     N       a'      cii         a                     ro           —    o                      1
                              —     —         —        I-      —       —       —       —       —       —           ,_           —        —            —    —     I-        —
o                    '4       '4    '4        '4       '4.. '4         vt'     C')     '4      (4      (it'.       C')          (4                    (4   C')   v'        v.
                     -4       N     N         -1       N     N.        N       N       -4      N       -4          N            N        -4           N    N     N         N
ru
Lii
C
        II                    I     I          I       I•
                              I                                         I       I       I       I       I          I                I    I            I     I     I         I     /
                                        OMflfttDV&flNVW'IVJ,OI————
r'                            p                                         p       p       p       p       p          p                p    p            p     p     i         i
                                                                                                                                                  .


                              I    .1          I       I       I        I       I       I       I     •I•          I                                  I     I    I          I     I
I II
CII                           I     I       .1         I       I        I       I       I       I       I          I                                                              I


                                               I               I                                                                                                                  I
cli II
-II                                 I          I       I       I        P       I       I       I       I          I                I
                 /   1                                                                                                                   •I
C                     A             I          I       I       I        1       I       I       I       I      .1                   I    I
,—.—Il
             7        I       I     I                  I       I                I       I       I                                   I                                             I
             /                                 I..                     I.                               I          I                    •I
OIL

                      ii      I                I       I       I        I       I       I               I          I                I                                            •1
  IIIIi                   1




                                               1t_:2           I        I       .
                                                               I        I       I       I       I       I
                                                               I                I       I       I       I
                                                                                                               /                    I    I            I
                                                                       •I

                      H       H-                                                                                   I                I




                                                                                                                                    I    I            I



                                                               I                I,                                 I                I    I            I          I         I
                                    I          I       I       I                                                                    I    I            I    I     I         I
                      I             I          1       I       I
                                                                                        I               I                           I    I            I    I     I


                              I     I          I       I       I        I
                                                                                        I'ø(
                                                                                        I       I       I          I                     I            I    I     I
                                                                                                                                                                                      Li
                              I     I          I       I       I        I       I       I       I       I          I                I    I            I    I     I         I      I
                      I             I                  I       I        I       I       P       I       I          I            I        I                 I     I         I      I
        II
I_rI.
                                              l
                                                            SSJXU NOIIVZI'Iflfl LIIDYdYD MI (rn) szonviAaa aw.t          1 .ivirn
                     I
                                                                                                                     TO SHIPMENTS
                                                                                         IN RATIO OF UNFILLED ORDERS
                                                     CHART   2.    TREND DEVIATIONS (LN)
                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                    I        I                                                      I                     I
          ii                                                                                                                                                        I            I
I'                                                                           I                                                      I                     I
                                           I            I
                                                                    I        I        I
                                                                                                                       —
                                           I
-t        H                                                                                                                                  I                                   I
                                                                                                                                                                                          Ii
                                                                                                                       I                                                                       2!
                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                        I        i
                                                                                                                       I
     -t                                                                                                                                          I                      I
     iuj Ii
               II
               II
               II
      -o       it
               II
               H
      o         ii
                II
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -4
                                                                                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                                                                               II
                                                                                                                                                              I                                       £
                                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                                                                                                II
                                                             I          I        I        I
                               I     I
                                                             I          I        I                                                                   I
                         I     I     I         I
                                                                                                                I
                                                                        I                 I
                               I
                                                                                                                                                              H             H        H
                                                                                                        H       H          H
                                                             H          H        H        H      H      (/.                                          -        —
                     H   H     H     H         H                        A        I               —      —
                                                                                                                C'
                                                                                                                —          —            —
                                               1/)
                                                             —          —        -4       —                                                                                          U,
                               —     —         —
                     —   —                                                                       N—
                                                                                                                CT-,
                                                                                                                                        N-
                                                                                                                                                                            H—
                                                                                 U?                     '4)     '.4)                                 0'       UT.
                         Cr.                                 'ft                          :1?,   'CI
                                                                                                        0'      0'             -4
                                                                                                                                        Cr
                                                                                                                                        -4                    -4
                         in                                  0'                           OS
                                                                                                        —       -4
                                               .7.                      r4                -4
                         Cr    ;-.   ;_4       —4            —4
                           .                                                                                                                                                                                           .
                  I-                   i               —         —                            —                         1
                                                                 '.0                                                                                 '.0       '.0       '.0            '.9               '.s)         4
                                                                             i'.0
                  '0           sD                      .0'                                    '.0              '.0              '.0
                   '4          N       N               N         N           N                '.7'             J'       G'      0.           0'      '7'        0'       '5'            0'                '7'    'it   cfl
                  .it          .&      c..,            ru        —           o                 '.o             o        N       0'           UI      .i         (.3      10             '                 c'     '4    C')
                                                                                                                                                                                                     -    -a'    —     -a
                 .—            —       -a              —         -a          -a               -a               I        -a      -a           -a      -a         -a       -a             I-
                  '4           '4      (4              (4         44         V.               (4               (4       0       0            Vi      (4         44                      0                 0            (4
                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                      '                                                      -4.     -4         -4
                                                                                                                                                                         0-.4
'-S               -4           -I      —I              -1         -4         -1               -I               -4       -1      -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rc'
                                                                                                                                         —                           .                                                            I_if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             II
                   I           I           I           I          I           I                 I               I       I        I           I        I         I         I              I                 I      I          II
1_fl--—--—
        ii         I           I           I           I          I           I                 I               I       I                    I        I          I        I'             I                 I      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             II
                   I                                                                            I               I       I        I           I       'I          I        I              I                        I          II
                                                                          — — — —                                                                                                                                            It
                                       DkItLLDVanNVW 'WIOI.                                                                                                      I                       I
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,II
                                           I                                                    I               I       1        I           I        I                                                           I          II
C
                                                             ABVNThJ                                                                                                                                                         It
        II         I                       I       .   I          i        •I             .     I               I''     I        I           I        I          I        I              I                 I                 II
'—II                                                                                                                                                                                                                         II

t.fl;                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ill_fl
                   I                       I                                                                                                 I        I          I        I              I                 I
                                                                                                                                             I        I          I        1              I                 I      I
                                                                                                                                                                 I        I              I                 I

    I II           I                                                                                            I.                                               I.       I              I                 I                 III
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             II
                                                                                                                I                                                I                       I                 I
                 'I                                                                                                                                                                                                          II
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  f-fl
i_fl



                                                                                                                                 I            I


                                                                                                                                 I            I
0            I                                                                                                                   I            I       I'
0'.fl                                                  I'
                                                                                                                                 I            I       I          I


                                                                                                                                 I            I       I          I         I
                                                                                                                                 I            I                  I         I             I
                                                                                                                                     I        I                  I         I             I                 I
C,                                                                                                                                                                         I             I                  I


f_fl,
                                                                                                                                                      I                    I             I                  I     I
                       I                                           I
                       I                                           I                                                                 I        I       I          I         I             I                  I

                       I                       I        I             I                                                              I           I    I          I         I             I
        II                                                                                                                                            I          I         I             I                  I                II
                       I           I           I                      I
                                   I                    I             I           I                 I               I       I        I           I    I          I         I             I                  I     I
                       I                       I



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  c_i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ln


                                       S1.NZNdIHS 01. Ss33o8d—tU—SU000                    QNV       SCIOOC)   (I3HSINL4 dO SSIBOJ.NaMLI dO OLIV1 NI        On) SN0IIVIA0        GNaRL        C   IIIVH3
                                                   Table 1. Regrjo results: Ouirter1v        ecente
                                          Materials
                                          prices aid
                                          wages, per—
                     Equa—                centage change
                     tion                 in weighted       Finished goods     Unfilled      utilizatic
     PRIMARY                   First                        inventories,       orders,       deviation
     PRODUCING                 Obser—     distributed       percentage         percentage    from    trenc
     INDUSTRY        ber vation           lag_L             change, t—l        change, t—l   percent, t
                                         Coef,      "t"     Coef         "t"   Coef.   ""      Coef
    TEXTILES             1     1959—      1.104      9.5    —.026        1.3    .048   2.8    .030
                         2     II         1.107     10.3
                         3*                .881      6.6
                         4                1.120     10.2
    LUMBER               1*    1959—       .742      0.8    —.062        1.5   —.107   1.7    .295     3.C
                         2     III        2.042      2.3
                         3                2.069      2.0
                         4                1.911      2.0
    PAPER                1*    1959—       .672      3.3     .008        0.9    .038 3.0      .083 2.
                         2     I          1.011     5.2
                         3                1.020     4.1
                         4                1.043      5.3
    CHEMICALS            1     1959—       .281     1.7       .001       0.1                  .030 2.3
                         2     I           .505     3.8
                         3*                .640     5.4
                         4                 .485     3.7
    'ERTILIZER           1     1959—      1.437     3.1       .007       0.5
                               III        1.353     3.0                                      —.027 0.7
                     2
                     3*                  I_.187
                                                    0.4
                     4                    1.323     2.9
STONE, CLAY,         1        1958—       1.001     7.8      —.007    0.7 —.006        0.5   —.000 0.0
      ct.ss          2*       IV          1.022     8.3
                     3                    1.042     7.4
                     4                    1.019     8.2
    TEEL             1        1958—        804      6.9     —.016     1.8 —.009        1.9   .015 2.0
                     2        IV           .838     7.0
                     3                     .861     7.0
                     4*                    .812     6.9

ONPERROUS            1*       1959—        .298 '0.6        —.082    2.0       .049    1.3    .089 2.
1    METALS          2        III        1.002      2.3
                     3                   1.229      2.9
L                  __4        _______ - .923      - 2.1

             equation marked by asterisk.
 a The
            lag distribution and weights are shown in table 2.
1In the case of lunber,             variables other than   wages and materials prices
 are introduced with no             lag.
       in price for   a,le period   enin1973—1V


                                                                                                               Avg.    al,
                                                                                                               a1nte
                                                                                                               change
                 ED                                                                                            in de—
                 deviation      ED             ED(+)               Constant
                                                                   term,
percentage       from trend     percentage     pe:cetttage
:hange, t—1      percent, t—1   change, t—1    change, t—].        percent2i                      DW           able

ef.       "t"    Coef,    "t"   Coef.    "t"   Coef..t't"       Coef.
                                                                .530           1.1        .667    0.9 1.10
                                                              — .555           3.2        .682    1.0 1.07     1.35
.123      3.3                                                                                     1.0 1.02
.094      2.5    .052     2.6                                   .324           2.9        .713
                                 .072    1.1   .179    2.5    —. 564           3.1        .662    1.2 1.10
                                                                .215           3.2        .248    1.5 3.15     2.58
                                                              —1.232                      .059    1.4 353
.058      0.4                                                                  1.1
                                                                                          .041    1.4 3.56
.061      0.4    .006     0.1                                  1.265           0.2
                                         0.6 —.129     0.5     1.058           0.9        .049    1.4 3•54
                                —.170
                                                               — .098          2.7        .447    1.8   0.62
                                                                                                  1.5   0.67   0,70
          2.3                                                  —.332           1.8        .339
.393                                                                                              1.5   0.68
.393      2.3    .001     0.1                                  —.397           0.3        .327
                                               .052    0.7     —. 349          1.9        .337    1.4   C.67
                                 .151    2.4

                                                               —.256           2.7        .228    1.5 0.53
                                                                                                               0.39
                                                               — .481          3.2        .177    1.3 0.55
.031      0.                                                                   5.0        .403    1.8 0.47
.010      0.3    .109     4.7                           •      —.612
                                               .165    2.2     —   .491        3.3        .220    1.4 0.53
                                —.031    0.5

                                                               —.321           0.6        .110    1.3   1.85
                                                                                                  1.3   1.85   1.22
.004      0.2                                                  —.279           0.9        .115
                                                                   .520        4.9        .375.   1.6   1.55
.053      2.4    .047     4.9                                                                     1.3   1.85
                                —.059    0.8   .020    0.6     —.321           1.0        .114

                                                               — .426          0.3        .519    1.8   0.45
                                                                                                               0.63
                                                               —.491           3.7        .531    1.8   0.44
.008      0.4
                                                               —.511           0.8        .524    1.8   0.45
 009      0.5    .003     0.3                                                                     1.8   0.45
                                 .014    0.5 -.014     0.4     —.484           3.6        .525

                                                               — .144          2.2        .494    1.6   0.69
                                                                                                  1.5   0.72   0.76
                                                               —.207           1.4        .443
          1.8                                                                                     1.5   0.72
                                                               —.302           ¶
                                                                               .1.. ..)   .442
          2.1    .006     1.0                                                                     1.6   0.71
                                                       1.2     —.208           1.4        .455
                                —.025    2.0 -.018

                                                                       • 544   2.8         .265    1.1 1.59
 .154      25                                                      —   .196 0.4            .133    0.9 1.731    1.49
 .133      2.2    .054                                             —.418 2.5               .206    0.9 1.66
                                                                   — .034 0.2
                                  .166   1.6    .O5'    3.5                                .068    0.8 1.80
                                    —37—


Table 2. Distributed lag and weights for materials' prices and wages




                               Relative
                               Weight       t      t—l    t—2    t—3    t—4    t—5

Textiles

     Wages                       .665      .333   .267    .200   .133 .067
     Materials' Prices           .335      .333   .267    .200   .133 .067

Lumber

                                 .925               —     .250   .250 .250     .250
     Wages
     Materials' Prices           .075               —     .250   .250 .250     .250

Paper

     Wages                       .515      .400   .300    .200   .100
     Materials' Prices           .485      .400   .300    .200   .100

Chemicals

     Wages                       .718      .400   .300    .200   .100
     Materials' Prices           .282      .400   .300    .200   .100

Fertilizer

                                 .234        —      —     .250   .250   .250   .250
     Wages
     Materials Prices            .766      .667   .333      —      —      —     —



Stone, Clay, Glass
     Wages                       .677      .500   .333    .167
     Materials' Prices           .323      .500   .333    .167

Steel

        Wages                    .641      .500   .333    .167
        Materials' Prices        .359      .500   .333    .167

Nonferrous Metals

                                 .765               —     .250   .250   .250   .250
        Wages
        Materials' Prices        .235      .667   .333
                                    —38—


Table 3. Actual price changes in 1974 and 1975 compared with those forecast
          using the best equations in Table 1, in percent per year.




Primary                          1974                           1975
Industry                Actual          Predicted      Actual       Predicted

Textiles                  3.9              6.5            4.8           7.0

Lumber                  —11.1              0.8            6.4          —3.4

Paper                    28.5             15.6            2.3           4.0

Chemicals                53.6            12.5             9.6          —1.3

Fertilizers              52.3            16.9           —6.2           13.5

Stone, clay and glass    19.1            10.4             7.0           8.8

Steel                    38.2            17.7             6.4           1.8

Nonferrous metals        34.4            12.9           —8.0           —3.5
                                     —39—


                                  References



Arrow, K. "Towards a Theory of Price Adjustment," The Allocation of Economic
     Resources; M. Abramovitz(ed.), Stanford: Stanford University Press,
     1959.
Cooper, R. N., and Lawrence, R. Z. "The 1972—75 Commodity Boom," Brookin
     tapers on Economic ActivIty, No.3. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
     Institute, 1975.
Debreu, G. The Theory of Value: An Axiomatic Analysis of Economic
     Equilibrium, Cowles Foundation Monograph No. 17. New York: Wiley,
     1959.

de Menu, G. "Aggregate Price Dynamics," The Review of Economics and
     Statistics, Vol. LVI, No. 2. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
     1974.

Eckstein, 0., and Fromm, G. "The Price Equation," American Economic
     Review (Dec. 1968).

Laidler, D., and Parkin, M. "Inflation: A Survey," The Economic Journal,
     Vol. 85 (1975).

Nadiri, M. I. "Price and Wage Behavior in the U.S. Aggregate Economy and
     Manufacturing Industries," Conference on Research in Income and
     Wealth, Vol. 42 (forthcoming) New York: National Bureau of Economic
     Research, 1976.

Nordhaus, W. D., and Codley, W. A. H. "Price in the Trade Cycle," The
     Economic Journal, Vol. 82 (1972).

_______________ and Shoven, J. B. "A Technique for Analyzing and
     Decomposing Inflation," Conference on Research in Income and
     Wealth, Vol. 42 (forthcoming) New York: National Bureau of
     Economic Research, 1976.

Okun, A. M. "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs," Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2.Washington, D.C.: The Brookings
     Institution, 1975.

Phelps, E. S., and Winter, S. G., Jr. "Optimal Price Policy Under Atomistic
     Competition," The Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation
     Theory, E. S. Phelps et al., (eds,) New York: W. W. Norton and Co., Inc.
     1970.

Popkin, J. "Commodity Prices and the U.S. Price Level," Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, No. l.Washlngton, D.C.: The Brookings Institu-
     tion, 1974.

Schultze, C. L., and Tryon, J. L. "Prices and Wages," The Brookings
     Quarterly Econometric Model of the United States, J. S. Duesenberry
     et. al., (eds.) Chicago: Rand McNally, 1965.
