               NBER Working Paper Series




              LEISURE, HOME PRODUCTION AND WORK'-—
        THE THEORY OF THE ALLOCATION OF TINE REVISIIED


                         Reuben Gronau*



                   Working Paper No. 137




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                           May 1976


                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NEER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
nutber for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, It has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

The research reported herein was supported by a grant (No. RF 72087)
from The Rockefeller Foundation to NBER.

*Hebrew UniversIty and NBER.
                   Leisure, Home Production and Work —

             The Theory of the Allocation   of TimRevisited*

            I. Time Budget Evidence — Data in Search of Theory



     The household production function is by now an established part of

economic theory. As formulated by Becker, Lancaster, Muth, and others, the

new consumption theory emphasizes the fact that market goods and services

are not themselves the agents that carry utility hut are rathe,r inputs In

a process that generates commodities (or characteristics) which, in turn,

yield utility. A second feature, introduced into the analysis by Becker,

is that market goods and services are not the only input in this process,

the other input being the consumer's time. By this approach (Becker, 1965)

the consumer maximizes welfare subject to the time and budget constraints where

welfare is a function of commodities, which are "producedt' using market goods

and time.

     The new approach has been put to wide use in the analysis of fertility,

health, consumption, labor supply, and transportation demand (to name just a

few). A fact that seemed to have slipped the users' attention is

that the theory does not really discuss household production in the common

sense of the term.' It discusses (to use Lancaster's terminology) consumption

technology, but has very little to say (in its current form) on home production.

It was Mincer who first pointed out (Mincer, 1962) that, at least in the case of

women, one should distinguish between work at home and leisure, but this

distinction (so conmon in everyday language) disappeared in Becker's more
                                    2



general   formulation. This omission was partly due to practical difficulties

in distinguishing between the two, given the large number of borderline

cases (e.g., is playing with a child leisure or work at home?), but partly

because it has not been shown that our understanding of household behavior

will be enriched by this distinction. whatever the reason, the theory of

the allocation of time in its current form is of little help where it is

most needed; namely, In the analysis of time budget data.

      From the theoretical point of view, the justification for aggregating

leisure and work at home into one entity, "non—market time" (or "home time")

can rest on two assumons: a. the two elements react similarly to changes

in the socio—economic environment and, hence, nothing is gained by studying

them separately, and b. the two elements satisfy the conditions of a composite

input, I.e., their relative price is constant, and there is no interest in

Investigating the composition of this aggregate since it has no bearing on

production and the price of the output. This study sets out to show that

none of these assumptions holds. Recent time budget findings have established

that work at home is affected differently by changes in soclo—economic var-

iables than is leisure, and this paper shows that the aggregation is also

suspect from the analytical point of view.

      The time use patterns of U.S. and Israeli families have been studied by

Bloch (1973) and myself (Gronau, 1976). Table 1 summarizes these findings,

describing the signs of the regression coefficients of the major determinants

of the allocation of time. In spite of the differences in methodology and

in the nature of the data used,2 the two studies are unanimous in pointing

out   that changes in the secio-economic enviruninent (e.g.,   changes in the wage
                                   3



rate, income, education and number of children) have different effects on

work at home and leisure and on the allocation of time of husbands and wives.

     According to the Israeli data, an increase in the wife's education resuits

in an increase in the time she spends in the labor market. This time is with-

drawn primarily from work at home, leaving leisure unaffected (and perhaps

even increased). The U.S. findings are much more specific, distinguishing

between income effects and price effects. An increase in the wife's wage

rate increases her supply of labor and reduces both work at home and leisure.

A change in the wife's wage does not affect her husband's work in the market,

but is positively correlated with his work at home, and, hence, negatively

correlated with his leisure. An increase in the husband's wage rate increases

his own supply of labor (mainly at the expense of his work at home), but

reduces that of his wife. This change does not affect the wife's work at home,

and consequently it increases the wife's leisure. An increase in non—wage income

reduces the supply of labor of both husband and wife, it reduces work at home

(at least in the case of women) and, hence, increases leisure.

     Finally, both studies concur that children cause their mothers to trans-

fer time from market to home tasks. However, the amount of time transferred

falls short of the additional time required to care for children, leading also

to a reduction of leisure. Children have the same deterrent effect where the

fathers' leisure is concerned, but in this case the fathers increase both

work at home and work in the market.

     The total time available for work at home and leisure depends to a

large extent on the person's employment status. Comparing the allocation

of time of employed and not employed Israeli married women (table 2), it is
                                        4




observed that controlling for education, the employed have less leisure than

the not employed. The employed Israeli married woman worked In the market

on the average 4.3 hours. She was able to conserve 2.8 hours by cutting her

work at home, but 1.5 hours had to come at the expense of leisure arid time spent

on physiological needs.

     Married men work more in the market than the not married, and married

women spend more time in work at home (and somewhat less in the market) than

the not married. Consequently         it is observed (Gronau, 1976), that married

people   have less leisure than the not married, and the difference is greater
for males than for females. These differences are explained by two factors —
marriage and the existence of children. To isolate the effect of marriage, I
ran separate regressions for all males and for all females who did not have

young children (i.e., children in age group 0 —      5,   or alternatively, children

in the age group 0 —   12).   The dependent variable is the time spent on the

activity, and the explanatory variables include the person's age, schooling,

land of origin, length of residence and number of older children; marital

status is represented by a dummy variable. (For lack of space, I do

not present the detailed regressions here.)

     Controlling for the number of children (and the other socio—economic

variables), I found that marriage reduces the Israeli wife's supply dl work

to the market and increases her work at home. The decline in the work in the

market (about 1.5 hours a day) is somewhat smaller than the Increase in work

at home (about 2 hours), but the difference is too small to be significant

(the time spent on physiological needs and, to a lesser extent, the time

spent on leisure decline, bit   the   decline is statistically Insignificant).
                                   5



As for males, they hardly increase their work at home but increase signif 1—

cantly their supply of labor to the market (by about 2 hours). This results

in a significant drop in married males' leisure.

     When the interaction terrn.s of marriage and schooling are introduced into

the equations, a puzzling asy'iiinetry appears in the Israeli data. In the case

of women, the effect of marriage seems to be either the same for all education

groups or to depend on the wife's education; none of the activIties is affected

by the husband's schooling. On the other hand, in the case of males, the effect

of marriage on the allocation of time depends invariably on the education of

their wives. The greater the wife's schooling, the more the husband works both

in the market and at home '.nd the less leisure he has.

     These findings give rise to several questions: Why do education, the

wage rate, and income have a different effect on work at home and leisure?

What explains the effect of children? What explains the differences in the

allocation of time between labor force participants and nonparticipants?

What explains the differences between females' and males' time use patterns?

How can one explain the effect of marriage and what is the source of the

asymmetry in the effect of marriage on the husband's and wife's time use patterns?

Answering these questions, we shall observe that the distinction between

consumption time and production time (I.e., leisure and work at home) has

implications reaching far beyond the analysis of home time usage, embracing

such topics as labor supply, fertility, marital stability, consumption (and

in particular the demand for substitutes for the person's home services)

and the reevaluation of the contribution of housewives to total economic

welfare.

     The paper opens with a description of a theoretical model that seems to

provide us with a unifying explanation of the observed time use patterns.
                                      6



Some of the crucial assumptions of this modelare tested in section III. The

implications of the model for the analysis of fertility, marital stability,

the demand for housemaids and child care, and the evaluation of the output

of the home sector are investigated in sectIon IV. A summarizing section

discusses some qualifications and suggests some future research.


                            II. The Model

A. The Simple Case of a Single—Person Household and One Commod

     A layman's distinction between work at home (i.e., home production time) and

leisure (i.e., home consumption time) is that work at home (like work in the

market) is something he would rather have somebody else do for him (if the

cost were low enough) while it would be almost impossible for him to enjoy

his leiure through a surrogate. Thus, one regards work at home as that time

use that generates services which have a close substitute in the market while

leisure has only poor substitutes in the market. In a somewhat extreme case,

work at home and work In the market are perfect substitutes as far as the

direct utility they generate Is concerned, and the person is indifferent to

the composition of the goods and services he consumes — whether they are

produced at home or purchased in the market.

     Formally, let there be a single—person household. The person maximizes

the amount of commodity Z, which is a combination of goods and services (X)

and consumption time (L):



     Z =   Z(X,L).                                                   (1)




The goods can either be purchased in the market or produced at home, but

the compositon of X does not affect       I shall measure the value of home
                                    7




goods and services (Xd) in terms of theft market equivalents (i.e., the cost

of the quality—corrected goad in the market). Let         denote market expendi-

tures; then total consumption Is composed of the consumption of goods pur—

chased in the market and those produced at. home




     X=XM+XH                                                             (2)


     Home goods are produced by work at home (H)



     XH =    f(H),                                                       (3)




subject to decreasing marginal productivity (f' >   0,   f" <   O)   The decline

In the value of marginal productIvity at home is due not oaiy to fatigue or

changes in input proportions but also due to changes in the composition of
   — a shift towards activities that have a cheaper market substitute, as H

increases.

     The maximization of Z is bound by two constraints: a) the (endogenous)

 budget constraint




     xMWN+v,                                                             (4)


where W Is the person's wage rate (which is assumed to be constant), N denotes

market work and V other sources of income; and b) the time constraint



    L+H+N=T.5                                                            (5)
                                              S



       The   necessary conditons for an interior optimum call for the marginal
product of work at home to equal the marginal, rate of substitution between
goods and consumption            time, which in   turn equals the shadow price of time (W*)


                   f'   _   W.                                                   (6)




If   the person    works in the market (N > 0), they will also equal the real wage

rate (W)



               =        =          6
                                                                                 (6'
       az/ax



      These conditions are depicted in figure 1. The             home production function
is   described by the concave curve TBA0C0. The more time the individual spends

working at home (as measured by the horizontal distance from point T), the

greater the amount of home goods produced. if the individual spends all his

time in work at home, he can produce an amount of 0C0 units of goods. in the

absence of market opportunities, the curve TBA0C0 is the opportunity frontier

enclosing the set of all feasible combinations of X and L. The existence of

a market where the person can sell his working time and buy market goods

expands this set. Thus, given the real wage rate W (described by the slope

of the line A0E0), the person can trade. his time for goods along the price line

A0E0 (the line tangent to the production curve TBA0C0). In the optimum

the person may choose a goods—intensive combination of X and L, such as B0,

where he enjoys 0L0 units of consumption time, spends L0N time units in work

in the market,and spends NT time units in work at home. Alternatively, the

person may have a high preference for leisute Ii e. , a            leisure—intensive
                                        9




consumption technology), choosing as his optimum combination the point B.

In this case he does not work in the market, splitting his time between lei-

sure (0L) and work at home (LT).

     Note that the person may adopt a goods-intensive technology, such as

    but it.   may still   be home—time intensive in the sense that a large part

of the goods are produced at home. Thus, leisure intensive and home—time

intensive     are not synonymous. Note further that if the marginal productivity

of work at home at the point T falls short of the real wage rate, there is

no home production and we are faced with the familiar Robbins diagram and the

dichotomy of work (in the market) and leisure.

     To analyze the properties of this model, let it be assumed that there

Is an increase in other sources of income by an amount of iSV. An increase

in other sources of income secures for the person the amount of OX0 of market

goods even If he spends all his time in consumption. The change is reflected,

therefore, In a vertical shift of the production curve TBA0CQ to TDBA1C1.

The change does not affect the marginal productivity of work at home —     it
does not affect the shape of the curve but only its location. Since the real

wage rate is given, there is no change in the point where the person finds it

cheaper to buy the goods in the market rather than produce them at home. If

the person prefers a goods—intensive consumption technology which makes him

work in the market (combination B0), he does not change the amount of time he

spends working at home (NT), and given the pure income effect, he expands his

amount of leisure (if leisure is not an inferior input) at the expense of

work at the market (consumption time increase from 0L0 to 0L1 and work in

the market is reduced from L0N to

     If, on the other hand,, the person does not initially work in the market

(point B), the increase in income and the resulting increase in Z call for
                                 10



an increase in consumption time which can come only at the expense of work

at home.

     Let there be an increase in the real wage rate W (figure 2). If the

person works in the market (point B0) a change in wages affects both the rate

of substitution between consumption time and goods and the profitability of

home production. The increase in wages lowers the price of goods in terms

of time and, hence, makes home production less profitable and encourages

substitutuiofl of goods for consumption time. This change wIll, therefore,

definitely cut work at home (from N0T to N1T), while its effect on leisure is

indeterminate. The substitution effect tends to lower leisure, while the

expansion effect tends to raise it. As for work in the market, it depends

on the extent of the reduction of work at home and on the change in consumption

time. If the reduction in work at home exceeds the increase (if there is one)

of leisure, the supply of work to the market increases. The tendency of this

supply curve to be positively sloped increases the greater the rate of sub-

stitution between goods and consumption time, the less sensitive the marginal

productivity in home production to changes in the amount of work, and the

smaller the income elasticity of leisure.

     If the person initially does not work, the change in wages may   lure   him

Into the market (point B), or he may be completely unaffected (point Bc).

     A third kind of change that is worth examining is a change in produc—

tivity. It is impossible to predict the Implications of this change without

specifying the exact nature of.the changes in home productivity (i.e., changes

in f) and consumption technology (i.e., changes in Z). In the absence of

such knowledge, one's predictions are limited to the case where the person

works in the market. In thIs case a change in consumption technology should
                                  11




affect work in the market and leisure but would leave work at home unchanged.

On the cther hand, an increase in the productivity of work at home is asso-

ciated with an increase In real income arid an increase in leisure, but its

effect on work at home and work in the market is indeterminate.

     Up to this point, it was assumed that entry Into the market is costless.

In effect, work in the market Involves costs both in terms of money and in

terms of time. Let these costs be C and t, respectively, and let them be

independent of the amount of work N (e.g., transportation costs and time).8

The introduction of these costs calls for some modification of the budget and

time constraints




     X.+óCWN+V,                                                     (4')


    L+H+N+ót=T,                                                     (5')




where S is a dummy variable that describes the person's employment status



     fl whenN>O                                                     (7)
        IO whenN=O.


The person is faced by two alternative opportunity sets (figure 3). If he

stays out of the labor force and confines himself to home production, he can

choose any point on the boundary TB1E. On the other hand, if he decides to

join the labor force, he suffers a loss of t units of time and C units of X,

but his opportunity locus becomes T'AF. Given these opportunity sets, a

person with a greater preference for goods will join the labor force (pcint B0),

spending 0L0 units of time on leisure, working in the market for L0N units,
                                  12


                                                                                      )
working at home for Nt units and, say, traveling to work for tT units of time.
A person with a greater taste for leisure will decide to stay out of the mar-

ket (point B1), dividing his time between leisure and work at home (0L1 and L1T,

respectively). Given the opportunity set, labor force participation is asso-

ciated) therefore, with a decline both in leisure and in work at home.9 The

existence of entry costs does not affect, however, our previous conclusions

about the effect of changes in the soc'lo—economic characteristics on the

allocation of time.

     The predictions of this simple model, are by and large consistent with our

observations. An increase in the wage rate should not affect the allocation of

time of the not employed but should reduce the work at home of the employed.

Thus, on the average, one should expect the wage rate and work at home to be

negatively correlated. The effect of a change in the wage rate on leisure

depends on the relative magnitudes of the income effect and the substitution

effect. The tendency for the income effect to dominate increases with the

number of hours. Thus, it is not surprising that the substitution effect is

the dominant factor in the case of the wife's leisure, but the two factors

cancel out (or even the income effect dominates) in the case of the husband.

An Increase in non-wage income should not affect the work at home of employed

persons but should reduce the work at home of the not employed. Consequently,

one expects non—wage income and wives' work at home to be negatively corre-

lated. On theother hand, in the case of males who are mostly employed, the

negative effect should be much less pronounced and may be insignificant.

In either case, one expects non—wage income and leisure to be positively

correlated. Finally, in the presence of market entry costs, employed persons

should spend less time or work at home   than   the unemployed, but this difference
                                      13



is swamped by the difference in the market hours. Consequently, one expects

that, other things being equal, the employed work longer hours (in the market

and at home) and enjoy less leisure.

       Next, one has to explain the effect of children on their parents' allo-

cation of time. This will allow us also to reexamine the conclusions of the

model in a somewhat more realistic setting, where there exists more than one

activity.

B. A World of Two Commodities — The Effect of Children on Their Parents'
     Time Use

           Let there be two commodities, Z1 and Z2. Each of these commodities

is a combination of consumption time and goods (Li. X1), nd it is assumed,

for simplicity, that their production functions (equation (1)) are linear

homogenous. These production functions differ between commodities and

are independent of each other (i.e., the production process of Z1

is   unaffected by the level and the way         is   produced). There Is no

joint production or consumption (i.e., the same unit of         time cannot be
used     simultaneously in the production of two goods or two commodities))

            The person maximizes his welfare



            U U(Z1, Z2)                                                   (8)



subject to the budget constraint (4) and the time constraint (5), where

     —       + XM2, L —    + L2 and H —        + H2. I also define (somewhat
                        L1                H1

 artificially) N —         + N2 where N X/W is the work time required
                      N1
                                   14




 to buy X, and T1 L + H1 + N1 the total time spent on Z(here T1 + T2           T).

        Given the allocation of time to any one of the commodities

one can derive (by equations (6) arid (6')) the optimum   allocation   of

this time between its different uses, L1, H and N1. To give a complete


 picture of the optimum allocation of time and goods one has, however, to

describe the process by which Z. and consequently T1 are determined.

This calls for the derivatIon of the transformation curve between the

two commodities.

        Let it be assumed that V = 0 and that there are no entry costs into

the labor force. Given the allocation of time T1 to each of the two activi—

ties,a person works in the market if for any activity i the time allotted

to that activity exceeds the time he wants to work at home plus the corres-

ponding amount of leisure



                   + f1(H) =
           >
               H             T1*                                        (9)
                      pi


where H is the amount of work at home at which f'1(H) = W and where p1 is

the goods intensity of activity 1 (X1/L.) at the wage rate W. Given the home

production function (i.e., given H and f1(H*)) and given the consumption

technology (i.e., Pt), there is a greater probability the person works

in the market the greater the amount of the activity demanded (i.e., the

greater Ti). On the other hand, given T1, the probability of participa-

tion Increases the lower H and f(H) and the greater the goods intensity

p1.

       Assume Inequality (9) holds for activity Z1 for sufficiently large

values of T1, but is not satisfied for Z2 regardless of the amount produced
                                       15




(T > T).     A8 long as the person works in the market (i.e., T1 >
                                                                      T1*,   T2 <

increasing   Z2 at the expense of       invclves increasing home production of K42

and consumption time L and reducing work in the market N, and the consumption

time associated with        (home production of      is unaffected). Thus, regardiss


of the leisure intensity of Z1 an increase in Z2 results in a decline in

the supply of labor to the market and an increase in home production, The

amount of leisure increases if Z2 is leisure intensive and declines when

   is goods intensive. Eventually, the point is reached where T1 T and

the person drops out of the labor force. Any further increase of Z2 should

reduce work at home and increase leisure when Z2 is leisure intensive and

leads to the opposite result if         is goods intensive (see figure 411)

          The transformation curve is concave. The marginal productivity

of time in the home production of the two goods differs, and the increase

in time allotted to Z2 makes a diminishing contribution to the output of

Z2. A wage increase reduces Tt and, hence, increases the tendency to

participate in the labor force. It reduces the price of Z1 in terms of

time if      >   T* and shifts the corresponding section of the transformation

curve upward.

          It is easy to apply the analysis to the case where for both activities

Tj* >   T, or where Tj* <   T but ZT1* >    T.    Of special interest, however,

is the case where T +         < T;   i.e., the person buys at least one of the

goods X in the market. Since it is assumed (for the time being) that the

person does not have any other sources of income (V         0), this assumption

implies that the person works in the market regardless of the combination
                                           16




 of activities consumed. Let T >
                                           T    for both activities, i.e., the person

 buys both         and XM2 in the market. Given the wage rate W, transfering

 time from activity Z1 to activity              does not involve any change in the

 amount of time spent in work at home, nor does it affect the marginal rate

 of substitution between goods and leisure. Assuming the consumption techno-

 logy is characterized by constant returns to scale, the:re is no change in

 the goods intensity of the two commodities. The change in the time allotted

 to activity Z. (AT.) affects, therefore, only consumption time and work in

 the market and they vary by the same rate



           AT = AL1    + AN1 =
                                 AL1
                                       + (AX1! W) =   [(1   /   p1) + (li x1AZ1     (10)


where   p1 =
               AX1/AL. is the (marginal) goods intensity of activity i and
xi =
       AX1/AZ1 Is the marginal goods input In Z1. By the assulrption of
linear homogeneity,p1 and x1 are independent of the level of Z and,

hence, the price of Z1 in terms of time remains constant as long as W

Is given and the person works in the market. In the relevant range the

transformation curve Is a straight line (figure 6).

          As more time is withdrawn from Z1, the point is reached where the

individual decides to drop out of the market for X. Beyond this point

any additional time has to be withdrawn from leisure and work at home.

However, cutting work at home Increases the marginal productivity of time

          and lowers the price of          in terms of time. The increase in

   due to the increase in its time share T2 remains constant, resulting in

an in_reasing price of Z2 in terms of Z1) as Z2 increases                    The trans-

formation curve becomes, therefore, concave beyond a certain point (point Gb).
                                     17




Alternatively, if one increases       at the expense of Z2, the person may

reach the point where he or she stops buying XM2 and relies exclusively on

home production (X2     X.d2). At this point (C0) the price of Z2 in terms of

Z1 declines and the transformation curve becomes concave.

          The transformation curve consists, therefore, of a part which is

a straight line bounded by two concave segments.12 Let        be the leisure—

intensive activity. The introduction of Z2 and the transfer of time from

the leisure—intensive to the goods—intensive activity is accompanied by

an increase in work at home and a decline in work at the market and leisure.

As Z2 increases there comes a point (T2 =
                                             T)   where it ceases to be prof—

itable to increase the home production of X. Any additional increase in

Z2 should not affect work at home, and since time is shifted to the goods—

intensive activity, work in the market should increase at the expense of

leisure. Eventually, the point is reached (T1 9) where any additional

cuts in     have to come at the expense of home production work at home

and leisure diminish      while the supply of labor is increased (figure 5).

          A wage increase shifts the transformation curve upward (a shift

from K0G0G!JK to K1G1GK in figure 6), and changes the relative

price of the two activities. It reduces the price of         if Its production

involves market goods (XMl >   0),   the rate of decline being positively

related (by equation 10) to the goods intensity of the activity.        Thus,

a wage Increase should increase the price of 21 relative to Z2 as long as

   >
       9 (i.e.,   In the section G1GjKj). However, when the person relies

in the production of Z2 exclusively on home production (T2 <     9) the
relative price of Z2 should increase with wages (section
                                                             K1G1).
                                 18




        It has been shown in the case of the one—commodity world that a

wage increase reduces the amount of work at home and its effect on leisure

and work In the market is indeterminate. In a two—conodity world, the

tendency for the labor supply function to be positively sloped is increased by

the substitution effect which favors the market goods intensive commod-

ity (the commodity that entails work in the market). Still, the final

outcome depends on the production functions of home goods f1, the con-

sumption technology Z, the elasticity of substitution between the commod-

ities and their income elasticities.

        Removing the assumption that there exist no other sources of income,

the person can obtain market goods without having to work in the market.

An increase in other sources cf income tends, therefore, to reduce

labor force participation. As long as the person works in the market and

buys all market goods (XM. > 0 for I =   1, 2), an increase in V shifts the
transformation curve upward but does not change the relative price of the

two commodities)3 The parallel shift in the transfOrmation curve creates

an Income effect which increases both activites. The increase in the derived

demand for leisure is satisfied by diverting time from work in the market

to leisure, leaving work at home unchanged.


        With minor exceptions the analysis of this section supports our

previous conclusions. Changes in the wage rate, other sources of income,

and home productivity (not discussed here) have a very similar effect on

the allocation of time in the two—commodity world as in the one—commodity

world4 The analysis sheds, however a new light on the effect children have

on the allocation of time. Among economists it. is customary to treat children

In the analysis as time—intensive commodities, the argument relying on the rtega—
                                     19



tive relationship between the number of children (and in particular young

children) and the supply of labor (Willis, 1973). It seems to me this is

a somewhat oversimplified view. In my terminology children seem to be

essentially a gooth4ntensive commodity, and hence     an   increase in the

number of children should cut into a person's leIsure. The introduction

of    children, similarly to any other commodity that uses home—produced
goods, should increase work at home and decrease labor supply, but even-
tually this tendency should be reversed and any additional       Increases   in

the   commodity children should lead to an increase in     labor supply at the
expense of leisure.
          It   has been observed that children have a different effect on

their mothers' and fathers' supply of labor. The factor dominating

women's allocation of time is the Increased scope for home production

associated with the introduction of children. Time is shifted from other

activities to the new activity, involving a shift from work In the market

to work at home. As for fathers, given their lower productivity at

home and their higher wage rate in the market, their scope for home pro-

duction is much more limited. Thus, the effect of children on their

fathers' work at home is much smaller than on their mothers'. On the

other hand, given the goods—intensive nature of children, an increase in

the number of children should increase the fathers' supply of work in the

market. For the same reason, one expects the leisure of both parents to

decline.

           The price of market substitutes (maids, nursery school, kindergarten,

schools) declines as the child grows older. Said differently, the real

wage of the mother (in terms of market substitutes) increases as the child
                                       20




grows older. This increase leads to a decline in work at home and an increase

in work at the market, but may not increase much the demand for leisure.'5
         Similarly,lt seems that in Israel the prices of market substitutes

(maids, nursery school) are cheaper than in the U.S.16 Thus, 'n Israeli

mother should find it less profitable to divert time from work in the market

to work at home when she has a child. The supply of labor of Israeli women,

and in particular of the more educated ones, should therefore be less affected

by   young children than that of their Amerlcan counterparts (Gronau, 1976).

          The introduction of children into    the analysis in the context   of a
single-person   household is admittedly of little relevance. To make the

analysis more realistic, one has to expand the model to a two—person house-

hold. In such a household people interact, and this interaction is often

reflected in their allocation of time. It has been argued (Mincer, 1962;

Gronau, 1973) that a multiperson household is a framework in which its

members can reap the gains from specialization and exchange. Our model

gives us new tools to reexamine this exchange.
                                                                             —
C. The Case of a Two—Person Household in a World of Two Commodities
      The Gains from_Marriag

          Marriage   introduces into people's choice set a new activity,"married

life." The new activity uses in its production home produced goods and,

thus, involves an increase in work at home at the expense of work in the

market. Furthermore, to the extent that this loosely defined activity

is more goods intensive than the other activities, it should also reduce

leisure. Marriage may      have,   however, a more fundamental effect on the

household members' allocation of time by allowing for specialization within

the family. Much of the preceding dscussicn Is based en the propositien
                                        21




that a person is reluctant (or finds it unprofitable) to sell his home

goods outside his household.       The analysis may       require     some modifications

when we expand the definition of the household from a one—person to a

two—person entity.

        Let it be assumed that the household consists of two persons,

husband and wife (denoted by m and f, respectively), and there are only

two commodities (one of the commodities may be children). On—the—job

training may make the wife a more efficient producer of home goods, and

discrimination and smaller market involvement result in the wife's earning

a lower wage than   her   husband W >
                                         Wf.   Given this wage differential, the

male will be happy to give up (w — c)LT         of   income (where £    > 0)   if he

could only get in return tT units of time. The woman, on the other hand,

will be content to do without LT of her time if she could secure in

return an amount of (Wf + £)T of Income. Since               >
                                                                 W,   there is ample

space for exchange. The only problem hampering the exchange is

limitations on the sale of nonmarket time. These limitations are, how-

ever, somewhat relaxed in the family context.

        By definition leisure is an input whicI the person has to provide

himself. Thus, there is no way in which the wife can conserve on her hus-

band's leisure. She can, however, conserve on his work—at—home time. Itideed,

the woman who is reluctant to sell her home goods (e.g., serve as a maid)

is willing to exchange them within the family for market goods. The extent

to which such an exchange takes place and the terms of the exchange depend to

a large degree on her marginal costs of producing these goods.

        Let it be assumed that in the absence of exchange the husband is

buying some quantity of every good in the market (XM. >           0).    Were exchange
                                 22




to take place, the highest price the husband would be ready to offer for

these goods would be their market price. If the woman also buys these

goods in the market (though she may produce some of them also at home), she

is facing the same prices as her husband, and in spite of the wage differen-

tial there is no room for exchange. If, on the other hand, the wife's

optimal combination of goods before marriage does not involve one of the

market goods, the wife produces that good at a price that is lower than the

market price at which the husband buys it, and there is still place for

specialization — the wife expands her home production in exchange for

market goods.


        The amount of goods and services exchanged depends on the terms of

trade. In the short run when the exchange is limited to a specific pair of

people, we are confronted by a inonopoly—monopsony case with an indeterminate

solution. In a broader context that also encompasses the marriage decision,

the number of players is not limited to two and the terms of trade (the price

of the home good in terms of the market goods) are determined by the demand

and the supply of the home good. The husband's home goods demand curve has

an infinitely elastic section at the prevailing market price. Thus, if at

the market price the husband's demand exceeds the wife's excess supply the

terms of trade equal the market price, and the gains from the trade accrue

solely to the wife.17 A change in the socioeconomic environment (e.g., an

increase in wage rates or in the family's other sources of income) that increases

the demand for home goods (or decreases the wife's excess supply) results in

an interaction in time usage of husbands and wives only if it gives rise

to an increase in the terms of trade. On the other hand, if the terms of
                                   23




trade are at their maximum (i.e., they equal the market price), they cannot

rise any further and the predictions of the two—person model are iiery simi-

lar to the one—person case.

        The different effect marriage is       observed   to have on the husband's

and wife's work at home and in the market is due primarily to specialization

and. exchange taking place within the family.18 But what explains the

negative   effect marriage has on the husband's leisure, and the observed

asymmetry in the effect changes in the spouse's education and wage rate

have on the husband's and wife's allocation of time? One possible answer

is that marriage has a redistributive effect. Equality within the family

calls for husbands and wives to have the same amount of leisure, and since

single men enjoy more leisure than single women, marriage entails a

reduction in males' leisure so that     it    equals that of females. Unfortunately,

this explanation provides an answer only to the first question but does

not resolve the second.

       An alternative explanation traces the effect of the wife's edu-

cation on her husband's allocation of time to selective mating and to the

effect it has on his investment in human capital. It has been observed

(Benham, 1974) that the wife's education and the husband's wage rate are

positively correlated. If wages have a positive effect on labor supply,

wife's education should be positively related to her husband's work in

the market and negatively related        to     his leisure.19 However, this

reasoning falls short of explaining the positive effect wife's education

has on the husband's work at home. Furthermore, why don't we observe the

same factors working on the wife's allocation of time?
                                       24




          To my mind, the explanation lIes in tha asymmetry of the exchange

process taking place within the family. Marriage increases the demand for

the   goods in which the woman has a comparative advantaga, and thus her
gains   from   marriage may exceed   those of her husband's. Specifically,

marriage affects the     allocation of time in two ways: (a) It   creates a

demand for a new goods—intensive activity that involves home production;

and (b) It allows for     specializatIon within the household. The first of
these   factors (similarly to the effect of chiidren) should increase the

woman's work at home and reduce her work in the market and leisure. It

should increase the husband's work both at home and in the market at the

expense of leisure. The opening of possibilities for exchange should

reinforce   this tendency for the wife but should decrease

work at home and increase     the work in the market of the husband. The

possibilities for gains from trade are greater the lower the wife's

education. Furthermore, the lower the wife's education, the greater the

probability that these gains will be shared by both husband and wife.

Thus, the less schooling the wife has, the more home tasks she takes over

from her husband the less he works at home, the more leisure he gets

and the less he works in the market. On the other hand, the higher her

education, the smaller the total gains from the exchange and the smaller

his fraction of the gains. Consequently, he works more both in the

market and at home at the expense of leisure. As for the wife, the more

schooling she has the smaller the total gains but the greater her fraction

or the gains from trade. The wife's leisure is affected by two contra-

dictory forces: marriage tends to lower leisure, but the gains from

exchange tend to increase it. The two forces seem to offset each other,

regardless of the wife's schooling, leaving the woman's leisure unchanged.
                                  25




                      III. Some Empiricai Tests


        The model gives rise to a wealth of testable hypotheses. Although

many of these hypotheses could have been generated also by other models,

which use a weaker set of assumptions (e.g., the models discussed In my 1973

and 1976 papers), none of them generates this model's prediction concerning the

income effect on work at home. A crucial test of our analysis focuses, there-

fore, on this effect: Does an increase In nonearning income reduce the work

at home of the not employed but leave the work at home of the employed

unaffected? The examination of this hypothesis is the subject of this section.

        The data used are the 1972 panel of the Michigan Study of Income

Dynamics. Given the peculiar nature of the subsample of the not employed

males (e.g., a mean age of 68), I confine tl'e discussion to the time usage

of married white females. This sample included 1,281 women, of which 660

were employed sometime during the previous year, and 621 reported they did

not work in 1971. The dependent variables consist of the time spent working

in the market (including travel to work), the time spent in housework, and

leisure.2° The explanatory variables comprised the wife's age, education ann

labor force experience (i.e., full—time work) since the age of 18, the husband's

education and wage, the family's nonearning Income, the number of children

younger than 18, the number of children In school and the number of rooms

in the home. The regressions were estimated for the whole sample, and sep-

arately for the employed and the not—employed.21

        The findings for the whole sample closely resemble those reported

earlier In section 1 and, thus, are not presented here. Table 3 presents

the results for the two separate subsamples. The results confirm the pre—

dictions of the mode1. When the wife is not employed, her work at home is
                                  26




negatively affected nd, hence, her leisure is positively affected) by her

nonearnings income and by her husband's wage rate. Children tend to increase

her home tasks, but school children less so than preschool children. Her

work at home is negatively associated with her education, but is positively

associated with the size of her house. As predicted, her potential wage rate

(as approximated by her past labor force experience) does not affect her

allocation of time.

        Focusing on employed women, a major determinant of their allocation

of time is their wage rate. This variable explains the negative effect of

labor force experience on work at home and leisure, and the negative effect

of the wife's education on her work at home (education and leisure are posi-

tively correlated in this regression, but the regression coefficient is

insignificant). Children have a negative effect on their mothers' leisure,

the time withdrawn from the market falling short of the increased housework.

As the child grows older and enters school, housework diminishes, but this

change hardly results in any gains in leisure —   the time saved In work at home
is diverted back to the market.22 Most important for our analysis is the

income effect. The husband's wage has a significant positive effect on leisure,

but has no effect on work at home. Similarly, work at home is unaffected by

changes in nonearning income; its effect on leisure is positive, though weak.

It is also worth noticing that the work at home of employed women is uncor—

related with the size of their house — presumably any extra work associated

with a greater number of rooms is done by maids (or other market substitutes).

       To isolate the wage effect from other effects associated with edu-

cation, I introduced this variable directly into the regression. Since the

survey does not include direct inforisation on the hourly wage rate, hourly
                                  27




earnings are computed by dividing annual earnings by annual hours (i.e., by

the product of weeks worked and weekly hours). This procedure generates

serious measurement errors which hamper any direct attempt to estimate the

wage effect. To overcome this problem, I used an indirect approach: in the

first stage I estimated the wage function, and in the second stage I intro—

duced the imputed (ln) wage in the time usage functions. The estimated wage

function was of the semi—log variety, the explanatory variables being the

wife's education, her labor force experience and her husband's wage rate



        In W = — .5955 + .0905 EDUC + .0302 EXPR — .0006 (EXPR)2 + .0442
                                                                          WAGEH2
                         (9.18)       (4.72)       (2.99)          (4.75)     R =.20



where the wages are measured in dollars and the terms-in parentheses denote

the corresponding t values.

        The results of the second stage (table 3) do not vary much from our

previous findings. The wage rate has a strong negative effect on both leisure

and work at home. Education is positively correlated with leisure, but its

effect on work at home (though positive) is not significant. (The direct

effect of education on number of hours worked in the market is, therefore,

negative.) Finally, the pure income effect is as predicted: Neither non—

earnings income nor the husband's wage rate affect the employed woman's

work at home. Our theory passes also this test successfully.


               IV. So, What's New? — Some Implications


       The model has been shown to yield a cohesive interpretation of the

findings on the allocation of time between work in the market, work at home

and leisure. It explains the different behavior patterns of people with
                                   28

                                                                                  )


different   incomes, wages and education, and the effect of children on the

allocation of time, It accounts for the different patterns observed for

males and females, married and not married, employed and not employed, and

it seems, in general, to provide the economist with more refined tools to

analyze time budget data. But does the theory extend our understanding of

household' behavior beyond this goal? In this section I shall try to show

that the ramifications of the theory reach far beyond the analysis of time

use.

       The Supply of Labor. The most direct application of our model is,

of course, to the analysis of labor supply. In the short tun the two most

important economic factors affecting the supply of labor of married women are

income apd wage rates. By our analyiss the income effect works primarily

through its effect on leisure. On the other hand, wage increases tend to

increase the supply of labor by reducing work at home; but their effect on

leisure is indeterminate. Given the wage effect on leisure, the labor supply

is more elastic the greater the sensitivity of work at home to changes in the

wage rate (i.e., the smaller the effect of H on f'). For that reason alone,

one should expect the supply of labor of married women to be more elastic

than that of males. But the analysis brings up a further point: A wage

increase may result not merely in a shift from work at home to work in the

market but also in a reduction of leisure — employed women having less leisure

than the not employed. Indeed, according to the estimates presented in table 3,

though the wage elasticities are almost identical (about 0.4), the marginal

effect of a wage change on the leisure of the employed is more than four

times that on work at home. Admittedly, some of these changes in leisure may

be due to changes in activities which are normally regarded as work at home
                                  29




but were not defined by the respondent as housework,23 but It is hard to

believe that this misclassification explains such a great difference.

        Recent decades have witnessed a great expansion in the labor suprdy

of married women. Still, with only about half the married women participating

In the labor force, and s.Lth the number of working hours of the employed women

being equal to the number of hours they put in work at home, it looks as if

this resource has only been partly tapped for future expansion. A natural

question is to what extent will the labor supply function of married women

resemble that of their husbands' once they reach similar labor force partic-

ipation rates? Right now any answer to this question should be regarded as

sheer speculation, since so much depends on changes in role differentiation,

and reallocation of work at home within the family. it is, however, worth

noticing that right now women are more willing to dispense with leisure in

response to increases in wages than men (a one percent change in wages changes

the employed wives' leisure by almost twice that of males'), and that males

are apt to increase their leisure in response to increases in income much more

than women (the ratio of the income effects is about 5:l).24

        In the long run, changes in wages are associated with changes in

education. But while wage increases reduce both work at home and leisure,

the effect of education Is confined to the first factor. The prospects for

increased labor supply due to increases in education are, therefore, much more

limited than In the short run. On the other hand, one can expect further

expansions in labor supply If the increase in education and wages is associated

with a decline in fertility.

        The Demand for Children. It is customary for economists to argue

that children are a home—time intensive activity and, therefore, an increase

In children reduces work In the market. A corollary of this conclusion is
                                   30


                                                                                  /
the argument that since children are time intensive, an increase in their
mothers' wage rates should raise their price relative to that of other

commodities. Given our analysis, one has to distinguish between home time

intensity and leisure intensity (or average arid marginal home—time intensity).

Children may be home-tiDe intensive when they are introduced into the house-

hold since some of the, goods used in the actvlty can be profitably produced

at home. However, as one increases this activity, the profitability of home

production diminishes and eventually the family relies (on the margin) solely

on market goods. At this point the goods—intensive nature of children becomes

apparent. Thus, while in the range where children!s goods.. are produced at

horn; an increase in wage increases the price of children; when these goods

are replaced by market goods, the increase in wage reduces it. The tendency

to repice home goods by market goods increases with the mOther's wage rate.

Thus, one should expect that the price of children increases with the

mother's wage for low wage mothers but that this relationship is reversed

as the mother's wage increases. Ben Porath (1973) observes for Israeli

women a transpose J shape relationship between fertility and education —

fertility   declines with education but there is a slight inflection at the
                                                                25
top. These findings are consistent with the moael's prediction.      The

price of housernaids relative to the wife's wage seems to be lower in Israel

than in the U.S. and the tendency to replace housemaid services for the

wife's time is, therefore, greater there. Consequently, the transpose J

shape relationship between fertility and the wife's education should be

more pronounced in the Israeli data.

        The price of market substitutes relative to the wife's wage declines

with the child's age. The goods_intensive nature of children becomes, there-

fore, more explicit as the child grows older. The relative price of "older
                                  31




children" has a greater tendency to declLne with the parent's wage. The

overall effect of changes in the wage rate on the present value of the cost

of children is, therefore, indeterminate and depends on the price of market

substitutes, the rate of discount, etc.

        The Gains from Marria. Past studies (e.g., Becker, 1973) have

asserted that the gains from marriage depend on the husband—wife wage ratio.

Other things being equal, the hIgher the husband's wage rate relative to

his wife's the greater the opportunity for specialization within the house-

hold and the greater the gains from trade. This conclusion has to be

somewhat modified if one realizes that there exists no direct way for trading

one's leisure and that the exchange is confined to home goods. The scope for

gains from exchange within the household is limited by the profitability of home

production. The latter, in turn, depends on the wife's home productivity and the

price of market substitutes. Given the wife's home productivity and the price

of market substitute the higher the wife's wage the greater the probability that

any change in her activities may change the composition of her market goods but

will not affect her home production. In this case the prices of goods confronting

males and females are the same and there are no gains to be reaped from trade.

The gains from trade decline, therefore, with the wife's wage rate irrespectIve

of the husband's wage. The increase in marital instability that has accompanied

the increase in wives' real wage rates and their increased participation in the

labor force is consistent with the prediction of the model, though one does, not

witness any substantial narrowing of the sex wage gap (Fuchs, 1974)26.
                                       32




          Taxes,   Childcare   Prrams, and the Demand for Domestic Help. It is

 often claimed that the wife' entry into the labor force Involves costs such as

 childcare and housemaid services which exceed by far the husband's cost of

 entry. According to this argument, childcare services should be tax deductible,

 as are books or other costs the person must undertake In order to work. This

 argument has been accepted by many legislators and incorporated into the tax

 laws.

         The analysis points out the fallacy of this argument. An increase in

the expenditures on childcare services is associated with the wife's work in

the same way an increase in the expendItures on a gardener is associated with

the husband's work. As distinguished from expenditures on books or commuting

costs (and time), it is not a cost which is a prerequisite to work but rather

a cost which the family willingly undertakes because it finds that it is

unprofitable for the wife to spend her time in childcare activities.

         The analysis emphasizes, however, an additional point. In

evaluating the various childcare programs which have been proposed or enacted

in recent years, one has to distinguish between their effect on the marginal

rate of substitution between goodsand leisure and their effect on the profit—

ability of home production. Assume a one commodity world where the only

commodity is "children." A program which gives the mother a fixed childcare

subsidy for every hour worked is equivalent to a wage increase and affects


both the profitability of home production and the price of leisure. On the

other hand,a fixed cash rebate or free childcare services which are conditional

on a minimum number of working hours does not affect the profitability

of home production of working women and ay only affect theIr

demand for leisure. When it comes to non—working women this kind of program
                                      33




encourages labor force participation (in particular if entry into the market

involves fixed costs) and may affect both home production and leisure. Finally,

a tax deduction of childcare expenditures which declines gradually with earnings

may affect home production but not affect the price of leisure.

        It has been argued (Heckman, 1974) that to evaluate and compare the

Impact the various programs have on labor supply and welfare, it is sufficient

to kno, the indifference curves between market goods and non—market time. Our

analysis indicates that this knowledge may not be sufficient and that a thorough

evaluation may require specific knowledge of both the household production

function f(H) and consumption technology (Z)2

         Finally, it seems at first puzzling that work at home is so insensitive

 to change3 in income, given the high income elasticity of the demand for

housemaids.28 T'-ie puzzle is, however, resolved if one realizes that the

demand for housemaid services (as many other services) is an excess demand.

An increase in income does not increase the profitability of producing these

services at home when the person is employed and reduces the profitability

when he is not employed (the shadow price of time increasing).    Thus, changes

in Income may have a strong effect on the excess demand for these market

services and no effect (or even a negative one) on home services.


        The Evaluation of the Home Sector Output. A long standing complaint

waged against the current national accounting system is its omission of the

output of the non—market sector, and specifically, the output of wives at

home, which constitutes according to some estimates (Morgan, 1966) close to

40 percent of measured GNP. Several attempts have been made to correct this

shortcoming (Morgan, 1966, Nordhaus & Tobin, 1973, Slrageldin, 1969) but these

attempts were plagued by an ensuing
                                      controversy over what nrices should he used in
                                          34




evaluating the wife's output. Should one use the value women seem to assign

to their tine (Gronau, 1973) or should one use the market prices of the services

rendered by the wives (Sirageldin, 1969, Walker & Gauger, 1973). The model

provides an analytical tool to resolve this controversy.

          If the wife works in the market and at least some of each good is

purchased (X > 0), her value of marginal, productivity at home equals her
wage rate (f W). Since most of the goods produced at home are in the

nature of services, she assigns to these goods a value that equals the wage

she would have to pay somebody to do the work for her divided by the average

produtivity of that person        (   = Wu/APHi).   The value placed on the last unit

of work at home equals, therefore,



          W =
                WHfI/APHi


Using the wage W11 of the service worker who can replace the wife in home

production serves as a good approximation for the value of her time only if

his or her average productivity equals the wife's marginal productivity. If

   >            the wage of the service worker will underestimate the price the
       APHi
wife assigns to her marginal unit of time in work at home.

          To estimate the value of home production, it is not sufficient to

know the value of the marginal unit of work at home but one has to know the

home production function f(H) itself. Multiplying the number of hours the

wife works at home by her hourly wage rate understates the value of her home

output If the law of margIr'] oroductivity prevails. Furthermore, it has
                                                                         =
been shown that if none of thc goods are not purchased in the market (K
                                                                      Mi
                                                                           0),
t value   of the marginal productivity of her dme in their production at home exceeds
                                   35




the wage rate. Finally, if the woman does not work in the market, her shadow

price of time exceeds her expected wage rate. It seems, therefore, highly

probable that our current estimates of the output of the home sector are
                      29
highly underestimated.


                            V. What's Now?


        I believe that this paper provides ample evidence for establishing

the distinction between work at home and leisure as an integral part of the

theory of the allocation of time and household production. It has been shown

that this distinction is a prerequisite for any further investigation of time

use patterns and is highly useful in the analysis of fertility, marriage,

childcare programs, labor force participation, and the evaluation of the output

of the nonrnarket sector. I am confident the model will also be found fruitful

for the analysis of problems in other fields, such as medical economics or

transportation demand, in which the household production model has been put

to good use.

        It is clear that the model is incomplete. I expect major criticism

to be launched against the assumption that work at home involves the same

marginal utility as work in the market. Childcare, cooking, gardening, etc.

clearly create direct utilities (positive or negative). The psychic income

derived from these activities relative to that derived from work in the market

may vary with the person's socioeconomic characteristics and affects his

behavior. Admitting the validity of this criticism, I contend that it Is not

more serious than in the case of the dichotomy of home time vs. work in the

market. Psychic income (or leisure ac work) Is an important determinant of

investment in human capital, occupational choice and the supply of labor.
                                  36




Economists have not been able up to now to derive a satisfactory method to

isolate this factor. This has not hampered research on the determinants of the

supply of work to the market and it sould not block research on the supply

of work at home.

        A second point of criticism may focus on the neglect of joint produe-

tion and joint consumption. These are important features of human behavior

which are not adequately treated by our analysis.3° ut ln this respect our

model does not do worse (or better) than the current model of household

production.

        Finally, in the empirical part of this paper I have investigated

only a small fraction of the implications of the model for the household

allocation of time and consumption patterns. Topics such as the interaction

between work at home and substitute market services, or the interaction

between entry costs (time and money) and time usage have only been touched

upon. More ambitious endeavors such as the estimation of the household

production function and the value of home output are still in a blueprint

stage. However, given the right data, it is hoped that this paper will

provide the framework that will facilitate their realization.
                                       37




                                    REFERENC ES




G.S.   Becker, "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Economic Journal, 75
       (September 1965) :493—517.

________—, "A Theory of Marriage:           Part   I," Journal of Political Economy,
       81 (July/August 1973):813—846.

L. Benham, "Benefits of Women's Education Within Marriage," Journal of
     Political_Economy, 82 (March/April 1974, Part tI):557—571.

Y. Ben—Porath, "Economic Analysis of Fertility In Israel: Point and Counter-
     Point," Journal of Political Economy, 81 (March/April 1973, Part II):
       S202—S233.

F. Bloch, "The Allocation of Time to Market and Non—Market Work Within a
     Family Unit," Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences,
     Stanford University, Technical Report No. 114, November 1973.
J. Cogan, "Labor Supply with Endogenous Time and Money Costs
                                                             of Entry
     Mimeo, April 1976.

V. Fuchs, "Recent Trends and Long—Run Prospects for Female Earnings,"
     American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 64 (May 1974):236—242.

R. Gronau, "The Intrafamily Allocation of Time: The Value of Housewives'
     Time," American Economic Review, 78 (September 1973):634—65l.

__________ "The Allocation of Time of Israeli Women," Journal of Political
     Economy, 84 (August 1976 Supplement).

J.J. Heckman, "Effects of Child—Care Programs on Women's Work Effort,"
     Journal of Political Econy, 82 (March/April 1974, Part II):Sl36—S163.

J. Mincer, "Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in Aspects of_Labor
     Economics, edited by H. Gregg Lewis, Universities—National Bureau
     Conference Series No. 14, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
       1962.

J.N. Morgan, l.A. Sirageldin, N. Barewaldt, Productive Americans, Ann Arbor:
     University of Michigan Press, 1966.

V. Nordhaus, J. Tobin, "Is Growth Obsolete?" in The Measurement of Economic
     and Social Performance, Studies In Income and Wealth, edited by M. Moss,
     Vol. 38, National Bureau of Economic Research, New York: Columbia
     University Press, 1973.
                                    38




R. Penman, Labor Theoy, New York: Wiley, 1969.

R.A. Pollak and M.L. Wachter, "The Relevance of the Household Production
     Function and Its Implication for the Allocation of Time," Journal of
     Political Econ, 83 (April 1975):255—278.

S. Sharir, "The Income Leisure Model: A Diagrammetic Extension," The
     Economic Record,   (March 1975):93—98.

l.A. Sirageldin, Non—Market Cop2pents of NatIonal Income, Ann Arbor: Uni-
     versity of Michigan Press, 1969.

K.E. Walker, W.H. Gauger, "The Dollar Value of Household Work," New York
     State College of Human Ecology, Cornell UnIversity, 1973.

R.J. Willis, "A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Behavior,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 81 (March/April 1973, Part II):S14—S64.
                                  39




                               FOOTNOTES


        This paper has been britten while on sabbatical at the National

Bureau of Economic Research. It has not undergone the full critical review

accorded the NBER studies.

        Research on this paper was supported by a grant to the National Bureau

of Economic Research from the Rockefeller Foundation. The paper was inspired

by discussions with Yoram Weiss and Robert J. Willis. I am thankful to Orley

Ashenfelter, Gary Becker, Victor Fuchs, Zvi Griliches, Robert Michael, Jacob

Mincer and Donald Parsons for their comments on earlier drafts of this paper,

and to Kris Chinn and Kyle Johnson for computational assistance.



        'One exception is (Penman, 1969, Ch. 1). After writing the initial

draft of this paper, I have become aware of another two exceptions; namely,

Bloch (1973) and Sharir (1975). Both suggest models that are in many respects

similar to the one suggested here but do not analyze all the implications of

this model.


        2The U.S. and the Israeli data differ both in the nature of the depen-

dent variables and in the degree of detail of the explanatory variables. In

the American survey (ihe 1964 Productive American study), people were asked

how much time they spent annually in regular and irregular housework and

how much in market work. Leisure was defined in thIs study as the residual.

In the Israeli survey (conducted by the Institute of Social Research in

Jerusalem), people were asked how they spent each hour of the previous day.

The survey included 48 activities which I classified into four major groups

(work In the market, work at home, leisure and physiological needs, only the
                                          40



first three of which are reported in table 1). The respoqdents' background data

are much more detailed in the American survey.                The Israeli survey does not

contain any information on the person's wage rate, and one has to use educa-

tion as a very imperfect proxy.

         3This assumption is crucial to the model and distinguishes this model

from previous formulations such as Z = Z(XM, XH L) (Gronau, 1973) that had

only very limited predictive power.

         4For simplicity I ignore the market goods that enter into the produc-

tion of home goods.

         5Thus, one can easily rewrite equation (1)



         z   = z(x, L)   =   z'(x, L,   T—L) =   Z'(X, L, H + N),                           (1')


i.e.,   H and N are perfect substitutes as far as the consumption technology

(Z) is concerned.


          6Equatlons (6) and (6')        are    derived by maximizing the Lagranglan

function



          G= z[(XM+ f(H)), L] +          )JWN    +V -   X]   + p(T -   L   -   H   —
                                                                                       N]



with respect to L, H, N and XM.           The shalow.price of time (measured in real
terms)   equals



              = p/A



where i and A are     the    marginal utilities of time and income, respectively.
                                        41




         The wage rate may fall short of the value of marginal productivity

at home O <     f')   either because of the person's reluctance to perform the

home services outside of his own home or because of differences in the value

of marginal productivity between home and the outside, due to transportation

costs, monitoring costs and efficiency (the person being self—employed in

his own home)

         7The decline in work in the market may result in some cases in the

person's dropping out of the labor force altogether.


         8One can easily treat variable time and money costs (i.e., costs that

vary with N) by an appropriate modification of the wage rate.

              alternative interpretation of the different patterns of time use of the

employed and not employed traces them to differences in productivity at home,

the less productive person having a stronger inclination to join the labor

force.


         10Thjs   assumption has come recently under heavy criticism by Pollalc and
Wachter (1975). I adopt it reluctantly for the sake of simplicity.

         The figures 4 and 5 do not pretend to describe the relative magni-

tudes of L, H, and N but only the direction of their change as more time is

allotted to Z2.

              the special case where the productivity of the person in the

production of one of the home goods is very low and he relies exclusively on

market goods (X. =       0),   the transformation curve has only one concave segment.


              long as N > 0 for any combination of         and Z2, the concave sec—

dons of the transformation curves are unaffected by changes in V. However,
                                     42



if the Increase in V is sufficiently large to make the person withdraw from

the labor force, for a given set of Z1 and Z2, the transformation curve becomes

concave for those sets. If V is sufficiently large, the person may drop out

of the labor force altogether. If V >
                                          Mx[p1(T
                                                    —
                                                        H)
                                                              —
                                                                  X]   the person does

not work regardless of the combination of commodities chosen.


             exception is the case where        >       but       > T (i.e., the person

works in the market, N >   0,   but does not purchase Z2 market Inputs, XM2 =       0).
An increase In V that increases both commodities entails an increase in

leisure and work at home at the expense of work in the market.

       5The goods intensity of children may decline with their age, resulting

in an increase in leisure as the child grows older. However, as long as

children are more goods intensive than other activities, they should be

associated with a decline in leisure.

       161n Israel many of the 2—year—olds and most of the 3—4 year—olds

attend a nursery for at least four hours a day. In 1968 over 40 percent of

the working mothers with a child less than 3 years old employed a maid (the

fraction for working mothers with 13+ years of schooling was two—thirds.)

       17The wJ.fe, however, may find it advisable to "bribe" her husband

to maintain this trading relationship.

       18The wife's tendency to specialize in work at home is reinforced if

work in the market involves fixed entry costs. Marriage offers the woman

a job which does not involve these fixed costs at terns which may not be

much inferior to her market wage rate. As a result, the wife may be tempted

to drop out of the labor force and concentrate on work at ome.
                                                                                          )
                                    43




       '9The positive correlation between the wife's education and the

husband's work in the market reported earlier for Israeli families is

observed by Benham also in the case of American data.

       20
            The families reported on the number of weeks worked, the number of

hours the wife worked per week, and the number of hours spent in housework

in an average week. (Housework is not defined in the questionnaire, but

the examples mentioned are cooking, cleaning and other work around the house.

Thus, it Is not known whether the families included such activities as

chlldcare and shopping in housework). Leisure was defined by me as the differ-

ence between 8,760 annual hours and the number of hours reported worked in

the market and at home.


       21Separating the sample according to employment status may give rise

to selectivity biases. I tried to correct these biases, but had very little

success because of the strong multicollinearity between the correction coat—

ficient and the rest of the explanatory variables. It Is comforting to learn

that recent attempts to correct selectivity biases in labor supply have gen-

erated results that do not differ much from simple OLS estimates based on

the working wives sample (Cogan, 1976).

       22The effect of children on leisure, as presented in table 3, is

significant at the conventional 5 percent level only if one uses a one—tailed

test. However, if one removes the variable "school children" from     the
regression, the variable "number of children" turns out to be highly sig-

nificant by any standard (i.e., t values that exceed 3).


       23See note 20. According to the Israeli data, "housework" (not including

childcare) is only two—thirds of the time defined by me as work at home.
                                     44



         24The findings   for the employed married men (not presented here) are
based   on the same sample as those for the women.


         25Ben Porath (1973) explained this relationship in a somewhat similar

fashion, arguing that if the elasticity of substitution between time and goods

in the production of children exceeds unity, children may be a time—intensive

commodity for low—wage mothers but a goods—intensive commodity for high—wage

mothers.


         26Fuchs (1974) reports that the sex differential in hourly earnings

of white non—farm employed hardly changed in the last decade (from .61 in

1959 to .64 in 1969). Moreover, the differential for the young (less than

35)   married   (the group more prone to divorce) has even slightly increased

(from .73 to .70).


         270ne can easily incorporate in the analysis additional proposals (e.g.,

a subsidy confined to formal source of childcare) and complicate it by intro-

ducing additional activities or exchange within the household, but this would

not change our basic conclusion.


         28Using Israeli data (the Family Expenditure Survey 1968/9), I found that,

even when one controls for the wife's education and employment status, the

inconAe elasticity of houseniaids exceeds unity.


         290ne has to qualify somewhat this conclusion because the wage rates

used in the imputations may exceed the nonworking wives' expected wages

(Gronau, 1973).

                may very well be that the observed goods intensity of children

can be traced to joint consumptIon and production. Much of the satisfaction

one derives from his children and much of the childcare activity Involves
                                    45




just having the children arouud while doing other things, e.g., cooking,

watching TV, etc. Children may riot require, therefore, an increase in leisure

to allow the enjcyment from them.
                                             46




 Table 1: The Determinants of the Allocation of Time: U.S. and Israel
                                                               V
                                                                                           _V   —-




                         Work in       Wcrk at                Work in     Work at
                        the Marker       Home        Leisure the Market     Home    Leisure
U.s.   (1964)1

Husband's Wage                           0               +         +
Wife's Wage                 +                                      0        +
Non—Wage Income             —(?)                         +                  o       +
Total Number                             +                         +
  of Children
                                   -
Existenc of                 —(?)         +       -

                                                         0         +        +(7)
  Preschool Children

Israel_(968)2

Iusband's   schooling                                              o        o       a

Wife's schooling            +

Total Number                             +           -


                                                                   +        +
  of Children

Number of                                +                         0(?)     0(?)    0(?)
  Preschool Children




     'The results are based on Bloch (1973). Question marks denote cases where the
direction of the effect depended on the functional form of the -regression equations.

     2Based on Gronau (1976). Question marks denote cases where the regression
coefficients are barely significant.
        0                                                                             ()


Table 2:     Time budget survey:               time uses of Israeli married women by education and employment status                          — 1968

  YEARS OF SCHOOLING:                          0—8        .                       9—12                           13+                           Total

                                               Not                                Not                            Not                            Not
  EMPLOT'ENT STATUS:      Employed                       Total       Employed               Total   Employed               Total                         Total
                                             Employed                           Employed                                           Employed
                                                                                                               Employed                       Employed

Age                           40.22           42.80      42.13        40.18      40.25      40.22   38.50       38.20      38.40    39.77       41.43     40.84

Schooling                      4.80            4.92           4.89    10.63      10.52      10.56   14.13       13.57      13.94     9.58        7.83      8.46
Land of 8irth:
      AsAf                     0.61            0.58           0.59     0.19       0.28       0.25                0.08       0.06     0.29
                                                                                                     0.04                                        0.42      0.38
No. of Children:

   Age 0—5                     0.46            0.74       0.66         0.41       0.68       0.58    0.44        0.70       0.53     0.43        0.71      0.61
   Age 6-12                    0.98            0.93       0.94         0.24       0.51       0.42    0.34        0.49       0.39     0.51        0.73      0.65
   Age 13—17                   0.85            0.90       0.89         0.38       0.35       0.36    0.34        035        0.34     0.53        0.64      0.60

Monthly Income            670.16             545.94     578.21       989.96     843.27     896.08 1379.93      914.86   1220.60    982.65     693.97     796.52

Labor Force Participation                                 0.26                               0.36                           0.66                           0.36
Time Usea:
   Work at Home                4.85            7.67       6.94         4.30       6.71       584     397        6.26        4.75     4.40       7.18       6.19
   Work In the Market          4.34            0.12       1.21         4.52       0.13       1.71    3.90       0.02        2.57     4.30       0.11       1.60
   Total Work                  9.18            7.79       8.15         8.82       6.84       7.55    7.87       6.28        7.32     8.70       7.29       7.79

Physiological Needs            9.95           10.30      10.21         9.49      10.36     10.04     9.78      10.62       10.06     9.71      10.35      10.12

Leisu'cs                      4.63             5.27       5.10         5.16       6.14       5.78    5.86       6.50        6.08     5.16       5.71       5.52
No. of Observations           93             265        358          117        208        325      71         37         108      281        510        791

*3ecajse of missing    data    the    time    uses do   not    always add up to 24 hours.
                                                              48



Table 3: The Determinants of the Aliccation of Time of U.S. Married Women by
          Employment Status



                            Not Emp 1 oyed                                         Employed
                                                 Work In                                 Work In
                                                      the     Work at                         the     Work at
                            Work at Home          Market      — Home        Leisure       Market        Home       Leisure

(:onstait             1669.40       1677.29      1953.51      1155.30       5651.19      —9310.70 3213.34          14857.36
                       (6.74)        (6.69)       (8.44)       (5.32)       (21.37)       (9.14)       (3.30)      (12.61)
Wife'E Age            —1.1650       —1.3125      —15.7448     3. 8952       11.8496      —14.9648 4.0841           10.8807
                       (    .37)     (    .41)   (5.01)       (1.32)        ( 3.30)       (5.08)       (1.45)      (   3.19)
Wife's                —53.4693      —53.8111     20. 7398     —36.2 618     15.5219      —241.3122 11.8830         229.4293
Education              (3.28)        (3.29)       (1.36)       (2.53)       (   .89)      (8.47)       (    .44)   (   6.97)
Husband's             22.6684       22.5114      —32.7809     14.4118       18. 3691     —31.0277 13.9999          17.0277
Education              (1.82)        (1.81)       (2.38)       (1.12)       (   1.17)     (2.30)       (1.09)      (   1.09)
Husbandts             —16.1287      —16.1992     —24.0172     —8. 0482      32.0654      —151.8965 15.2644         136.6322
Wage1                  (2.21)        (2.22)       (1. 80)      (    .64)    (   2.11)     (8.89)       (    .93)   (   6.91)
onearnings            —.0441        —.0445       — .0660      .02 10        .0451        --.0598      .0197        .0401
InconieL               (2.23)        (2.24)       (2,39)       (    .81)    (   1.43)     (2.21)       (    .76)   (   1.28)
Children              327.6538      327.8430     —198. 7814 278.1406        —79.3593     —189,5587 276.0247        —86.'4661
  0—17                 (6.94)        (6.94)       (4.94)     (7.37)         (   1.73)     (4,81)       (7.31)      (   1.90)
Children              —1.25.1955 —124.9259 123.2164           —104 .464 7   —18.7516     98.3938      —100,0978 1.7041
In School              (2.86)     (2. 85)   (3.24)             (2.93)       (     .43)    (2.64)       (2.81)      (     .04)
Rooms                 83.2513       83. 2066     6. 4456      2 7.4669      —33.9125,    —3.5018      29.1479      —25.6461
                       (3.17)        (3.16)       (    .28)    (1.29)       (   1.31)     C    .16)    (1.37)          (1.00)
wife's                               .8077       38. 49 75    —6. 2440      —32.2535
Experience                           (    .21)    (9.57)       (1.65)           (7.02)
'ife's                                                                                   2810.95      —514.77      —2296.18
xpected                                                                                  (11.11)       (2.i)       (   7.85)
ge (LN)3




                      .2593         .2593        .1934        .1657         .1052        .2267        .1680        .1207
o. of                      621           621          660          660          660           660          660         660
)bservations



     1
         In $   per    hour.

     21n $      per year.
     3
         In     per hour.
                                                        49




    Goods
    E1                                                       Goods
    Cl          B.1

'

    Co



                                    I
                                                                                         A,
            I


                                             D




            L0L1 N                                            0        L0L1     N0       N1   T   Time

                      Figure 1                                                Figure 2




                            Goods




                             F



                                         0
                             E




                                                   L1   N            tT              Time

                                                                  T'

                                        Figure 3
                                            50


        Z2 Goods Intensive                       Z2 Leisure Intensive
L,H,N                                   L,H,N




                                                                        Ft


                                                                        L




                             T   T7                                     T    T2
              T—T                                       T—T
                                 Figure 4
    N




                                                                        H

                                                                        L

                                                                        N



                                                                                  T2

                                 Figure 5




                    V1
                     0




                                            C1
                    0
                                                              zi
                                      K0 K1
                                  Figure 6
