               NBER Working Paper Series




                 TREATMENT DECISION-MAKING IN
                     CATASTROPHIC ILLNESS


                       Kenneth E. Warner




                   Working Paper No.   139




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                           May 1976



                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

Financial support for this research was supported in part by a
grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research from the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
      It is well established that the social and economic environment of

medical care distinguishes its provision from that of other goods and

services. 1,7,11    While scholars have studied the influences of this idio-

syncratic environment, there is relatively little empirical knowledge about

how it affects decision—making in specific medical contexts. Through general

conceptual discussion and consideration of a case study of leukemia chemo-

therapy, this paper examines the medical decision—making process in one

specific context: the response of physicians to the availability of an

innovative treatment for a catastrophic illness. The manner in which the

medical profession deals with serious illness is relevant to concerns as

diverse as the promotion of economic efficiency and the preservation of human

dignity.


                    Decision—Making with Respect to Innovation

           A decision—making problem may be modeled as follows: the decision—maker

has an objective function which specifies how quantities of identified inputs

interact to produce quantities of the objective. The decision—maker chooses

the quantities and mix of inputs to achieve as much of the objective as possible

subject to existing constraints.

      In an environment of readily available information and complete knowledge

(of relevant production technologies, etc.), decision—making may be reduced to

to a mechanistic process. The human element enters when there is risk or

uncertainty, as in the decision whether or not to use an innovation. In this

case, the decision—maker must make imperfect judgments on relationships and out-

comes (uncertainty) or must weigh and value the risk associated with the

possibility of a variety of outcomes. Even if they possess similar information

and knowledge, different decision—makers will vary in their assessments of the
                                       —2—



likelihood of alternative outcomes; in addition they will differentially value

anticipated risk. Consequently, they may arrive at different decisions, or

they may arrive at similar decisions but following varying periods of deliberation.

These differences will be accentuated by variations in the timing and quantity

of information acquisition.

      The literature on response to innovation offers several insights into the

factors influencing decision—makers responses to innovation. 5,6,8,9,10,16

Central among these are the following:

      — Decision—makers tend to adopt innovations more rapidly the greater the

innovation's perceived relative advantages, the smaller the investment it requires

(in terms of physical capital, learning of new skills, etc.), the greater its

testability, the less its technical complexity, and so on. 8,10,16

      — Decision—makers tend to be risk averse. Caution dictates the wisdom

of adopting a "wait—and--see" attitude in order to avoid the hazards of risk

and uncertainty. The late adopter of an innovation may reap some of the

benefits of early users' costly experimentation. "[Pjotential users.. .have an

incentive to let others try [innovations] first and identify the defects," as

well as establish the potential profitability. Even in the highly competitive

arena of economic activity, firms demonstrate considerable risk aversion and

conservatism in their: approath' to innovations.9

      —   Partly   as a consequence of this risk aversion, It appears that the

probability that nonusers will adopt an innovation is an increasing function of

the proportion of their peers (colleagues or competitors) who are already using

the innovation.8 This imitation phenomenon reflects both the prima facie

positive evidence implicit in the fact of growing usage by peers and the

increasing availability of objective evidence about the innovation's relative
                                       —3—



advantages and deficiencies. Such evidence increases knowledge of how to

best use the innovation and decreases uncertainty about the results of using

it. Risk aversion and imitation are responsible for the frequently documented

S—shaped innovation diffusion pattern wherein diffusion is initially gradual and

then accelerates •15

      In short, an innovation will be used if it contributes cost—effectively

to the realization of the decision—maker's objective. The risk and uncertainty

inherent in most innovations generally act as deterrents to rapid adoption in

a population of risk averse potential users. One possible exception merits

attention here because of its relevance to medical treatment decision—making.

An organization which finds itself in a dismal situation (e.g., a firm verging

on bankruptcy) may    be   highly reponsive to an innovation. The organization's

fiscal (or other) condition triggers a search for a new means of assuring

survival, existing techniques having failed. To a successful (profitable)

organization, use of an innovation implies the risk of damaging the status quo,

in addition to the possibility of enhancing success. To the organization whose

survival is in jeopardy, an innovation offers the hope of improvement, while

downside risk is low by definition.


                 The Environment of Catastrophic Illness Care

      The physician with a seriously ill patient often faces a decision—making

problem analytically similar to that of the entrepreneur or manager of a near—

bankrupt firm:    confronted   with imminent demise ——   of   the patient or the firm   ——



the decision—maker has a strong inducement to use an innovation which might alter

the status quo, assuming that the innovation does not impose substantial costs

which the decision—maker will have to bear. (An entrepreneur might rationally
                                  —4—



choose to accept existing losses rather than risk incurring additional
                                                                                      .
liabilities.)

      An entrepreneur confronts the serious possibility of the demise of a firm

infrequently and rarely repeatedly; repeated confrontations would generally lead

to the firm's bankruptcy. In contrast, physicians routinely deal with dire

medical situations in which remissions or cures are impossible or highly

improbable, given existing therapies. For a number of reasons, physicians are

permitted and encouraged to use innovative therapies even before the therapies'

efficacy has been demonstrated and largely irrespective of their cost. A

physician's decision to use a poorly understood innovation may well be individually

rational in the face of a likely death or serious impairment. At the same time,

the social desirability of widespread adoption may remain open to question.

      Use of expensive new therapies of unknown efficacy is permitted by the

unorthodox economic environment in which catastrophic illness care is delivered.

In the present context, the most important of the market imperfections and idio-

syncrasies which pervade medical care17fl is the severance of the conventional

bond between consumption of a good or service and financial liability. Wide-

spread insurance coverage imposes the liability for most catastrophic illness

care on third parties, private and public insurers. When the patient's insurance

coverage and other resources are inadequate, individual or institutional price

discrimination may pass costs on to other patients. In short, the financial

constraint on consumption is effectively removed from the delivery of catastrophic

illness care. Patients' demand for care is economically unconstrained and, of

greater importance, physicians acting as demand agents for their patients

(discussed below) need not be concerned about the financial implications of

                                                                                      S
                                     —5—




their demand decisions.

         Use of new therapies is encouraged by a variety of factors. One is

the tendency of the physician—patient trust relationship to foster "Cadillac

care":

         Delegation and trust are the social institutions designed to obviate
         the problem of informational inequality. . . [Tihe patient must delegate
         to the physician much of his freedom of choice. He does not have the
         knowledge to make decisions of treatment, referral, or hospitalization.
         To justify this delegation, the physician finds himself somewhat limited...
         The safest course to take to avoid not being a true agent is to give
         the socially prescribed 'best' treatment of the day. Compromise in
         quality, even for the purpose of saving the patient money, is to risk
         an imputation of failure to live up to the social bond.'

         In the case of catastrophic illness, "best" treatment usually implies

the physician's taking some positive therapeutic action, often irrespective

of its efficacy. Medicine's general pro—therapy bias4 is strongly reinforced

by reactions to a desperate situation: patients feel comforted by medical

attention, however technically ineffective it may be; and beyond their agency

role, physicians apparently deal with their own   sense   of frustration or impotence

by "taking action." "[Pjhysicians.. .get nervous about not treating... It is

difficult to do nothing; [they] are neither trained nor conditioned for it...

How should one behave when nil desperandum collides with primum non nocere?"

      Physicians are trained to follow therapeutic leads set either by top

experts or by their immediate colleagues. The medical research/education

establishment fosters imitative behavior —— and innovative behavior ——    at   the

earliest stages in the training of physicians. Governmentally and privately

subsidized research is housed, in the main, in and around educational centers;

hence medical students are exposed to, and often participate in, work on the

frontiers of clinical medicine. The students' role models are Innovators.
                                    —6—



Modernity may become a goal in itself; at a minimum, it is viewed as producing
                                                                                     .
professional respect. The innovative propensity is passed on to each

generation of medical students, which attempts to establish its superiority

over preceding generations by becoming more technically sophisticated. This

creates a demand for medical research and its products. Through the professional

literature and seminars and meetings, practitioners who have completed their

formal training are supplied with information on, and encouraged to keep up

with, recent developments.

      Imitative behavior may or may not be accompanied by a thorough understanding

of the medical problem, or of the therapy. For specific decision—making purposes,

imitative behavior tends to be substituted for comprehensive personal under-

standing most commonly when the costs of waiting for such understanding

are perceived as too high. If the prognosis for an illness is a few days

of mild fever and nausea, there is no compelling reason for a physician

to prescribe a drug about which very little is known; in fact, the danger of

toxicities is a compelling reason not to prescribe the drug. If, however, the

prognosis is imminent death, the relative risks of trying a novel and

promising therapy are small. In other words, the worse the prognosis, the less

is the risk differential between trying and not trying the therapy. The former

may introduce uncertainty and variance in the outcome, but a not unreasonable

assumption is that both the uncertainty and the variance are desirable relative

to the near—certainty outcome of not trying the therapy. From the physician's

perspective, the only "cost" of using a technique which proves to be a failure

is that things are not better. There Is no counterpart in medicine to the

financial risk accepted by the business entrepreneur who decides to use an

innovation.                                                                          S
      In   short, in dealing with catastrophic illness, physicians have powerful

incentives to try any therapy which is available and few financial deterrents
                                      —7—




to doing so. In a fundamental sense, the major constraint is the technology

itself, the "state of the art."


            A Model of Treatment Decision—Making in Leukemia

Leukemia and Its Therapy

      The leukemias are cancers of the blood. Acute leukemia is the leading

childhood cancer, though leukemias kill many more adults than children. Prior

to the late 1940s, these diseases had not responded to any therapy. With the

development of the early anti—cancer drugs, physicians had a relatively easy

method of treating leukemias, a method whose initial successes in inducing

remissions in leukemic children provided reason for optimism. Since the 1940s,

physicians have experimented with an arsenal of drugs ——   individually,   in

combination, with varying dosages and timing of dosages —— and they have

achieved mixed results. Only one of the four leukemias considered in the study

reported below ——   the acute leukemia of childhood —— yielded significant ground

to drug therapy during the two decades following its first use. Yet large

percentages of each of these four closely related diseases have long received

chemotherapy. (Many of the victims of chronic leukemia are treated only for

symptomatic relief. Chemotherapy of the acute leukemias is virtually always

administered with the goal of remission or cure.) Table 1 presents distinguishing

characteristics of these leukemias.



The Model

     As noted earlier, a decision to use or not to use an innovation is

generally based on the contribution that that innovation is expected to make

toward realizing the decision—maker's objective, compared with the cost of
                      TABLE   1.     Characteristics of the Four Leukemias


              Blood                Most          Prognosis
Type of       Cell Type            Frequent      without          Nature of          Prognosis
Leukemia      Affected             Victims       Therapy          Therapy            with Therapy

Acute         Lymphocyte           Children      A few          Originally 1 or      Complete remissions
Lymphocytic                                        months       2 drugs. Currently   expected. Median survival
(ALL)                                                           multiple drug        3—5 years; some cures.
                                                                therapy with CNS
                                                                irradiation and
                                                                much supportive
                                                                therapy.
Acute         Granulocyte      Adults            1—2            1— or 2—drug         Partial remissions
Myelocytic                                         months       therapy through      possible, though not
(AML)                                                           period studied.      common until most recent
                                                                                     years. No appreciable
                                                                                     extension of median sur-
                                                                                     vival through period
                                                                                     studied (through 1968).

Chronic       Lymphocyte       Adults,           A few          1— or 2—drug         Unchanged. Chemotherapy
Lymphocytic                    generally           years        therapy.             treats symptoms only.
(CLL)                          middle—aged
                               to elderly

Chronic       Granulocyte      Adults            A few years    1— or 2—drug         Unchanged. Chemotherapy
Myelocytic                                       (shorter on    therapy.             treats symptoms only.
(cML)                                            average than
                                                 for CLL)




  S                                                      .                                                S
                                            —8—



    use. A mechanistic view of the physician—qua—demand—agent for the patient

    would suggest that the physician's objective is to improve the health or
                                *
    comfort   of the patient.       Thus, the decision of whether or not to use a

    therapy would rest on a comparison of the expected health improvement with

    the anticipated costs of the therapy, both economic and medical (e.g., risk of

    suffering due to toxicities).

          Of course, as observed above, other factors may complicate the decision—

    making: in a medically desperate situation, physicians may not have sufficient

    information to predict the costs and benefits of using a treatment, yet they

    may still choose to administer the therapy for reasons that are both rational

    and emotional. The rational component is recognition that risk and uncertainty

    may be desirable when the certainty outcome of not using the treatment is near—

    term death, severe morbidity, or incapacitating disability. The emotional

    component is the compelling need felt by many physicians to "do something,

    anything" when confronted with a dire medical situation, even if that something

    has virtually no chance of improving the situation and may even cause suffering.3'4

          Physicians cannot know precisely how a given therapy will affect a given

    patient. What they can do is observe certain variables and then estimate an

*
The decisions of whether or not to treat a seriously ill patient, and if
so how, are generally made by the physician in charge of the case. This
is not to suggest a lack of consultation with the patient, but rather
recognizes the critical importance of the trust relationship in the situation:
not only must the patient rely on physicians for reasons of technical
knowledge, but in addition many patients and their families are relieved
to have someone else take responsibility for such serious, potentially
emotional decisions. Thus, the decision—making process focuses on the
physician. The patient's role is mostly passive, though there are exceptions:
for religious or other non—economic reasons, the patient may overrule a
physician's decision or recommendation, an occurrence not considered in the
analysis which follows; or conventional economic demand factors may come
into play. Acknowledging these exceptions, and recognizing that the patient
Is the ultimate consumer of the therapy, this is primarily an analysis of
physician decision—making.
                                      —9—


                                                                                     .
outcome for a patient, both with and without use of the treatment In question.

To the extent that physicians accurately perceive the roles of these variables

in influencing health improvement, and to the extent that the improvement of

their patient's health is their sole objective, one would expect variables

significant in influencing positive treatment decisions to be correlated with

improved health status. If the variables which influence treatment decisions

did not play significant roles In affecting the patient's health, this would

suggest either that the physicians did not understand the effects of certain

variables on health improvement, and hence relied on other considerations, or

else that health improvement was not the sole objective motivating use/rejection

decisions.

      In comparing the medical treatment decision—making process with conventional

decision—making, it is useful to think of classes of relevant variables which

play the roles identified in the general discussion of decision—making. Thus

we need to identify a variable indicative of the decision—maker's objective,

and a set of factors involved in the production or realization of the objective,

including both technical inputs and constraints. Each of these categories is

discussed briefly below. The specific variables employed in the empirical

analysis are enumerated and defined in Table 2.




      The objective. For many not—for—profit activities, the objective

function is either multi—dimensional or ill—defined. In the treatment of

catastrophic illness, the primary objective is "improved health." This may

mean objective physical improvement ——      for   example, disease remission or

increased survival time ——   or   it may refer to the easing of suffering, both

physical and psychological. With respect to the latter, it is important to
.                                                          S                                                .
                                                                   *
                                           TABLE   2.     Variables

Variable                                                                                 Mean Value** For
Name                  Definition                        Role in Analysis          ALL                CLL     CML

 SUR.      Survival time of patient        i,                                    15.01      3.83    37.41   24.08
                                                    Objective
             in months


 TREAT.    Whether (1) or not        (0)            Decision variable             0.81      0.66    0.35     0.50
           patient i received
           chemotherapy

AGE1       Age of patient 1 at time                Independent influence on       5.67    58.50    68.41    61.77
           of diagnosis, in years                  SUR. May also influence
                                                   physician's sense of des-
                                                   peration

HOS.       Hospital in which patient               Measure of quality of         0.46      0.38     0.30    0.31
           i hospitalized; high quality            hospital facilities and
           (1) or low quality (0) for              personnel for delivery of
           chemotherapy                            cheino therapy                                                   3

PVTPT.     Private   (1)   or ward   (0)           Indicator of patient i's      0.75      0.84     0.80    0.79
           patient                                 socioeconomic status

           Number of articles in                   Indicator of professional     7.99      3.78     1.66    2.45
ARTS
           leading medical journals in             scientific interest and
           year t (the year of patient             dissemination of knowledge.
           i's diagnosis) on the chemo-
           therapy of this leukemia

PCTt_l     Percentage of Connecticut               Measure of colleagues'        0.79      0.64     0.31    0.46
           patients diagnosed in year              experience. An indicator
           'c—i to whom drug therapy was           both of learning about
           administered                            this therapy and simply
                                                   of a state—wide trend in
                                                   therapy
                                                   TABLE   2   (cont'd)


Variable                                                                                   Mean Value** For
Name                         Definition                Role in Analysis             ALL       AML     CLL      CML

                     Median survival time, in        Indicator of degree of        10.35      1.39
MSTt2                                                                                                25.87    22.16
                     months, of Connecticut          success with this chenio—
                     patients treated in year        therapy realized by
                     t—2 (period necessary for       physicians in Connecti—
                     such information to be          cut. Measure of average
                     ascertained)                    state—wide technological
                                                     capabilities and learn-
                                                     ing

                     Median survival time, in        State of the art. mdi—        15.06
TECHt                                                                                         ——Not applicable——
                     months, for patients            cator of therapy trend and
                     treated in year t by            maximum (average) potential   (For other than ALL, state—of—the
                     members of a leading din—       at time t                      art therapies did not change sig—
                     ical research group
                                                                                    nificantly during period studied,
                     (Acute Leukemia Group B)                                       1947—68, inclusive.)                 '0

ALARTt               Values of        for ALL        Included in treatment          ——                7.99
                                                                                                                     I
                                 ARTt
ALPCT                                                decision—making equations      ——                0.79
      t—l                        PCTt—l
                                                     for ANL, CLL, and CML as
                                 MST                 indicators of experience       ——               10.35
ALNSTt2                                    2
ALTECH                                               and success with similar
                                 TECH                                               —                15.06
         t                             t             therapy for a related dis-
                                                     ease (ALL) which has
                                                     yielded ground to drug
                                                     therapy

              *Derivation and meaning and limitations of variables are discussed in detail in reference 14.
             **
                  Data are discussed in the next section of this
                                                                 paper and in reference 14.




.                                                              .                                                   S
                                     —10—



recognize that one objective of the physician decision—maker may be to

reduce his or her own psychological discomfort; administering therapy may

partially achieve this objective, irrespective of its effects on the patient's

health status.3

      In the case of the acute leukemias, the principal goal of chemotherapy

is to increase the patient's survival time. This is the only objective

explicitly quantified. However, other objectives can be ascertained from the

analysis. They are discussed in the next section of the paper.

      Inputs and constraints. The production or attainment of increased

survival time is a function of the knowledge of the medical personnel delivering

care, the technology available to them, and the condition of the patient.

Knowledge can be obtained both from personal experience and from non—experiential

sources (the professional literature, seminars, etc.). The technology consists

both of facilities and equipment specific to the therapy and of general

facilities for supportive therapy.

      Production of increased survival time is fundamentally constrained by the

state of the art, the capability of the best therapy administered under optimal

conditions. In a given case, the ability of therapy to enhance survival time

depends on the individual patient's condition: the older the patient, the more

advanced the disease, the less effective will be the therapy. Finally, economic

factors can act as a constraint either on the fact of therapy or on its quality,

by affecting the demand of either the patient or the physician.

      The conceptual model is as follows:


(1)       SUR     f(X 1 ,...,x )
             1                n

(2)       TREATi = 1    if E(SURi)     SURJ
                  = 0   if E(SURi) <
                                       SURi
                                    —11—



Equation (1) says that the objective, survival time (SUR1), is a function of a

series of variables (identif led in Table 2). Equation (2) says that a physician

will choose to administer chemotherapy to patient i if the expected value of

patient i's survival time (E(SUR1)) equals or exceeds some threshold value

(SUR1*).

      SUR. may vary from physician to physician and even among patients for

a given physician. In addition, for individual patients, physicians can only

guess at E(SUR1), and the variance is so large that the expected value is not

only very difficult to determine but also not necessarily very meaningful. It

seems more likely that physicians' treatment decisions are influenced by individual

observable variables which they believe to be associated with health improvement.

For this reason, and in order to explore other influences on the treatment

decision besides objective health improvement, both the survival time and the

treatment decision—making equations are specified independently as functions of

a similar set of variables. (The variables are identical except that the

decision—making equation includes the variables with the "AL" prefix in order

to allow for the possibility of "cue—borrowing," a phenomenon discussed in the

next section.)* This approach permits comparison of the roles of individual

      *
       Theoretically the survival time equation should include measurement of
the fact and nature of treatment as independent variables. This study's only
relevant variable, TREAT1, was excluded for the following reasons:
      During the period studied, the medical evidence demonstrates that chemo-
therapy for other than childhood ALL did not increase survival time. The use of
drugs for symptomatic relief in the sicker chronic leukemia patients, who died
earlier, would lead to a spurious negative correlation between TREAT1 and SUR1
      For childhood acute leukemia (ALL), treatment definitely did increase
survival time. However, problems in the data set recommended against including
TREATi. Specifically, TREAT1 is collinear with other important variables. Its
inclusion in regressions masks the effects of variables like TECHt whose influences
need to be observed to compare the determinants of the treatment decision with
these variables' roles in the production of survival time,
      Secondly, survival time in ALL is highly dependent on the specifics
of the chemotherapy administered. By the early l960s, virtually every child
with ALL received chemotherapy, yet there were great disparities in the types
and qualities of therapies. TREAT1 misses these subtleties completely.
                                                          —12--




independent variables in influencing survival time and the physician's

decision to administer or to withhold chemotherapy.



(1')            SUR1 =      a0 +    a AGEi +     a2 HOS. ÷ a3 PVTPT.


                       + a4 ART + a5 PCTt             1    + a6 MST2

                        + a7 TECH        +


       *
(2')            TREAT. =
                        i       0
                                    +
                                        1
                                            AGE. +
                                               1      2
                                                           HOS +
                                                                  i   3
                                                                          PVTPT.
                                                                               i



                            +4      ART + 5 PCTt_l + 6 MSTt 2 + 37 TECHt

                            +       ALART +          ALPCTt1 +              ALMST2

                            + ALTECH
                              11    t
                                      +c 2


                                        Results and Discussion

           The primary source of data for the empirical study was the Connecticut

Tumor Registry of the Connecticut State Department of Health. This Registry is

a unique resource, containing data on all reported cases of cancer among the

residents of the entire state dating from 1935. The present study examined all

cases of the four leukeniias diagnosed from 1947 through 1968, excluding some
                                                                             **
incomplete records and cases falling outside of prespecified age categories.


            *
       TECHt is included only for ALL, while the variables with the prefix
"AL" are included only for AML, CLL, and CML.
           **
       For details on these and the other data —— their nature, problems, and
deficiencies —— and on the diseases and their therapies, see reference 14.
                                      —13--




        Table 3 presents regression results fitting the data to the survival
                                                                                         .
time equation (1'), using a limited dependent variable regression package.

Tables 4 and 5 present Probit analysis fits to the treatment decision

equation (2'). Table 4 excludes the ALL variables from the regressions for

the other leukemias, thus yielding a set of variables identical to those of

the survival time equation. Table 5 includes the ALL variables. The limitations

imposed by data availability and quality are substantial, yet these results

permit several generalizations.



        From Table 3, we see that the only clear determinants of survival time

are the patient's condition (represented here by the single variable, AGEi) and

the technical capability of the therapy (represented by the state of the art

median survival, TECHt, measured only for childhood acute leukemia; recall that

the state of the art ——   in   terms of increasing survival time ——   did   not change

significantly for the other leukemias throughout the period studied). The near—

significant coefficients of PCTt1 suggest that some learning—by—doing may

have   been occurring, but this effect is not pronounced. (The coefficients imply

small elasticities at the means, ranging from —0.17 for CLL to 0.55 for AML.)

The nonsignificance and suggested negative tendency of the study's sole

indicator of the quality of facilities and personnel for administering chemo-

therapy (HOS1) probably reflect the fact that many patients were treated first

at "lower quality" hospitals and then, after therapeutic failure, were transferred

to one of the "higher quality" hospitals. Patients were reported as having

been in one of the high quality hospitals if during the course of the disease

they were ever in one of them. Hence the average physical condition of patients

                                                                                         .
                                         —13 a—




                     TABLE 3. Determinants of Survival Time
              (Numbers in parentheses are asymptotic t statistics)



                                                  Disease
Variable
                        ALL             AML                 CLL       CML


CONSTANT                2.828           5.351           104.513      41.314
                        (0.81)          (2.89)              (8.73)    (4.99)

AGE.                    —.461           —.095               —.977     —.483
      1
                       (—2.71)         (—5.00)          (—6.50)      (—6.67)

                       —1.851           —.513            —2.098      —1.656
HOSi
                       (—1.13)         (—0.65)          (—0.67)      (—0.64)

                        —.117           —.178               8.328      3.480
PVTPT
                       (—0.07)         (—0.17)              (2.28)    (1.13)

ART
      t                 —.136
                       (—0.61)
                                          .087
                                        (0.69)
                                                              .629
                                                            (0.59)
                                                                        .508
                                                                      (0.88)

PCT                      7.667           3.281          —20.769       12.151
      t —1
                        (1.48)          (1.58)          (—1.75)       (1.96)

MST                     —.201             .012              —.026       .075
      t2               (—0.55)          (0.01)          (—0.17)       (0.33)

TECH                      .819
          t
                        (353)


Ages (in years)          0—19           20—98               40—98     20—98

N                        268             752                 693       419

df                        7               6                  6          6

—2 in X                 91.37           20.90               62.38     39.53


(A is the likelihood ratio. —2 in A is distributed chi—square with degrees
of freedom equal to the number of variables, including the constant term, minus
1.)
                                                -13b—




                     TABLE 4. Determinants of the Treatment Decision,
          Excluding the ALL Variables From the AML, CLL, and CML Equations
                                                                                           .
                  (Numbers in parentheses are asymptotic t         statistics)

                                                        Disease
Variable
                            ALL            ANL                    CLL              CML

CONSTANT                   —1.252          —.223                    .041           —.298
                          (—2.93)        (—0.92)                  (0.10)         (—0.67)

AGE                          .001          —.014                  —.012            —.012
                           (0.03)        (—4.54)              (—2.51)            (—2.62)

HOS                          .616           .374                    .333            .565
                           (2.54)         (3.50)                  (3.05)          (3.91)

PVTPT.                      —.039           .153                  —.226             .443
              1
                          (—0.17)         (1.12)              (—1.74)             (2.59)

ART                          .016           .011
                                                                                           S
      t                                                          .023               .039
                           (0.50)         (0.64)               (0.60)             (1.24)

PCT                         1.142          1.849                  2.243           1.839
      t       1
                           (1.17)         (6.67)               (5.14)             (5.28)

MST                          .058           .022                  —.012           —.019
      t—2
                           (0.61)         (0.22)             (—1.41)             (—1.58)

TECH                         .048
          t
                           (1.38)


Ages (in years)             0—19          20—98               40—98              20—98

N                           268            752                    693             419

df                           7              6                      6               6

—2 in A                    73.35         118.08               52.99              78.79

(A is the likelihood ratio. —2 in A is distributed chi—square with degrees
of freedom equal to the number of variables, including the constant term, minus
1.)




                                                                                           S
                                            —13c—

                   TABLE 5. Determinants of the Treatment Decision,
                              Including the ALL   Variables
                  (Numbers in parentheses are asymptotic t    statistics)

                                             Disease
Variable
                             AML               CLL                   CML


CONSTANT                     —.695             —.685                  .191
                            (—2.17)           (—1.32)               (0.38)

AGE                          —.016             — .012                —.013
                            (—4.92)           (—2.54)              (—2.85)

HOS.                           .356              .357                 .561
                             (3.25)            (3.18)               (3.77)

PVTPT                          .124            —.239                  .386
                             (0.88)           (—1.80)               (2.21)

ART                          —.001                 .038               .005
      t
                            (—0.03)            (0.88)               (0.15)

PCT                            .138            —.100                  .005
      t1                     (0.31)           (—0.13)               (0.01)

MST                            .020              .003                —.031
      t—2
                             (0.17)            (0.34)              (—2.32)

ALART                         —.037            — .050                —.032
          t
                            (—2.22)           (—2.78)              (—1.07)

                              2.497               1.672              1.121
ALPCTt1
                             (4.88)            (3.28)               (1.71)

ALMST                         —.045               —.054               .019
          t—2
                            (—1.67)           (—1.96)               (0.49)

ALTECH                         .035              .045                 .026
              t
                             (2.05)            (2.16)               (0.94)



Ages (in years)              20—98             40—98                20—98

N                             752                 693                419

df                             10                  10                 10

—2 in A                     147.91             69.97                84.22


(A is the likelihood ratio. —2 in A is distributed chi—square with degrees
of freedom equal to the number of variables, including the constant term, minus
1.)
                                   —14—



in   the higher quality hospitals was probably much poorer than that of the
                                                                                       .
average patient in the state. Unfortunately, the data did not permit separation

of these influences.

        The economic factor (PVTPT) is not important in the determination of

survival time. This fact is of most interest in the case of childhood acute

leukemia, the one leukemia for which chemotherapy significantly increases longevity.

The tentative implication of this analysis is that ability to pay for an expensive

therapy does not influence outcome for a child seriously ill with leukemia.

Implicitly, this suggests that the economic factor Is not important In the

determination of receipt of therapy, nor in the quality of therapy administered

as measured by outcome. This is corroborated by the analysis of treatment

decision—making, discussed below. The one instance in which soclo—economic status

is associated with greater longevity ——   chronic   lymphocytic leukemia in middle—

aged and elderly adults ——   probably reflects the fact that more affluent patients
are generally healthier (for reasons of diet, habits, etc.). This interpretation

is also supported by analysis of the treatment decision—making findings.

        Comparison with the above of the results presented in Tables 4 and 5

sheds considerable light on the determinants of the decision to administer drug

therapy to or to withhold it from the victims of leukemia.

        While the technical capability of ALL therapy (TECH) had an obvious

impact on survival outcomes, its influence on actual treatment decisions is

not of comparable importance. Combined with the nonsignificance of the measures

of recent state—wide achievement (MST_2) and of professional scientific




                                                                                       .
                                  —15—



 interest (as reflected in number of journal publications, ARTt),* this

 suggests that the effectiveness of therapy was of less direct consequence in

 childhood leukemia treatment decisions than other considerations. This find-

 ing is consistent with the conventional wisdom4 and is supported by other

results discussed below.

      The patient's condition and personal characteristics, represented by

AGEi, play a role in the determination of both outcome and the treatment dec-

ision, though not necessarily for identical reasons. The patient's condition

does have an objective impact on survival expectations and response to therapy.

Physicians might be responding to this objective consideration in making

therapy decisions, but in addition they may be responding to the subjective

impact of having to deal with seriously ill patients. The desire to treat ——

to intervene in a situation with a dire prognosis —— may be greater the more

desperate the physician feels the situation to be. Quite naturally, a terminal

illness in a child would generally be considered more tragic than terminal ill-

ness in an elderly person; similarly for a middle—aged adult as contrasted with

a very old one. Indeed, while relative youth is associated with longer sur-

vival in all the leukemias, it is medically well—established that therapy per

se did not increase survival expectations in other than childhood leukemia

through the period studied. Thus the tendency for physicians to treat their

younger ANL, CLL, and ML patients would seem to indicate reaction to a sense
                  13
of desperation.

      *
       The nonsignificance of ARTt may reflect the way in which this variable
was measured, rather than the phenomenon it was intended to measure. However,
there is substantial evidence in the literature that the scientific and popular
press may provide information about an innovation, but more personal contacts,
e.g., colleagues' experiences with the treatment, have more significant in-
fluence in actual adoption decisions.2
                                  —16—




      The nonsignificance of AGE1 In the childhood ALL treatment decision
                                                                                   .
regression may reflect either of two considerations and probably reflects

both: first, while younger children fare better with therapy than do teen—

agers,nearly all children realize additional survival time as the result of

therapy; even the relatively small increment in survival time realized by

the older children may be enough to justify treatment in the minds of most

physicians. Second, physicians view terminal illness in a child of      age

as being a tragic event. The treatment of afflicted children of all ages may

represent an attempt by physicians to alleviate their sense of impotence or

desperation.

      For all four leukemias it is clear that chemotherapy was administered

more often in hospitals equipped and staffed to deliver high quality therapy.

This is not surprising. Physicians at the better hospitals tend to believe in

and be experienced with cancer chemotherapy; they tend to keep up with new

developments in therapy; hence, ceteris paribus, patients who consult them are

more likely to receive therapy than are individuals who consult physicians in

or affiliated with other hospitals. In addition, especially in the case of acute

leukemia, general practitioners or internists are often reluctant to treat;

instead they will refer the patient to a specialist, who usually practices in

one of the better hospitals.

       The treatment decision equations permit some intriguing though highly

tentative conjectures about the role of ability to pay in the receipt of

therapy. For victims ot the acute leukemias it appears that treatment

decisions were   independent of the patient's economic status (PVTPT1). Note

that the bulk of the period studied predates Medicare and Medicaid, so many of

the poorer patients were uninsured or very inadequately insured. While some
                                  —17—




leukemia therapy was funded by research grants, many of the poorer patients

must have been the beneficiaries of individual or institutional price

discrimination (redistribution). The important point is that the economic

factor did not bar seriously ill people from receiving potentially beneficial

therapy. The nonsignificance of economic status in the survival of children

with acute leukemia further suggests that the quality of therapy was not

significantly different.

      The results for the chronic leukemias are somewhat more ambiguous but

admit to plausible interpretations. The negative coefficient estimate for

PVTPT. in the CLL regression probably reflects physicians administering the

CLL chemotherapy only to their sickest patients, who tend to come from lower

socio—economlc groups. This interpretation is consistent with the significant

positive coefficient estimate for PVTPT1 in the CLL survival time regression.

It is medically established that drug therapy did not significantly influence

survival time in CLL patients; hence the significance of the economic variable

must represent other, exogenous, factors. In the case of cML, a plausible

conclusion is that ability to pay did influence the decision to

administer drugs. As in CLL, CML drug therapy did not enhance survival

expectations; rather it could palliate, and with fewer significant deleterious or

discomfiting side effects than in CLL. Hence it appears that affluent CLL

patients may have demanded and bought therapy which was not administered as

frequently to poorer CML patients. Combined with the nonsignificance of

economic status in the acute leukemia treatment decisions, this suggests the

possibility that an approximation to conventional market behavior may character—

ize the demand for and provision of medical goods and services which either

are not highly effective or which relate to a medical condition which is not
                                    —18—




considered serious (i.e. threatening to lift or limb, Involving prolonged morbidity,

etc.). By contrast, for reasonably effective therapies addressing serious

medical problems (e.g., acute leukemia therapy), conventional market forces

may often be inoperative.

      The results involving the direct measure of quantity of recent experience

with chemotherapy within the state (PCTt1) provide insight into the development

of medical therapy trends. According to the survival equations (Table 3),

experience per se did not necessarily convey useful learning to prac-

titioners (defining "useful" as an Improvement in outcomes). However,

when the dichotomous treatment decision variable was regressed on the same set

of variables (Table 4), PCTt1 was invariably strongly statistically significant

for other than ALL; in addition, its quantitative Importance (coefficients

relative to the magnitudes of the dependent variables) is considerably greater

for the treatment decision. The inference is that there was a distinct trend

phenomenon in which physicians followed their colleagues' therapeutic leads

despite the lack of resultant improvement in their patients' survival expectations.

For innovations in most settings, a comparable pattern of imitative behavior,

with its consequent substantial diffusion, generally would require effective

demonstration of the innovation's relative advantage (technical superiority,

profitability, etc.).

      The trend phenomenon takes on a new dimension when one compares Tables

4 and 5. In Table 5 —— the regressions which include the ALL variables in

the decision equations of the other leukemias ——           is clearly nonsignifi-
                                                   PCTt1
cant, in striking contrast to Table 4. However, in Table 5 the corresponding

ALL variable (ALPCTt1) is significantly correlated with TREAT1, as

is the measure of the ALL state of the art (ALTECH) .       In   other words,          S
                                      —19—




in cases of leukemia other than the childhood variant, the decision to administer

drug therapy appears to have been significantly affected by the recent trend

(both quantity of experience and degree of success) in administering chemo-

therapy to the victims of the childhood disease. Indeed, the amount of ALL

experience clearly dominated the influence of the disease's own trend (PCTi).

In a sense, the trend in the treatment of the childhood disease ——    the   one

successful leukemia chemotherapy ——   diffused   to the handling of the other

leukemias. This effect was notably stronger for AML and CLL than it was for

CNL,a predictable result as AML and CLL are more closely related to ALL (by

disease severity and by cell type, respectively) than is CML. This provides

support for the concept of "cue—borrowing" in treatment decision—making:

following the more successful treatment trends for similar therapies in closely

related diseases. Apparently indirect success influenced physicians' leukemia

treatment decisions more than did direct failure. This is consistent with the

apparent need felt by physicians to take positive therapeutic action in caaes

of serious illness.


                               Conclusion

      Conclusions drawn on the basis of this empirical study must be accom-

panied by several caveats: this is a case study, one whose generalizability

remains to be established; and the data are imperfect, as is the modeling.

Still, the findings provide strong suggestive evidence for several tentative

conclusions.

      The principal general observation is that, at least in the case of

catastrophic illness, the medical decision—making process with respect to the
                                     —20—



use or nonuse of an innovation does differ from the process which occurs in

other settings which have been studied. This is a function of the compelling

nature of many medical situations and of the unorthodox, relatively uncon-

strained economic environment in which individual use/nonuse decisions are

made. Manifestations of the difference in decision—making processes include

the following:

      —   In   the dire medical situation, decision—makers are less cautious or

conservative in deciding to use an innovation than would be more conventional

market decision—makers. The former seem to require less proof of efficacy

(relative advantage) than the latter. Indeed, the usual market usage decision

is predicated almost exclusively on the expected contribution of the innovation

to the firm's profitability, while in the medical setting both the inherent

merits of the therapy (the analog to profitability) and themedical situation

itself influence usage decisions. That is, as illustrated by the case study,

a desperate medical situation may promote use of a therapy irrespective of its

efficacy. Thus, other things being equal, diffusion of an innovation may be

more rapid or extensive in the desperate medical context than in the conventional
          13
market.

      —    Even in the instance of the firm verging on bankruptcy —— perhaps the

closest market analog to the catastrophic illness situation ——     innovation
adoption is not costless. While such a firm might be more receptive to

innovation than a more stable firm, its entrepreneur must weigh the potentially

significant costs of using the innovation against its anticipated benefits. A

decision not to use an innovation, and thus to accept near—certain dissolution,

might well be rational. In an important respect, the Costs to both physicians
                                      —21—




and patients of therapeutic failure with the medical innovation are very

limited, given the near certainty of death, severe disability, etc. without

using the Innovation and the absence of direct financial implications attached

to use. This would seem to account in part for physicians' preference for

an active therapy, and their apparent inability to consider "doing nothing"

as a viable option in cases of serious illness.

      —   Physicians   may place more emphasis on indirect encouraging evidence about

a therapy than on direct discouraging information. This was suggested by the

"cue—borrowing" phenomenon In leukemia chemotherapy in which physicians appear

to have based therapy decisions for ANL, CLL, and CML more on the successful

trends in ALL treatment than on the disappointing results of these diseases'

own therapies. Such "cue—borrowing" may be an important determinant of the

development of many treatment trends in medicine.

      In sum, in a conventional market environment an innovation must demon-

strate its superiority to alternatives, including using nothing, in order to

be accepted by a large segment of the population it is designed to benefit. In

a dire medical situation, the innovation's preferredness may be assumed until

demonstrated otherwise. I am not arguing that this is irrational or undesirable;

In a desperate situation, use of an unknown quantity may indeed by logically

preferable to the dismal outcome associated with other approaches. Rather,

I wish to emphasize the existence of differences in decision environments

and hence in decision outcomes, and the concomitant implications for the

allocation of resources both within medicine and among sectors.

      In an important sense, much of medical decision—making, and hence

behavior, is constrained by technology and by the state of knowledge rather
                                  —22—



than by conventional economic considerations. We live in an era in which

medical knowledge is changing rapidly and new understanding Is frequently

accompanied by a profusion of new technology and technique. Not all of

these technical changes are necessarily worth their cost,12 yet they are not

forced to survive orthodox market tests. As both existing and proposed

legislation promise to remove the delivery of medical care even further from

the conventional marketplace, we must develop an understanding of decision—

making within the medical marketplace so that we may determine the rules and

regulations by which It should governed.
                                    —23—



                              Ref erences




   1. Arrow, K.J.: Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care.
Amer. Econ. Rev. 59:941, 1963.

   2. Coleman, J.S., Katz, E., and Menzel, H.: Medical Innovation: A
Diffusion Study. Indianapolis, Bobbs—Merrill, 1966.

   3. Crosby, W.: To treat or not to treat acute granulocytic leukemia.
Arch. Internal Med. 122:79, 1968.

   4. Freidson, E.: Profession of Medicine. New York, Dodd, Mead, 1975.

   5. Kaluzny, A.D.: Innovation in health services: theoretical framework
and review of research. Health Serv. Res. 9:101, 1974.

   6. Kamien, M.I., and Schwartz, N.L.: Market structure and innovation:
a survey. J. Econ. Lit. 13:1, 1975.

   7. Kiarman, H.E.: The Economics of Health. New York, Columbia University
Press, 1965.

   8. Mansfield, E.: Industrial Research and Technological Innovation. New
York, Norton, 1968.

   9. Nelson, R.R., Peck, M.J., and Kalachek, E.: Technology, Economic Growth,
and Public Policy. Washington, Brookings Institution, 1967.

  10. Rogers, E.M., and Shoemaker, F.F.: Communication of Innovations: A
Cross—Cultural Approach. New York, Free Press, 1971.

  11. Sorkin, A.L.: Health Economics. Lexington, Mass., D.C. Heath, 1975.

  12. Thomas, L.: The technology of medicine. In The Lives of a Cell. New
York, Viking Press, 1974.

  13. Warner, K.E.: A "desperation—reaction" model of medical diffusion.
Health Serv. Res. 10:   , 1975.



  14. Warner, K.E.: The Diffusion of Leukemia Chemotherapy: A Study in
the Nonmarket Economics of Medical Care. Doctoral dissertation in Economics,
Yale University, 1974.

  15. Warner, K.E.: The need for some innovative concepts of innovation:
an examination of research on the diffusion of innovations. Policy Sci. 5:433,
1974.

  16. Zaltman, G., Duncan, R., and Holbek, J.: Innovations and Organizations.
New York, Wiley, 1973.
