               NBER Working Paper Series




          OPTIMAL INCOME REDISTRIBUTION WHEN INDIVIDUAL
             WELFARE DEPENDS UPON RELATIVE INCOME


                        Michael J. Boskin
                        Eytan Sheshinski



                   Working Paper No. 144




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                           August 1976



                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

This research was supported by a contract with NBER from the
Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Treasury Department (No. TO—76—13;
OS—612).
        OPTIMAL INCOME REDISTRIBUTION WHEN INDIVIDUAL WELFARE
                   DEPENDS UPON RELATIVE INCOME*

                                 by
             Michael   J. Boskin** and Eytan Sheshinski***


          Our theory ... depends upon the validity of a single
          hypothesis, viz: that the utility index is a function
          of relative rather than absolute consumption expenditure.

                            J. Duesenberry, Income, Saving and
                               the Theory of Consumer Behavior


1.     Introduction

       The problem of the "appropriate" role of government in redistribu-

ting income has a long and interesting history in economics. Dating back

in its modern form to Edgevorth, the original argument, based on addition

of the welfare of all citizens, diminishing marginal utility of income and

no tax disincentive effects was for complete equality, i.e., a tax—transfer

system that equalized incomes.

       More recently, the rigorous examination of this problem by Mirrlees

[1971], Atkinson [1973], Fair [1971], Feldstein [1973], Sheshinski [1971]

and Stern [1976], focusing on the tax—Induced disincentive to

supply labor, has concluded that optimal tax rates are quite modest and that

rather little public income redistribution is socially desirable. While

the results are fairly sensitive to assumptions about labor supply elas-

ticities and social welfare functions, these results stand in striking



       *We would like to thank Louis Garrison for research assistance.

      **Stanford University and NBER.

     ***Stanford University and Hebrew University.
                                    —2—



contrast to both the Edgeworth analysis and the policies and          policy   pro-

posals of many   advanced   economies.

      One aspect of the debate over income distribution which has not

been analyzed in the optimal income tax framework is the popular notion

that welfare depends at least in part upon relative income or consumption.

We are familiar   with   the notion that poverty may    be   a relative, as well as

absolute, income phenomenon. For example, Gaibraith [1958] argues that

"people are   poverty   striken when their income ...    falls   markedly behind

that of the community."      The relative income hypothesis has rarely been

analyzed or empirically tested in economics. Probably the most important

exception is Duesenberry [l919]. The purpose of the present note is to

explore the structure of optimal income taxation/redistribution in an economy

where the welfare of individuals depends in part on relative after—tax con-

sumption, i.e., we specify individual welfare as a function of absolute

and relative after—tax consumption, with diminishing marginal utility to

each. With such a specification, of course, an additional incentive for

income redistribution from wealthy to poor citizens is created and the logical

impossibility of increasing tax     rates   to the point where disincentive effects

actually reduce tax revenues is potentially removed. The analysis highlights

the importance of the marginal valuation placed on upward social mobility

in various ranges of the income distribution and its interaction with the

elasticity of the marginal utility of consumption; of course, "labor supply"

elasticities, the form of the social welfare function, and the skill distri-

bution continue to play an important role.
                                   —3—



       In Section 2, we introduce the simplest model of optimal income

redistribution: linear redistribution plans (credits plus flat rate taxes,

i.e., archetypical negative income tax schemes) combined with investment in

human capital (a proxr for all forms of increasing or decreasing income).

We derive analytically the structure of optimal linear negative income taxes

for the case of individual welfare depending upon both the absolute and

relative levels of consumption. We demonstrate that increased concern for

relative consumption levels leads to higher income guarantees and marginal

tax rates.                                 /




       In    Section 3, we examine the extreme "Maxi—min" case (in which the

government attempts to maximize the welfare of the worst—off individual).

Assuming for analytical convenience a Pareto distribution of skills and log-

arithmically eparab]e utility, we derive explicit formulas for the optimal

marginal tax rate and income guarantee. Of course, these depend upon the

usual parameters: the skill distribution, the elasticity of the marginal

cost of human investment, and the elasticities of the private and social

marginal vaiua6ion of absolute and relative consumption. A numerical example

reveals that concern for relative status adds very little additional progres-

sion to the optimal policy. Indeed, pushing an already extreme case to the extreme—--

concern only with the relative income of the worst off individual ——   leads   to sur-

prisingly little redistribution.

       In Section , we report the results of some numerical calculations of

optimal marginal tax rates and income guarantees for a utilitarian social

objective. We examine how these policy parameters respond to variations in

concern for relative position as well as the other parameters of the problem.
                                    —4—



The optimal tax     rate   and relative income guarantee in the utilitarian case

turn out to be enormously sensitive to concern for relative position.

The optimal redistribution schemes range from quite modest to substantial

as concern for relative status moves from non—existent to virtually

exclusive.

       Further, for identical parameters of the skill distribution, marginal

cost of human investment elasticity and concern for relative status, we

demonstrate that the utilitarian welfare function can lead to substantially

more redistribution than the allegedly extremely egalitarian Maxi—inin

objective. This occurs because the improved welfare of the remainder of

the low—income population as their relative income increases suffices to

overcome the decline in the absolute level of consumption caused by extremely

high tax   rates.
       Finally, in Section 5, we offer a brief summary and suggestions for

future research.
                                         —5—



2.      An Optimal Negative Income Tax Model

        There are a variety of ways to parameterize the potential disincentive

effects of income taxation (see, for example, Sandmo' [1976] survey.) For

illustrative purposes, we consider the educational investment model suggested

by Sheshinski [1971].

        There is one consumption good, denoted by c, and an educational input

(say, school years), denoted by x. Invididuals are distinguished by their

ability to produce income from a given educational input. Let this ability

be indexed by n, (n >       o).      Income, denoted y, is assumed to depend on n

and x: y =       y(n,x).   For simplicity, this relation is assumed to have a

multiplicative form: y = mc.               The cost of educational investment, in terms

of the consumption good, is denoted g(x). We assume that g'(x) >                          0,
g"(x) > 0.       In the absence of income taxation, the individual's consumption

is thus given by c =       y   —   g(x).
        Suppose that the government decides to redistribute income via a linear

negative income—tax, t(y),


(i)                         t(y) =       —cx   + (1 —



where   a is the income guarantee,                  or   credit, and (1 — 8) is the marginal
tax rate.

        Note that this tax rule,               in   accord with accepted practices, does
not allow    a   deduction for educational expenses.1 Accordingly, after tax
income, y —      t(y), is equal     to     a+       By   and consumption is given by2

(2)                            c=a+By—g(x)
                                                 —6—




        Each individual is assumed to maximize c with respect to x
The first—order          condition is



(3)                          g'(x) =   n         or x =     x(n)

where x = g ,—1          .     We assume that the solution to (3) exIsts for all n

Accordingly, the optimum before—tax Income is also a function of n and the tax

rate, Sr(n,) =           (n,(n));          optimum consumption is given by           = cy. +     —



        The individual's utility, u, is assumed to depend on two variables:

own consumption, c, and the average consumption in the population, denoted C:


(tt)                               u =     u(c,;       a)



where    0 is a parameter, 0 >                   0,   signifying the degree of concern for the

individual's "relative position". In particular, we assume that when 0 =                               0,
        =        >   0, u/9 = u2 =           0        and 32u/c3E = u12 = 0.      For any 0 >     0,
            u1
we assume that u1 > 0, u2 < 0                         and that u is trictly concave and twice

differentiable. As a special case we may have u(c,; 0) =                           v1(c)
                                                                                           +
                                                                                               0v2(c/c),
where V.,,       i   =   1,2 are increasing,concaVe functions. The variable c/
represents, of course, the individual's relative position in terms of

consumption. Clearly, 0 = 0                      is the standard case when the individual's

utility is independent of other individuals' consumption.

            Let f(n) be a density function denoting the relative number of

individuals with ability n: 1(n) > 0                         and ff(n)dn =   1.    In choosing the

optimum tax parameters                            the government is assumed to follow a utili-

tarian principle. Thus, its objective is to maximize the social welfare

function, W,
                                             —7—




 (5)         W =   fu(6,;       O)f(n)dn


subject to a balanced budget constraint ft(y)f(n)dn =                      0,   or


 (6) a_(1_B)o
where         =    yf(n)dn      is average income. Accordingly, average consumption

is given by


(7)           =    cx   +   B   fgGc)f(n)dn


          The first—order conditions for an interior maximum of (5) subject to
(6)    and   (7) are

(8)       f{u,(,; e)
                                               —   iijf(n)dri   = 0
                                    U2(C,C; o)
                                +



(9)      f[u1(&,; e) + U2(C,C;               e) —         —
                                                                 A)y]f(n)dn     = 0



where i       >0        is   the shadow price (or Lagrangean—coefficient) of increased
income redistribution, u., Ci = 1,2)                  denote partial derivatives, and
A =    A(x) =      g"(x)x/g'(x)        is the elasticity of the marginal cost of education.

We assume that there exists a unique solution to these equations, denoted

by (c&*,8*).

         In order to find the effect of "concern for relative status"

on the optimum tax scheme, we differentiate (8), (9) and (6) totally w.r.t.

e, evaluating these changes at 0 = 0.                   Assuming for simplicity that A is
constant (i.e. g(x) =               xA/(l + A),      A > 0      a scalar), we have
                                 -8-

                                                                                         )


(10)     fu11f(n)dn       fu11r(n)dn                 —1


                                                               3*
         fu11f(n)dn fu,2f(n)dn-                 _(l_18)
                  1                                   0
                          (1_1)
         —
             fu2f n) dn
                  (




         _5u2f(n)dn

                  0


        Denote the matrix on the L.H.S. of (10) by t. By the second—order

conditions for maximization,      <    0.   Solving the system (10) for



(11)          =                         <   0
                           $u2f(n)dn

        Thus , as expected, some concern for relative position, as well as

absolute position, always leads to an increase in the optimum marginal tax

rate.

         It can be shown that '/6 < 0           implies act*/3O > 0   and. vice versa.

Hence, increased concern for relative position will lead both to higher tax

rates   and to higher credits, or income guarantees.
                                              —9—




 3.       The Maxi—Min Criterion

         As an alternative to the utilitarian welfare function, consider

the Ravisian objective criterion (termed Maxi—Min), according to which

the    government is    concerned solely with the welfare of the worst—off

individual. Denote this individual's gross income                      (corresponding to the
lowest   ability, say, i)          by y, and his consumption by c: c =           cx   +    —   g(i(8n)).
         The government's objective is to maximize


(12)                    u =   u(c,;      0)


w.r.t. a and , subject               to (6),        i.e.   to choose the income guarantee and

the marginal     tax rate to maximize the welfare of the worst—off individual
given the disincentive effects                of the   tax.   The   first—order conditions now
become


(13)



and



(in)
                        ulY+u2Y_P(1_;x)Y=o

where u1 and u2 are evaluated at c = c.                         One may rewrite (l3)—(ll),

solving for 8*


(15)
                                         1
                        8*
                               1 +   A(l       —



where    r =            +          r >   1.                                           =1
               u,/(u1       u2),                Clearly, by our assumptions, n             when 8 =   0,
and r increases as 0 becomes positive. Consequently, for a given ratio
                                —10—




y/y, (0 < y/ <      as 8 increases from zero, ' will decrease, i.e.

the optimum tax rate increases. Alternatively, for a given 0, as y/y

increases, 8* decreases. These results should be expected: when the ratio

of lowest to average before—tax income increases, the optimum tax rate

decreases. This reasoning, however, is not completely rigorous, since the

ratio y/ as well as r depend on the chosen '. Hence, equation (15)

cannot be directly used to calculate the latter. In special cases, however,

when f(n) is further specified, an exact solution for              is possible.

We shall now present such an example.

       Let f(n) be the Pareto distribution:



(i6)             f(n) =                 n   n


                   n > 0 are parameters, the latter denoting the lowest
ability level.

       Suppose that the utility function is logarithmic


                     —                           C
(ii)             u(c,c; o) =   log   c + 0 log ()
                                                 C



       We continue to assume that g(x) =        (ill +   A)x', where A > 0, is

the elasticity of the marginal cost of education.

       Using the individual's first-order conditions we find that



(18)
                                                 —11—




         For y to be finite we have to assume that 1 +                       A <   A6




(19)                     =


                         —
                         —            1+0
                                  +   0(l+A)

         Condition (15) thus becomes


                                                1
                                 1+ (i
   /                      —
                                       +    o)x(l +
                                      A6   + e(i +

         Now, when 0 = 0               we have


                                       1
(21)
                                 1+1+A
                                    6



         Notice   that the optimum marginal tax rate, as expected, is positively

correlated with the elasticity of marginal cost, A, and with the dispersion

of ability, represented by (the inverse of) the parameter, 6.

         From (20) we note that



(22)                         =    A(l + A)[Ao — (1 + x)I           < 0
                    30
                                      8*2[A6 +      o(i   + A)]2


since,   by assumption, XiS — (1 + A) > 0.                     Thus, the optimum   marginal   tax rate
                                                                                                    4
and income guarantee increase as concern for "relative position" increases.

         Furthermore, it can               be   seen from (21) that as 0 +          (i.e.   the mdi-

vidual becomes exclusively concerned with relative consumption),
                              —12—




(23)



and hence the dispersion in the skill distribution no longer affects the

optimal policy. For the range of reasonable values of
                                                          A5 and 6, the

difference between the optimum tax rate at   0 = 0   and at 0 =     is
quite small. Table 1 presents some sample calculations.

         Note also that



(2)-f)
                           -y = 1   —




the "relative income guarantee" equals the marginal tax rate. From Table 1

we note that even this extreme egalitarianism combined with enormous con-

cern by the worst-off individual over relative status leads to surprisingly

little income redistribution relative to the Edgeworth analysis.6

         Finally, while the amount of redistribution is nontrivial for the

Maxi—min criterion,COflCerfl for relative position does not seem to provide

much by way of additional progressive taxation.

         We turn now to a consideration of whether concern for relative position

becomes important when the government follows a somewhat less egalitarian

 social objective.
                                 —13—




                                 Table 1


       Optimal Marginal Tax Rate and Relative Income Guarantee for
                     Alternative Parameter Values
                          (Ma.xi—min   Objective)

                                       0


                    0.0           1.0           5.0    10.0

 6          A


2.5:      0.75      0.41          0.42          0.43   0.43     0.43

          1.0       0.44          O.7          0.49    0.49     0.50

          1.25      O.4T          0.51         0.54    0.55     0.56


          0.60      0.35          0.36         0.37    0.37     0.38

3.0:      0.75      0.37          0.40         0.42    0.42     0.43

          1.0       0.40          0.44         0.46    0.49     0.50

          1.25      0.43          0.48         0.53    0.54     0.56
                                 —14—




4.         A Utilitarian Social Objective

           Returning to the utilitarian social objective discussed in Section
                                                  (10) explicitly for the case of
2, we may solve the system of equations

logarithmically separable utility and a Pareto skill distribution. This

yields the following:



(25)                 (l+O)ff(n)dn —


                                                         1 -
26)                  (l+e)ff(n)dn -
                           c
                                                  (1 -    BA
                                        c


Substituting from the individuals' first—order conditions for x, we derive

 the expressions for y, c, y, , and         ct.    This leaves us with two nonlinear

 equations in the two unknowns p and B .                 We   have solved these equations

 numerically for certain values of the parameters 5, A, and 0 .                  The results

 are reported in Table 2. Several characteristics of the results are worth

 noting.

            First, unlike the Maxi—min case, the optimal marginal tax rates and

 relative income guarantees are extremely sensitive to variations in 0 ,

 our   parameter reflecting concern for relative versus absolute

 consumption. The optimal marginal tax rates and income guarantees range

 from a quite modest 27% to a very substantial 67%. For a given                 A and 6 ,

 the   Increase in 0 from zero (no concern for relative position) to five

 (predominant concern for relative position) approc1mately doubles the optimal

 marginal tax rate and income guarantee. It Is thus obvious that a strong

 relative income effect        overcome somewhat the tendency of disincentive

 effects to hold down marginal tax rates and Income guarantees.6
                                   —15—




                               Table 2


      Optimal Marginal Tax Rates and Relative Income Guarantees,
                     Alternative Parameter Values
                          (Utilitarian Case)


                                    e


                            0.0               1.0              5.0

  =   2.5
      A =   0.75            0.37              0.48             0.67
        =   1.0             0.35              0.46             0.64
       = 1.25               0.34              0.46             0.64



6 =   3.0
      A =0.6                0.29              0.39             0.57
       = 0.75               0.27              0.37             0.55
       =    1.0             0.27              0.37             0.55
       = 1.25               0.27              0.37             0.55
                              —16—




        Second, as in the Maxi—min case, the results are only slightly

affected by modest variations in A ,     the (constant) elasticity of

marginal cost of human investment, and only modestly affected by variations

in 5 , the skill dispersion parameter.
        Finally, we note a surprising result: For the case of extreme concern

for relative position, the optimal marginal tax rates and relative income

guarantees for the utilitarian case actually exceed —    in   some cases sub-

stantially exceed —— those for the corresponding Maxi—min case! With

concern for relative position paramount, the additional welfare ,f the

balance of the low skill population from higher relative income guarantees

certainly may outweigh the welfare loss due to lower total income

In society. while the absolute consumption of the lowest skill group declines

in this case, its relative position improves enough to more than overcome

the value of the decline in their absolute consumption and that of the

higher skill groups.

        For example, we note that when 0 = 5     and A = 1, the ratio of

per capita consumption in the utilitarian case to per capita consumption

in the Maxi—min case equals 0.88 when ô =    3.0 and 0.76 when 6 = 2.5.         The

higher tax rates in the utilitarian case lead to dramatically lower average

levels of consumption.

        Thus, the concern for relative Income may make the Maxi—min criterion

less egalitarian than a utilitarian social objective!
                               —17—



5.      Conclusion.

        In considering the conjecture that individual welfare depends in

part upon relative consumption, we have explored some of the implications

for public policies which redistribute income via progressive income

taxation. Briefly, these implications include the following:

        1) The class of linear negative income taxes exhibits increasing

            marginal tax rates and relative income guarantees as concern

            for relative position increases;

        2) The Maxi—min criterion yields relatively modest redistribution

            schemes which are made only slightly more progressive with

            concern for relative position (recall the specific utility

            function and skill distribution);

        3) Concern for relative consumption may substantially increase the

            optimal marginal tax rate and relative income guarantee with a

            utilitarian objective. Indeed, strong concern for relative con-

            sumption may induce substantially more redistribution than with a

            Rawisian Maxi—inin social objective.

        We conclude with a word of warning lest we be misconstrued. Our

purpose here is to explore the potential implications of individual concern

for relative consumption on the design of optimal redistribution schemes.

While it is clear that such concern can be extremely important, it seems to

be so in cases where concern for relative consumption is extremely strong.

Too often, such a concern is considered "obvious." Evidence that this is

indeed the case is virtually nonexistent, let alone convincing. We hope
                              —18—



that by demonstrating the potential policy relevance of empirical

information on the "relative consumption effect," we will encourage

much additional empirical research on the subject by economists and other

social scientists.
                                     —19—



                                  FOOTNOTES



    'See Boskin [1976] for a discussion of the tax treatment of human invest-
ment.

    2We   think   of c and y as lifetime consumption and Income, respectively.

    31f we also include the tax disincentives to hours of work and saving (see
Boskin [1977])), the results reported below would be strengthened.
    4
     If there Is a substantial negative (positive) relative income effect
on labor supply, It would weaken (strengthen) the conclusions reported here.

    5See Lazear [1976] for an estimate of 1/A.

    6lndeed, such redistribution schemes are no more progressive than those
actually in practice in several countries.
                                  —20—



                              REFERENCES



Atkinson, A.B., "How Progressive Should Income Tax Be?," in M. Parkin, ed.,
     Essays In Modern Economics, Longmans, 1973.

Boskin, M.J., "Notes On the Tax Treatment of Human Capital," Conference on
     Tax Policy, U.S. Department of The Treasury, 1976.

__________ "Taxation, Saving, and the Rate of Interest," Journal of Political
     Economy, forthcoming, 1977.

Duesenberry, J., Income, Saving and The Theory of Consumer Behavior, Harvard
     University Press, 1949.

Fair, R., "The Optimal Distribution of Income," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     1971.

Feldstein, M., "On the Optimal Progressivity of the Income Tax," Journal of
     Public Economics, 1973.

Gaibraith, J.K., The Affluent Society, Houghton—Mifflin, 1958.

Lazear, E., "Family Background and Optimal Schooling Decisions," NBER Working
     Paper No. 141, July 1976.

Mirrlees, J., "An Exploration In the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," Review of
     Economic Studies, Vol. 38, pp. 175—208, 1971.

Sandmo, A., "Optimal Taxation — An Introduction to the Literature," Journal
     of Public Economics, Vol 6:1—2, pp. 37—54, July—August 1976.

Sheshinski E., "On the Theory of Optimal Income Taxation," H.I.E.R. Discus-
     sion Paper No. 172, February 1971.

Stern, N., "On the Specification of Models of Optimum Income Taxation," Journal
     of Public Economics, Vol. 6:1—2, pp. 123—162, July—August 1976.
