                       NBER Working Paper Series




                 MISINTERMEDIATION AND BUSINESS FLUCTUATIONS




                              J. Huston McCulloch*



                           Working Paper No.         160




           CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
                       AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

             National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
          204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                              Revised January 1977



                       Preliminary; not for quotation.

       NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
       number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
       written permission of the author.

       This report has not undergone the review accorded official
       NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
       for approval by the Board of Directors.

*The author is Scherman Research Fellow at NBER—West and Assistant Professor of
 Economics at Boston College (on leave). He is indebted to A. Collery, J. Frenkel,
 M. Friedman, R. Hetzel, A. Leijonhufvud, S. Maisel, R. McCulloch, J. Meginniss,
 R. Shay, R. Zecher, others mentioned in the text, and the participants in various
 workshops for helpful suggestions and/or encouragement. None of these individuals
 necessarily subscribes to the arguient of the paper. Work on earlier drafts was
 partially supported by the Earhart Foundation; the paper was rewritten while at
 NBER—West.
                               ABSTRACT



    Individuals plan consumption and production for different points in

the future, using interest rates of various maturities as a guide. How-

ever, individuals do not always pre—contract all planned future borrowing and

lending, and the intermediaries they work through often do not match the

maturity structure of their assets and liabilities. As a result of this

individual failure to hedge and institutional "misinterniediation,t'

aggregate production and consumption plans for each period in the future

need not coincide. The resulting discrepancy will eventually appear as

a recession or boom, involving an unanticipated change in interest rates.

Fiscal stimulus aggravates the welfare loss associated with a recession,

whether the spending is consumption—displacing or wholly wasteful.
Introduction

     There •is growing dissatisfaction in the economics profession with the

plausibility of Keynesian macroeconomic theory. Many economists would

prefer to see a neoclassical explanation of the overall workings of the

economy, in terms of individuals who try to maximize their welfare, subject

to their budget constraints in conjunction with appropriate prices.

     However, it is a challenge to explain business fluctuations in terms

of neoclassical theory, for the budget constraints lead us to Walras' Law,

according to which there cannot be a net surplus of supply over demand when

all markets are considered at once. Yet depressions, which in some sense are

just such a net excess supply, do occur from time to time.

     In this paper, we provide a neoclassical explanation of business fluc—

tuatiôns, in terms of intertemporal disequilibrium. There can be an excess

supply of all current output, provided it is matched by an excess demand for

aggregated future output. In a world of institutionalized "misintermedia—

don" like our own, such a disequilibrium can easily come about and will

have serious real costs. We then examine the welfare implications of counter—

recessionary fiscal policy.


The Fisher Model

    We begin with Irving Fisher's famous model of the simultaneous determ-

ination of the term structure of interest rates, planned consumption over

time, and planned production over time) Essentially this model is that of a



     1Fisher (1930, Part III). Fisher's model provides the basis for Hirsh—
leifer's generalized discrete equilibrium over time (1970, 109—113). As
Harry Johnson has pointed out, ". . .Schumpeter's statement that 'some future
historian may well consider Fisher as the greatest of America's scientific
economists up to our own day' [p. 872] has provided If anything too cautious
an accurate prediction of subsequent scientific development: for Fisher's
                                      2


                                                                                    .
Wairasian equilibrium,except that instead of n goods available at one point

in time, there is only one good (aggregated consumption output), which can

be available at any of n points in time. Instead of n—l independent Inter—

commodity prices, there are n—i independent intertemporal prices or discount-

ing factors, from which the term structure of interest rates can be readily

calculated. Only n—l of the n equations setting excess demands equal to

zero are necessary to determine the n—i intertemporal prices. By Walras'

law, one of these equations is redundant)

        If Fisher's equilibrium term structure prevails, the economy will develop

without business fluctuations, provided there is no unforeseen change in

tastes or technology. As the economy moves forward in time, there will be

no discrepancies between planned production and consumption that arise from

miscoordination of the efforts of individuals. This is the most we as econo—

mists can hope for. Welfare could be improved through better technological

foresight, and individuals would have better luck achieving their ends if

they did not change them in midstream, but these are not catallactic problems

per se.

        What Fisher failed to realize is that in the actual world in which we

live, only the excess demand for current output is driven toward zero in the

current period. In terms of current plans, excess demands for output in



insights into monetary theory and capital theory keep his works in live
teaching and scholarly use not only in every major economics department
in the United States but wherever economics is a subject of serious teaching
and research." Johnson's reference is to Schumpeter's History of Economic
Analysis (London, 1954). (Johnson 1977)

              is Hirshleifer's "redundant conservation relation" (1970,
113).
                                     3



future periods may be positive or negative. Budget constraints imply that

the present discounted value of these excess demands sum to zero, but not

that they individually be zero. When we get to those future periods, these

excess demands (or supplies) will then be driven to zero, but in the mean-

while, market participants will have been planning to produce either more or

less in future periods than they were planning to consume. These plans will

necessarily be disappointed, and it is these disappointments of plans that

constitute the business fluctuations we explain with our model.

     In an n—period world, instead of one redundant equation, there are

actually n—2 degrees of indeterminacy to the set of possible term structures

and corresponding planned consumption and production streams. In the 2—period

world, clearing of the current market together with Wairas' law guarantees clearing

of the future market. However, in the 3—period world, clearing of the current

market and Walras' law leaves one degree of freedom. In a 4—period world

there will be two degrees of freedom, and so on.


His intermediation

     The term structure would assume its equilibrium shape if three conditions

were met:

     1. If savers put their savings into financial instruments whose matur-

            ities corresponded to their dissavings plans.

     2. If borrowers borrowed by issuing financial instruments whose

            maturities corresponded to their repayment plans.

     3. If financial intermediaries matched the maturity structures of

            their assets and liabilities.
                                    4




     Risk aversion in the face of interest rate uncertainty, along the lines

described by Stiglitz (1970), provides savers and borrowers with an incen-

tive to meet conditions 1 and 2 (to the extent that this is worthwhile, given

actual transactions costs), provided they are free to write loan contracts of

any maturity. However, financial intermediaries notoriously do not satisfy

condition 3. Savings and Loan Associations, Mutual Savings Banks, and the

savings departments of Commercial Banks traditionally are based on passbook

accounts, which are virtually demand liabilities. They invest these funds

in more or less long—term assets. In doing so, they are taking an econom-

ically unnecessary speculative position. We call such a mismatching of

asset and liability maturities by an intermediary "misintermediation." The

opposite policy of scrupulously matching maturities could appropriately be

called "balanced intermediation."

     In order to understand why thrift institutions misintermediate today, we appar—

ent.ly must go back to the origins of modern   banking in   the thirteenth and four-

teenth centuries. At that time, banks could do whatever they pleased, provided

they did not pay or receive interest. A bank could not promise to pay back

110 florins next year in exchange for 100 florins received this year, because

a contractual obligation to repay more than was received was considered to be

manifest usury, punishable by eternal damnation and, if that did not prove

sufficient disincentive, by secular excommunication and ostracism. However,

there was nothing to stop a bank from taking in a deposit of 100 florins

with the understanding that it would invest this money "at its discretion,"

and then voluntarily give the depositor a "discretionary" extra 10 florins

at the end of the year. These deposits "a discrezione" were the direct

ancestors of our modern passbook—type savings deposits)



     1De Roover (1954, 39—40,and 1963, 100—107). By investing these funds
in foreign bills of exchange, the banks were not considered to be receiving
                                     5




    The strict usury doctrine has been defunct in the West since the French

Revolution. If banks were unregulated, we would not expect it to have any

residual effect on bank structure today. However, at least since the

Mercantilist era, banking has possibly been the most closely regulated

industry in the world) Furthermore, finance is more vulnerable to regula-

tion than other industries, since a large part of the value of a loan contract

is the willingness of the courts to recognize and enforce it. And the regu-

latory law the courts recognize is intrinsically resistant to change.

     One   reason   for this resistance, as Dicey has pointed out (1914/63,

41—46), is that if a body of law is reasonably successful in attaining its

end, the principles on which it is based take on prestige in the eye of public

opinion. The medieval structure of deposit banking was fairly successful in

bringing savers and borrowers together. At least it was far superior to no

intermediation at all. Public opinion therefore came tO believe that the

passbook represented the proper way in which banks should gather savings from

the public. Two popular economic doctrines seem to have originated in this

manner.



interest on their assets, but only making legitimate nonusurious speculative
profits on foreign exchange movements.  (De Roover, 1963, 108—141). The
London branches of the great Italian banks were the nucleus of banking in
England as early as the fourteenth century. It was not until the seventeenth
century that native English firms, mainly established goldsmiths, were
able to get a toehold in the banking industry on Lombard Street. These
Anglo—Saxon goldsmiths, however, did not invent banking in England, as the
chauvinist myth alleges (Merchant, c1676). Rather, they merely performed
the functions the "Lombards" had kept for themselves for centuries.


     11n answer to a point raised by Paul Cootner, even during the "free
banking" era in the United States, banks were far from unregulated. Free
banking only meant that anyone complying with banking regulations was allowed
to open a bank, without having to obtain discretionary permission. In every
state, regulations took it for granted that banks would issue demand obliga-
tions (primarily bank notes) offset by term assets (often mortgages on western
lands).
                                    6


                                                                                        .
     The first doctrine is the countereconomic notion that interest accumulates,

rather than that it reflects the market price at which future payments are

discounted. This is a subtle distinction of which even many economists are

not fully aware. The accumulation notion is implicit in many of the falla-

cious theories of interest which Bhm—Bawerk first refuted only in the late

nineteenth century (1914/59, vol. I)) Nevertheless, we continue to see

evidence of this kind of thinking. For example, we see references to "the"

rate of interest without reference to maturity.2 Other evidence is the arbitrary

identification of repayments as either 'interesif' or"principal", and the presumption

that loans should be "redeemable" in advance, in effect giving them ambiguous

maturity.

     The second doctrine is that "borrowing short and lending long", or

"creating liquidity" is a proper and valuable economic function of inter-

mediaries.3 This doctrine has been especially popular with governments and

bankers since the development of central banking and inflationary finance

in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, since it makes the money—creating

role of banks seem more plausible. It certainly would be desirable if

somehow intermediaries could enable producers as a whole to embark on long—

term projects while guaranteeing to consumers as a whole the option of

consuming their wealth as soon as they desire. However, this is technologically




     1Fisher's model is thoroughly Bhm—Bawerkian.     Indeed, his Theory of
Interest is dedicated to Bhm—Bawerk.


           kind of thinking probably tends to flatten the term structure
from its equilibrium shape. Indeed, requiring that the term structure be
flat would just eliminate the degrees of freedom in the Fisher model with
misintermediation.

     3For example, Lapidus el at (1974), p. 27.
                                    7




 impossible) Balanced intermediaries with negotiably rediscountable deposits

 would guarantee any one individual complete liquidity (up to transactions

 costs), and would provide the economy as a whole the option of consuming

 ahead of plan to the extent this is technologically feasible.

      In the United States today, these doctrines manifest themselves in

 four principal categories of financial regulation or intervention that

 encourage misintermediation. The first is the governmental subsidy to mis—

 intermediation through the FDIC and FSLIC. Theoretically these are self—

 financing insurance programs. However, since depositary institutions all

 take qualitatively the same speculative stand on future interest rate move-

 ments, default due to interest rate changes is not an insurable risk? So

 far the banking system has been able to finance the FDIC and FSLIC by itself

 from the seigniorage proceeds accruing to the zero ceiling (outside of New

England) on checking account interest and from the monopoly rents on time

and savings accounts when interest ceilings are effective.   However, it

would take only about four defaults the size of Franklin National Bank to

exhaust (at least temporarily) the FDIC's reserves. In that case, the tax-

payers would one way or another take the loss, either through an emergency

act of Congress or inflationary finance at the Fed's initiative.3

     The second category of regulation that encourages misintermediation is

the ceiling structure on interest rates intermediaries may pay on savings

and time deposits. Tobin (1970, 10) has noted that the objective of the



      11n terms of Figure 2 below, no financial institution, however ingenious,
 is capable of allowing the economy to consume the point w0 on the c axis. Even
 though this point is the sum of points that each individual is capale of con-
suming, this ability is contingent on not everyone doing it at once. The Law of
Large Numbers is of no help here, in spite of the conventional wisdom to the con-
trary (e.g. Gurley and Shaw 1960, 194).

     2Hence the high failure rateamong state—sponsored insurance schemes prior
to the FDIC (Kiebaner 1974, 136—7).
     3Agcording to the chairman of the FDIC, ". . .were the FDIC ever to exhaust
the funus available to it for insurance purposes, I have no doubt that Congress
                                   8



FHLBB in imposing these ceilings on Savings and Loan Associations was to

attempt to recoup the capital losses these Associations suffered during the

interest rate rise of the Sixties. The FRB then was under pressure to impose

complementary ceilings on commercial bank time deposits, even though coniiner—

cial banks are not as extremely misintermediated as S & L's. As it happens,

these ceilings backfired by causing the "disintermediation" crises of 1966 and

1969. Nevertheless, it should be remembered that they reflect the continued

eagerness of regulators to preserve misintermediation by protecting it from

its inherent shortcomings.

     The third category is the hobbling of the retail "certificate of deposit"

market that has appeared in the last fifteen years. CD's ideally allow the

saver to specify exactly when he wishes to dissave, and to know what interest

he will receive for that period. They also can let the bank know exactly

when it can be legally called upon for cash outflows. Negotiability (or even
                                                                                 S
assignability) can allow the saver the flexibility to change his plans by

rediscounting his certificates, to the extent this is feasible given trans-

actions costs and what other savers and borrowers are doing. However, only

wholesale denomination CD's are allowed to be negotiable. Furthermore, as

a typical advertisement for these deposits points Out, "Federal regulations

allow withdrawal before maturity provided the rate of interest is reduced

to the regular savings account rate back to the date of issue and that three



would act promptly to provide the FDIC with such additional borrowing author-
ity or funds as might be needed to honor the Government's commitment to
insured depositors." (Wille 1975, 6) Federal Reserve Board Chairman Arthur
Burns has stated that the Fed would not hesitate to aid the FDIC even without
Congressional direction. Indeed, the $1.77 billion the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York lent the failing Franklin National Bank served largely to protect
uninsured depositors.
     Recently the Hunt Commission (1972, 77) has proposed a further subsidy to
misintermediation through a Federal "insurance" program specifically designed
to reimburse losses due to interest rate risk.
                                  9




months' interest is forfeited at the regular savings account rates." This

formula, or variations on it, virtually destroys the potential attractiveness

of retail CD's. On the one hand, the saver is artificially locked in, even

if a third party or the bank itself stands willing to take the certificate

(or some fraction of it) off his hands on attractive terms. On the other

hand, the bank cannot be positive it will not be legally required to cash the

certificate before maturity.

     The fourth category is the historical willingness of governments to

accommodate banks when they get into financial difficulties, whether caused

by inisintermediation, bad loans, or just mismanagement. An example is the

policy beginning in July, 1938, of allowing banks to value "sound" bonds on

the basis of book rather than market value.1 This willingness goes at least

as far back as the introduction of central banking during the Mercantilist

era. At least in part it is due to a recognition that banks that borrow

short and lend long can be forced to close through no fault of their own.

     Because thrift institutions are essential for economic progress, and they

all happen to misintermediate, governments have taken special measures to

protect them from their own fragility. Because they are protected, they are

competitively viable against balanced intermediaries. Therefore all thrift

institutions continue to misintermediate, and so forth in perpetuity.

     That such an elaborate structure of economic misconceptions and detri-

mental intervention is apparently grounded in the medieval usury doctrine,

which the Catholic Church already began backing out of in the sixteenth century,

is one of the most remarkable illustrations of Sir Henry Maine's dictum on survivals:


     1-Klebaner (1974), 161. More recently, just before the December, 1975
default by the government of New York City, Arthur Burns announced that the
policy of the Fed would be to allow banks to cover up (not his choice of
words) losses on these bonds by carrying them at pre—default values (Wall
Street Journal, September 12, 1975). Banks are often able to make up such
losses eventually out of their seigniorage profits.
                                    10



    Everybody conversant with the philosophy of opinion is aware that
    a sentiment by no means dies out, of necessity, with the passing away
    of the circumstances which produced it. It may long survive them;
    nay, it may afterwards attain to a pitch and climax of intensity which
    it never attained during their actual continuance. (1861/1960, 132)

Perhaps in a world with unregulated financial markets, financial intermediar-

ies would be forced by competition for the deposits of risk—averse depositors

to match the maturity structures of their assets and liabilities. However,

misintermediation and a regulatory environment encouraging misintermediation

have been with us for six hundred years. There is no reason to expect that

they will not be with us for another six hundred years. In the meanwhile,

we may expect business fluctuations arising from intertemporal disequilib-

rium to continue to disturb economic development. We can, however, hope to

understand how these fluctuations operate and the effects of conventional

policies intended to combat them.

     Even without policies encouraging misintermediation, transactions costs

would prohibit the exact matching of maturities and the finding of the

Fisherian equilibrium term structure. To that extent, even in an unrestricted

market economy, misintermediation fluctuations might occur.1 However, these

fluctuations would be slight compared to the ones that actually occur in our

world of institutionalized misinterinediation. It is questionable whether it

would be worth trying to eliminate these residual fluctuations, given the

informational and transactions costs involved.


A Model of Fluctuations

     The simplest world in which misintermedlation fluctuations are possible

is one in which there are only three periods, t1t0, "t",   and   "t2".
                                                                         We may




           has been emphasized by Serwin   Rosen.
                                   11




relate this model to the real world of continuous time by bracketing time

into three periods and identifying each bracket with the date that corresponds

to its economic center of gravity. (The bracket "t2" is open—ended, but

ordinarily has a finite center of gravity because the most distant future

is discounted by prices approaching zero.) Thus each t. may be thought of

either as an interval of time or as a particular point in time. We represent

real consumption goods during these three periods (aggregated over both

commodities and the relevant time bracket) by "c0t', "c11t, and

     At t0 a real loan market exists in which c1 may be traded for c0 at a

price 'OOl' and c2 may be traded for c0 at price oO2      Also, c2 may be

traded for c1 at the implicit forward price



         Ol2 = 'OO2'OOl                                                       (1)




All these prices are discounting factors ordinarily less than unity. The

first subscript represents the time in the market when the price is effec-

tive, the second subscript represents the time when the loan is to begin.

and the third subscript represents the time when the loan is to be repaid.

     Fromthese prices we may compute the term structure of real interest

rates in the market at t0:



     1Strictly speaking, for the intertemporal aggregation to be valid, we
must hold intrabracket forward rates constant (Liviatan 1966). In terms
of the continuous—time discount curve (McCulloch 1971, l975a), this implies
the appearance of discontinuities in this curve as we change interbracket
forward rates.
     2                                  to         to
      These prices are equivalent to         and in Hirshleifer's notation.
                                       1       2
See NcCulloch (1971, l975a) for details of inferring these pure discount
prices from observations on bond prices.
                                     12


                     —in
                            OOl
                                                                                    .
            r001 =                                                            (2)
                        — to

                     —in OO2
                =
                        —
                                                                              (3)

                     —in (5
                               2
                                                                              (4)




Because of (1), if we know any two of these interest rates, we may calculate

the third. The long spot rate r002 is a weighted arithmetic average of the

short spot rate r001 and the forward rate r012.

        Given a linear production technology, the factors (whether original

or produced in some earlier period) available to the economy will determine

a convex production possibilities set as shown in Figure 1. This set is the

set of all combinations of c0, c1, and c2 that are feasible as of to. The

production possibilities frontier P0P0P0 is the set of production streams

that are technologically efficient as of t0.1

        For any given term structure of interest rates at t0, competitive

profit maximization will lead factor owners to plan to produce the output

supply stream S0 shown in Figure 2 with maximal present discounted value w0.

The budget plane of all consumption streams with this present value is also

shown in Figure 2. The slopes of its traces on the three planes defined by

the coordinate system are related to the interest rates indicated. The

steeper the line in absolute value, the higher the corresponding interest

rate.




     1For a proof that such a frontier (Georgescu—Roegen's tlinput isoquant")
is, in a linear von Neumann model, concave toward the t0 origin 00, see
Georgescu—Roegen (1951), 107.
                                 13




                   C2




                   P0




                                                     P0




     P0

Co


                             Figure 1

       The economyts production possibilities frontier as of to.
                                             14


                            C2
                                                                                         .

                                 O / ' 002




                                                                 r012




                                     \
                                     S\
                                                                                         .
                                                  \   \   r012



                                                                             Wa     Cl
                                                                             óoo'

                                             r001



     Wa
CO


                                     Figure       2


              The economy's budget plane and planned production point (S0)

          for a given term structure of interest rates during to.
                                   15




     As of to, market participants collectively think they can purchase any

point on this budget plane. However, it will be immediately apparent, i.e.

during t0, if they demand a different quantity of c0 than is being supplied.

Therefore the c0 components of the t0supply point S0 and the t0 demand point

D0 will coincide, and we may concentrate on the section through P0P0P0 and

the t0 budget plane indicated by the broken lines in Figure 2. There are

three possible locations of D0 relative to S0.

     First, the t0 term structure of interest rates might just happen to have

Fisher's equilibrium shape, in which case D0 and S0 will coincide in all

three components. We will represent these interest rates by r001e, r002e,

and r012e.l In this case, as time moves forward to t1, participants will

find that they were planning to produce exactly as much c1 as they were

planning to consume. There will be no unanticipated change in interest

rates necessary to clear the market in t1. Unless there is a change in

tastes or an unforeseen technological development, r112 will just equal

r012 (here equal to r012e). Note that we have no a priori presumption about

the shape of this equilibrium term structure. The forward rate r01 may

be higher or lower than the short—term spot rate r001e. Both are ordinarily

positive for the reasons set forth by Bohm—Bawerk2, but since the marginal



     1With unusual distributions of tastes and endowments, this equilibrium
might not be unique. However, we do not regard this as very likely.

     2(1914/59, Vol. II, Book IV). Fisher's example of shipwrecked sailors
forced to survive on a fixed stock of figs does generate negative real inter-
est rates. But, as Fisher points out, "The fact that we seldom see an example
of zero or negative interest is because of the accident that we happen to
live in an environment so entirely different from that of the shipwrecked
sailors" (1930, 191—2). The Keynesian assertion (Klein 1966, 84—85) to the
contrary deserves more careful scrutiny than it has received, in view of
Bohm—Bawerk's argument. The possibility of a negative equilibrium nominal
interest rate (Keynes 1923/1932, 190) is more real.
                                   16


                                                                               .
consumption wants and productive activities are in general completely
different in the three periods, the span from t0 to t1 is historically

unique and different than the span from t1 to t2, so there is no reason for

the interest rates corresponding to these spans to be equal. In continuous

time, forward rates are probably smooth, but otherwise the equilibrium

forward curve can take on any shape: upward sloping, downward sloping, or

oscillating. Therefore equilibrium development may require a substantial

change in yields to maturity. However, this change will have been fully

anticipated in forward interest rates.

     Second, the forward rate r012 may be higher than its equilibrium value,

In which case    will have a lower c1 component and a higher c2 component

than S0, as shown in Figure 3,1 This is the case of an impending recession.

There is, in the minds of participants at to, an excess supply of c1 and a     S
corresponding excess demand for c2. Walras' law requires that they be equal

in present (t0) value, but not that they individually be zero. As time moves

forward to t1, a recession will appear as the excess supply of c1 becomes

apparent in the current market for output. A value of r112, necessarily

lower than r012 and probably even lower than r012e, will be found that elim-

inates the excess supply.2 Therefore a recession will be associated with

an unanticipated fall in interest rates.



     1That there will be an excess supply of c1 if and only if r012 is
higher than r012 is demonstrated in the mathematical appendix.

           Katz has pointed out that a fall in Interest rates might con-
ceivably enlarge the disequilibrium rather than closing it. However, for
this to be true we must be in the vicinity of an unstable equilibrium, and
the fall in Interest rates will eventually take us to an adjacent stable
equilibrium. (See Johnson 1971, p. 30.)
                             17




         C2



      W0 —Co

       OO2




         P0




                                                   ro 12




               01                             P0           w0—c0    Cl



                          Figure 3

    A cross—section through Figure 2 when r012 is above its equl—

librium value. A recession is impending for t1.
                                    18




     Third,   the forward rate r012 may be lower than r012e, in which case
                                                                                    .
D0 will have a higher c1 component and a lower c2 component than S0, as

shown in Figure 4. This is the case of an impending boom. As time moves

forward to t1, an excess demand for current output will become apparent which

will drive r112 up above r012. Thus a disequilibrium boom is associated with

an unanticipated rise in interest rates.'

     If business fluctuations are associated with unanticipated changes in

interest rates, rational expectations imply that those fluctuations cannot

exhibit regular cycles, but rather must be random in nature. Irving Fisher

(1925, 191) conjectured that the "business cycle" is nothing more than a

"Monte Carlo cycle", that is, that business has no more regular a pattern

than a gambler's luck at a fair casino. In another paper (McCulloch l975b)

we have tested this hypothesis and not found any strong evidence to the contrary.

Therefore the noncyclic nature of the fluctuations we have described is in

conformity with the observed business "cycle" rather than in conflict with it.

     In terms of financial arrangements, an impending recession (as in

Figure 3) means that during t0 market participants are planning as a whole

to produce more c1 than they are planning to consume and to lend the proceeds

from selling this output at the forward rate r012 in order to finance addi—

tional consumption of c2 above and beyond their production of c2. However,

their planned lending is inconsistent, since no one is planning to borrow the

surplus c1 from them. During an impending boom, on the other hand (Figure 4),

participants are planning (during t0) to borrow during t1 in order to finance

additional consumption of c1 beyond their own production, and to repay these

loans during t2 out of their surplus production. In this case the inconsistency


      Note that the excess supply or demand for c1 does not actually appear
during t1, but only has reality in terms of the plans for the future people
had during t0. As Friedman has noted, "Inflationary Gap is never of the past
or the present; it is always in the future." (1942, 314)
                             19




          C2


       wo—Co

        5002



          P0




                                                  D0




                                                         r012




               01                            P0              wo—CO     C'
                                                                6001

                          Figure 4

    A cross—section through Figure 2 when r012 Is below its equi—

librium value. A boom is impending for t1.
                                      20


                                                                                 .
 is   that no one is planning to lend them this c1. If all planned future

borrowing and lending, whether by ultimate borrowers, by ultimate savers,

 or by financial intermediaries, were precontracted during to, this kind

 of inconsistency could not arise.



The Austrian Effect

        Misintermediation fluctuations would involve no technological ineffi-

ciency and no welfare loss, except possibly for the small discrepancy between

      output and its ideal level, were it not for the contraction of the pro-

duction possibilities frontier between t0 and t1. At t0, the economy can

produce any point on P0P0P0 in Figures 1 and 2, or on its section P0P0 in

Figures 3 and 4. To produce any particular output stream, certain productive

activities will be necessary during t0, t1, and t2. In general, these activity

vectors will be different for every different output stream. In particular,

the t0 activities appropriate to the point S0 will be appropriate to that

point and to no other point on the t0 production possibilities frontier.

Therefore during t1 the production possibilities set is not the set of points

under P0P0, but only a proper subset of that set. The point S0 will still

be feasible, but since it is too late to go back and change the activities

conducted during t0, elsewhere the production possibilities frontier will have

shrunk, to P1P1 as shown in Figure 5. P0P0 and P1P1 will osculate at

but P1P1 will have a lower transformation elasticity than P0P0 in a neighbor—
            1                                                         2
hood of S0 and so will fall away from P0P0 as we move away from S0.




       'It is not actually necessary that P1P1 have a lower transformation
elasticity than P0P0 at S0 itself, but only in a deleted neighborhood of S.

     2Phrased differently, the long—run transformation curve      in Figure 5
will be the envelope of short—run curves like P1p1 correspondiiig to difterent
production decisions made in to.
                                 21




         C2




         P0




         P1




                                                      r0 12




              01                                 P1           Pu      ci




                             Figure 5

        The "Austrian effect." As time moves forward from t0 to tj,

the transformation curve between c1 and c2 contracts from P0P0 to

Pip1.
                                      22




      This principle of vanishing intertemporal production possibilities has

long been emphasized by the Austrian economists Mises and Hayek.1 Essentially

the way it works is that the numbers of the various types of capital goods

produced during t0 for later use are inappropriate to any point on the t0

transformation surface except S0. We cannot say that there were too many or

too few capital goods produced during to, but only the wrong mix. This is

the reason why Austrian writers, such as Lachmann (1966, p. 115), place such

great emphasis on the heterogeneity of capital goods. A model with homogen-

eous capital hardly begins to deal with the problem of intertemporal plans,

because according to it, the only decision to be made in t0 is between c0 and

the future, without reference to how output is to be allocated over the future.2

      Because of this "Austrian effect", it is essential for technological

efficiency that production follow through with output stream S0. This will

occur if r112 equals r012, but not otherwise. The unanticipated change in

interest rates necessary to bring the t1 demand point D1 into coincidence
with the t1 supply point S1 will require that S1 lie inside P0P0, as shown in
Figures    6 and 7. Therefore misintermediation fluctuations, whether booms or

recessions, necessarily entail technological inefficiency and wasted resources.



     1See von Mises (1924/53, 357—66, and 1963, 553, 560, and 564). Indeed,
the present theory grew out of an attempt to Fisherize Mises' theory of bus-
iness fluctuations. Note, however, that in our theory, the recession is
associated with an unanticipated fall in interest rates rather than a rise,
as in the Mises—Hayek theory. Hansen's critique (1951, 384—93) of Hayek's
popularization of Mises' theory completely misses the essential concept of
the time specificity of investment.

     2Much of.theoriginal development of the Austrian effect was in terms
of the conversion of "circulating capital" into "fixed capital". Ineffect,
this implies that P0P0 is a straight line5 while P1P1 forms a right angle at
     We have here improved on this original version by making it more margin—
alist — that is to say, more "Austrian".

        Sherman Maisel   has pointed out that producers deliberately build flex-
ibility into   their capital equipment. That is to say, during t0 they may aim
for   a point S just inside P0P0 from S0, but from which P1P1 will not fall off
                                23




       C2




       P0
                 N
       P1
                     N     D0




                                                  12




            01                             P1   P0                Cl

                           Figure 6

     The unanticipated fall in interest rates associated with a

recession. Production moves to a point S1 inside the original

production possibilities frontier.
                             24


                                                                      .
      c2




      P0               112
      P1




                                                                      .
                                     \.' \ r2
                                      \
                                          \



           01                             P1   P0                ci




                          Figure 7

    The unanticipated rise in interest rates associated with a

boom. Again production moves to a point inside P0P0.
                                    25


Factor Incomes and Unemployment

     Given the economy's endowment of original factors of production in

and t2, and of produced factors produced before t1, there will be a derivable

vector of equilibrium factor prices corresponding to each output price

ratio (i.e. each price of c1 in terms of c2 and corresponding interest rate

linking t1 to t2). The prices of those factors of production that are rela-

tively intensive in the production of c1 will move, relative to the prices

of factors intensive in c2, in the same direction the price of c1 moves rela-

tive to that of c2.1 Furthermore, by the "magnification effect", the relative

factor price change will be larger than the relative output price change,

in such a way that if the price of c1 falls relative to c2, the price of

c1—intensive factors will fall relative to both outputs.

     Which factor services, then, are c1—intensive, and which are
                                                                      c2—intensive?
Factor services available during t1 contribute to both c1 and c2, so it is

not immediately apparent how to classify them. However, factor services

available during t2 obviously contribute nothing to c1. Therefore t2 factor

services must be c2—intensive. It follows that t1 factor services, taken as

a whole, must be c1—intensive. Individual factors may be found during
                                                                         t1
that are c2—intensive, but the general presumption must be that the real income

of t1 factors, whether the current services of labor, land, or capital equip-

ment, will be directly related to the price of c1 relative to
                                                                c2.

with as low an elasticity of transformation as it does from S0. If r112 equals
r012, they will incur a small loss, because they cannot quite produce S0, but
this cost will be worth incurring because r112 might be far from r012. In
spite of this valid point, balanced intermediation will remain beneficial,
since it will minimize the price changes that do occur, which are still costly.
Furthermore, it will reduce the amount of expensive flexibility producers will
need to build in.

     'See Johnson (1971, 18) for the case when there are only two factors.
While during t0 it is necessary to keep the heterogeneity of capital goods
in mind in order to capture the "Austrian Effect", by t1 this effect has already
taken place, and we may aggregate factors into "c1—intensive" and "c2—intensive"
for the purpose of analyzing factor incomes during the fluctuation.
                                   26


                                                                                 .
     During a recession, there is an unanticipated fall in the price of
in terms of c2. Corresponding to the anticipated price 1/5012 there was

one set of equilibrium real remunerations for t1 factors. Corresponding to

the price l/ô2 necessary to clear the t1 markets are lower equilibrium

remunerations. Therefore if factors had been expecting rewards corresponding

to the anticipated price of c1, full employment during t1 will require that

most if not all current factors accept an unanticipated fall in their

real incomes.1
     If prices adjusted instantly and smoothly to the excess supply that

appears during t1 in a recession, there would be a fall (relative to expec-

tations) in real wages, real land rents, and in real returns to capital.

In practice, however, it will take some time for factor owners to feel out

the market and revise their expectations.2 We would therefore expect to find a

misintermediation recession to be associated with pervasive, though temporary,

unemployment of workers, factories, farms, and other factors of production.

     Artificially maintaining pre—recession wages and factor returns would

stall the market's process of salvaging the most it can from the malinvest—

ment that occurred during to. Instead of moving from S0 to l' production

would move to a point inside of P1P1 that would represent prolonged factor

unemployment.



     1The extent to which factors during t can anticipate the returns cor-
responding to the anticipated price of c1 Is a subtle question that deserves
further exploration. However, there is even less reason to believe that they
will have been anticipating returns correspodning to any other price of c1.

     2The "search" literature provides numerous insights into this process.
See Stigler (1961), Phelps (1970), and Rothschild (1973).

                                                                                 .
                                   27



     Thus, the policies of Hoover and Roosevelt during the '30's were exactly

the opposite of what was necessary if the Great Depression was the result of

mlsintermediation. We are told that

       Hoover believed that the maintenance of wage rates would contribute
     to sustaining economic activity and employment. This belief was
     simply the application to the depression of the general American
     high—wage philosophy that became popular in the 1920's. One of
     Hoover's first acts after the 1929 stock market crash was to summon
     industrial leaders to the White House and ask them to pledge not to
     cut wage rates. They agreed, and there was at the time little argu-
     ment over the wisdom of this polciy. Later, of course, wage rates
     were cut, and by 1932 there emerged some public argument in favor of
     wage reduction as a cure for unemployment. However, Hoover did not
     change his position. (Stein 1966, 192)

Hoover's voluntary programs were unable to keep nominal wages from falling

altogether, in spite of his great influence with business leaders. However,

he was able to prevent them from falling as fast as consumer prices. When

he left the White House in 1933, real wages were actually higher than at

the beginning of the Depression,1 and unemployment stood at 20.6% — even

using Darby's correction (1976) of the BLS figures. At the same time,

Hoover's Federal Farm Board acted as a Federally sponsored cartel in an

unprecedented attempt to support farm incomes (Rothbard 1963, 203—9).

     Roosevelt continued and even strengthened Hoover's policies of resisting

market adjustment with the NRA,2 minimum wage legislation, and the Wagner Act,




      1Average hourly earnings in 1957—59 dollars for city wage earners in
manufacturing rose from 93.8 in 1930 to 97.OQ in 1933. These figures would
would seem to contradict Gaibraith's claim (1955, 142—6, 188) that Hoover's
efforts were entirely ineffectual.

       2CMrlesKindleberger (l97, 14—15) recalls that when his salary as an
qff ice boy was increased in 1933, his boss made it clear that he had given
him the raise because he was required to by the NRA "and for no other
reason
                                  28




which gave unions monopoly power over wages. An interesting hypothesis is
                                                                                  .
that it was not until a major segment of the work force had its real wage

expectations drastically reduced, by being forced to work for low and almost

constant nominal wages in the military during World War II while the price
                       1
level shot up by 51.7%, that the country clearly came out of the depression.

Compulsory reduction of real wages would have been effective, but not neces-

sary to cure the Depression's unemployment rate, since real wages would have

fallen of their own accord without the Hoover/Roosevelt policy of artificially

maintaining them.

    Among current activities, we would expect the extractive industries to

be particularly sensitive to interest rate movements. At high interest rates,

it pays to exploit mineral deposits relatively quickly. At low interest

rates, it pays to leave the minerals in the ground for a longer period and to

employ time—consuming techniques of lowering costs. We would therefore expect

to see the extractive industries, and the new capital goods industries which

use up the current output of such raw materials, lapse into unanticipated

inactivity when interest rates unexpectedly fall during a recession. The demand

for capital goods will tend to be met instead with rehabilitated or salvaged

old machines. Mines and steel mills will languish, while junk parts yards

will thrive, comparatively speaking. Ironically, the new capital goods indus-

try may actually be more active with high interest rates than with low.


Welfare Considerations

     In the actual world of diverse tastes and factor endowments, we cannot

unambiguously say whether misintermediation fluctuations are a good or a bad

thing, since some people will benefit and others will lose. In order to make

____________
     1From 1941 to 1947.
                                                                                  .
                                          29




blanket welfare statements, we must simplify somewhat, and think in terms of

 a "representative participant" who has representative tastes and representative

 factor endowment. The economy will then behave as if it were made up of a

very large number of carbon copies of this individual, who will be in unani-

mous agreement as to how well off they are.1

       When    a   recession is impending, the representative participant will plan

to consume an output stream which gives him higher utility (U0) than any

 feasible stream, since the corresponding indifference surface, a cross—section

through which is shown in Figure 8, is separated from P0P0P0 by the t0 budget plane.

The equilibrium utility level U, which is attainable, therefore lies below

U0, as shown. (The curve labeled Ue in Figure 8 does not quite touch P0P0 except

in the unlikely case that the c0 component of S0 and          is unaffected by the

presence of a disequilibrium between c1 and c2.) Therefore an impending

recession provides the representative participant with a sense of euphoria;

his anticipated welfare level is higher than any feasible level.

      When the recession strikes during t1, the representative participant

finds that the best he can do is to consume D1. This point lies inside

P0P0P0 and therefore provides a lower utility level, U1, than the highest

attainable utility level Ue Thus a recession implies a welfare loss. Fur-

thermore, since Ue lies below U0, the recession involves an even bigger dis-

appointment of expectations. (We must evaluate the recession on the basis of

U1
     instead   of U0, since U1 represents the utility level of actually realized

consumption, while U0 is only the utility from planned consumption.)



     1For this simplification to be valid, individuals' tastes must be iden-
tical. Furthermore, either their factor endowments must be identical, or
their tastes homothetic.
                                   30



                                                                            .
      C2




      P0
                              D0


      P1




                                                                            .
                                                                      U
                                                                 U'    e
                                                            Ud


                                                     r012




            Oi                                 P1   P0



                               Figure 8

     The welfare loss accompanying a recession. The representative

participant anticipated utility level U0 during to, but ends up with

U1 in t1,   instead   of the level Ue attainable with equilibrium growth.

(Ud pertains to consumption—displacing fiscal policy, to be discussed

later.)
                                    31




     Although S1 (equivalent to D1) is technologically inefficient in terms

of the production possibilities available at t0 it provides higher welfare

than S0, since it is the highest utility point on P1P1. Therefore S1 is the

economically efficient production point for a recession that has materialized,

even though it is technologically inefficient. It would be even better not

to have had the recession in the first place, but by t1 it is too late to

prevent it. The best that can be done is to salvage utility level U1 from the

situation.1   Ud, the utility level of S0, is even lower than U1.

     A boom has the same welfare implications as a recession. As shown in

Figure 9, an impending boom causes a sense of euphoria, with a planned

utility level U0 higher than the equilibrium level U. When the boom mater-

ializes, participants are stuck with a utility level U1 that is lower than

U and a fortiori lower than U
 e                           0
     We therefore arrive at the odd conclusion that a boom is as much a

disappointment as a recession. It is true that as producers participants

are pleasantly surprised by the briskness of demand. However, this benefit

is more than offset by the deterioration of the terms yn which they as con-

sumers can buy that output. The financial side of this situation is that

during t0, the representative participant was planning to borrow at a low

interest rate to finance additional consumption of c1. When he gets to t1,

he finds that no one was planning to lend him this purchasing power, and the

interest rate has to go up sufficiently high above r012 to discourage him from

borrowing.



     1As in Mises' theory, we must regard the situation leading up to the
recession as retrogression and the recession itself as progress (1963, 576).
                              32




      C2




     P0

     P1




                                                                       .
                                            D0




           01                        P1      P0                 Cl

                          Figure 9

     The welfare loss accompanying a boom. Again the representative

participant suffers a disappointment from U0 to U1, and ends up with

lower utility than the highest attainable, U.
                                   33




     The ability of misintermediation to raise the representative participant's

pre—fluctuation planned utility from    to U0 helps explain the historical

survival power of tnisintermediation) If inisintermediation merely introduced

uncertainty, without altering the utility of the expected consumption stream,

risk aversion would have worked more powerfully against it over the centuries.

However, it holds out the prospect of a consumption stream with higher utility

than is attainable with balanced intermediation. The apparently improved

utility of the mean is capable of outweighing the expected utility loss from

the increased variance, or so it appears to participants during to. If the

representative participant fully understood the economic implications of

misintermediation, he would realize that if he does not precontract during t0

all planned future borrowing and lending, interest rates will systematically

move in the direction necessary to disappoint his plans. In practice, how-

ever, individuals' economic situations are so diverse and interest rate

uncertainty such a small portion of total economic uncertainty that misinter—

mediation fluctuations, while possibly the major component of aggregate fluc-

tuations, are only a small component of each individual's changes in fortunes.

Considering that most individuals do not even understand interest, let alone

misintermediation, it is easy to see how they might completely lose sight of

the systematic component in interest rate movements.

     Misintermediation implies changes in interest rates that are systematic,

but systematic only in the sense of being correlated with an unobserved

variable, namely the production and consumption plans of the representative



           paragraph is in partial answer to a point raised by William
Sharpe.
                                      34


                                                                                    .
participant.     It is true that everything necessary to construct this variable

is "known" at to. However, this is not usable information, since its compon-

ents are known to different individuals. By Hayek's principle of the "f rag—

mentation of knowledge" (1973, 14), everyone is necessarily ignorant of

almost everything that is known to anyone. Only if someone were to perform

the superhuman task of putting everyone's plans together would this variable
                 1
be observable.       In many cases, market prices allow individuals to use infor-

mation known to other individuals without actually having to know that infor-

mation themselves. In a hypothetical world in which balanced intermediation

were not actively discouraged, the term structure of interest rates would

serve that function by allowing individuals to coordinate their intertemporal

production and consumption plans with those of other individuals without

having to know what any of those other individuals is planning.                     S
Money and Business Fluctuations

     In the real world there is a strong correlation between fluctuations

in the rate of monetary growth and fluctuations in the rate of growth of

real output (Friedman and Schwartz, 1963). A completely exogenous fluc-

tuation in the money supply could easily affect real output. One possible



         has been suggested that polls might provide information about the
average individual's position. However, it is hard to believe that individ-
uals would give as much attention to a questionnaire as they would to actual
financial commitments. Furthermore, knowing whether a given sample of
respondents is in fact representative is almost as difficult as knowing
what financial position is representative. In any event, the fact that no
such poll has ever been taken means that historically, at least, the represen-
tative participant's position has not been known, so there is no inconsistency
if we posit the unavailability of this information to explain past fluctuations.


                                                                                    .
                                   35




mechanism is through Walras' Law, which we used above with reference to

the real intertemporal economy) A monetary contraction, say, would lead

to an excess demand for money, offset by an excess supply of real goods in

general. This excess supply would last until deflation removed the excess

demand for real cash balances.

     Another possible mechanism works via the short—run Phillips Curve. The

slowdown in the rate of inflation caused by a slowdown in the rate of mone-

tary growth would ordinarily be largely unanticipated. Until inflation expec-

tations caught up with the actual inflation rate, unemployment would be

above the "natural" unemployment rate, and physical output would be below

trend.

     However, there is a mechanism by which misintermediation fluctuations

could lead to disturbances in the money supply. The unanticipated rise in

interest rates that accompanies a misintermediation boom would lead to unan-

ticipated capital losses on any long—term securities or loans in the banks'

portfolios. These losses will jeopardize the safety of the banks and make

them more prone to failure in the event of runs. Therefore a misintermedia—

tion boom may lead to a banking crisis and monetary contraction followed by

a deflationary depression. We would expect this phenomenon to have been

particularly strong prior to the founding of the FDIC.

     On the other hand, the unanticipated fall in interest rates that accom-

panies a misintermediation recession will lead to unanticipated capital gains

on long—term assets. These gains will leave the banks in a good capital




     1This is the aspect of Walras' Law emphasized by Lange (1942).
                                    36

                                                                                     .
position,   from which they can safely launch a monetary expansion. Thus a

misintermediation recession may   end   in a bank expansion and inflationary boom.

     Furthermore, monetary instability can lead to conditions that permit the

type of intertemporal disequilibrium we have discussed to appear, through

the following mechanism: Monetary instability will tend to cause an erratic

price level, so that participants will lose confidence in their ability to

predict the future price level. For a given maturity, lenders would insist

on a risk premium on nominal bonds above the effective real rate plus expected

inflation. On the other hand, borrowers will insist on a nominal rate

below the effective real rate plus expected inflation. The only way they

will be able to agree on a nominal rate is for them to settle on a shorter

maturity than corresponds to their actual dissavings and repayment plans.1 In

this manner, inflation uncertainty can break the link between financial instru—

ment maturities and the dates of real consumption and production plans.

Although intermediaries will not be the culprits, the same sort of fluctuations

would occur.2
     We therefore see monetary and misintermediation factors in business

fluctuations as complementary and interrelated, rather than as mutually

exclusive alternatives. However, we would expect the pure misintermediation



     1Brealey and Schaefer (1976) note the effect on lenders and conclude that
inflation uncertainty leads to a liquidity premium. However, when the effect
on borrowers is also considered, the only presumption that can be drawn is
that maturities will be shortened.

     2Purchasing power bonds would get around this problem, but they are
not a viable alternative until Congress reverses the 1933 joint resolution
against gold clauses. We are told by Cynthia Lichtenstein that on the basis
of this resolution the courts interpret cost—of—living indexed bonds as
contrary to public policy and therefore unenforceable. In a recent talk at
MIT, Alan Blinder cited a recent instance of such a ruling in a Tennessee
court. Variable rate loans are unsatisfactory substitutes for indexation,
since they leave the real interest rate uncertain.
                                    37




effect to be potentially much larger than the pure monetary effect, because

of the magnitudes on which they operate. An intertemporal disequilibrium

acts on the present discounted value of all future consumption (and produc-

tion). A disequilibrium may be small as a percentage of this total and

still involve enormous stakes. On the other hand, a monetary disturbance

will involve only a fraction of the money supply, which in turn is only a

fraction of just one year's consumption and production. The excess supply or

demand for goods corresponding to an excess demand or supply of money will

therefore be only a small fraction of the total demand for goods over time.

     The power of banks to create money, whether in the form of checking accounts

or old—fashioned circulating bank notes, is inextricably tied up with their

habit of mismatching asset and liability maturities. Therefore balanced

intermediation will require some changes in the monetary system. The new

"liquid asset mutual funds" (on which large—denomination checks can now be

drawn)   and banks conforming to the old—fashioned "real bills doctrine" have
desirable   features in this respect, since they at least reduce the mismatching

of maturities. One hundred percent reserve banking, which many have advocated,

would permit completely balanced intermediation. However, it would preclude

the efficiency gains from payment of interest on checking accounts (Johnson

1969, 31—37). We have not yet resolved in our own mind what the best way would

be of integrating the monetary and intermediation systems.


Fiscal Policy

     The conventional macroeconomic solution for a recession is increased

government spending to absorb the excess supply of output. We now examine

the welfare implications of such fiscal policy in the light of our model.

     The increased government spending can take two extreme forms. It can

either provide services consumers would have purchased anyway (consumption—

displacing fiscal policy) or can consist entirely of wasteful make—work
                                      38


                                                                                   .
projects   to employ idle factors.'

     If during a recession the government bought up the excess supply of

current output and then gave this output back to the public without charge,

it could induce participants to consume what they had originally planned to

produce (S0 in Figure 8). Doing this would require the government somehow to

drive a wedge between the marginal rate of substitution and the marginal

rate of transformation, in effect by taxation of c2 and subsidization of c1.

The marginal rate of transformation between c1 and c2 would then be undisturbed

from its t0 anticipated value and no alterations of production plans or

unanticipated changes in (before tax) factor incomes would be required for

full employment. However, as was noted in the next—to—the—last section, the

utility level Ud that would be achieved by this consumption—displacing fiscal

policy is necessarily lower than U1, the utility level that would be achieved by   S
moving production as quickly as possible to S1. (See Figure 8.) Therefore

consumption—displacing fiscal policy actually aggravates the welfare loss

caused by a misintermediation recession.

    Keynes (1936, 128—131) argued that there is an advantage to expenditure that

is wholly wasteful and therefore does not compete with what little demand

there is for current output. As unemployed c1—intensive factors are diverted

into these make—work activities, the transformation curve between c1 and c2



     11t is sometimes assumed that the increased spending will be on "public
goods" that consumers would not have purchased if left to themselves, but
which do increase net consumer welfare. However, if there are any such goods,
the government should not wait for a recession to provide them. We there-
fore assume that all desirable governmental public goods projects aie
undertaken with or without a recession, so that all deliberate counter—
recessionary fiscal policy is either consumption—displacing or wasteful.
      We also assume that all future tax liabilities are fully anticipated by
the present (only) generation. Interesting consequences arise if they are not,
but this issue is beyond the scope of the present paper.
                                   39




will shrink as shown in Figure 10. The Rybczynski line RR is the locus of

points at which the shrunken transformation curves have the same marginal

rate of transformation as curve P1P1 (and P0P0) does at S0.1 At the point W

along this line where this marginal rate of transformation equals the mar-

ginal rate of substitution in consumption, the unemployed factors will be

just absorbed without any disturbance to anticipated interest rates or factor

prices. Again, the realized utility level (U.) with fiscal policy is neces-

sarily lower than the level U1 that would be attained in its absence.

     While either sort of fiscal policy is worse, from the point of view of

the representative participant, than no fiscal policy at all, it is not cer-

tain which will be the worse of the two.    If the elasticity

of substitution of the indifference curves2 is high, so that they are relatively

flat, the U indifference curve may pass beneath S0 as shown in Figure 10,

and the wasteful variety will be worse.      On the other hand, if it is low,

so that they are sharply bent, the U indifference curve may pass above S0,

and the consumption—displacing variety will be worse.      Ironically,

wasteful fiscal policy might actually be a lesser evil than consumption—

displacing fiscal policy.

     The utility level U1 is the best that the market can possibly achieve,

with instantaneous factor price adjustment and relocation. In practice,



     1See Johnson (1971, 35—39). Note that if tastes are homothetic, the
point W can be constructed as the intersection of RR with the ray O1D0 (not
shown).

     2From the standpoint of
                             t0,
                                 the relevant substitution elasticity is the
"direct" elasticity which holds the quantity of c0 constant.
                              40                                       S



        P1
        P
         w

                                          D0




                                                        U0
                                                                       .
                                                              R




                                                                U
                                                                  w


             01                       P            P1             c1
                                      w


                          Figure 10

     The welfare loss from wholly wasteful fiscal policy.    Make—




                                                                       .
work employment of factors contracts the transformation curve from

P1P1 to PP, where RR is a Rybczynski line. The representative

participant achieves utility level U.
                                   41



this adjustment will take time and there will be some output lost due to

unemployed resources, so a utility level somewhat below U1 will actually be

attained without fiscal policy. Note, however, that the worst the market

can do is not adjust factor prices at all, leaving the economy with welfare

level U, the ideal welfare level from wasteful fiscal policy.

     Fiscal policy will also take some time to implement, since the problem

must be first recognized, then expenditure programs authorized, and finally

these programs put into effect. To that extent, market adjustment will par-

tially take place, so that fiscal policy will in practice achieve a welfare

level somewhat above Ud or U.' However, if the fiscal policy somehow works

instantaneously, say through the use of tautomatic stabilizers", this gain

will be lost.


Conclusion

     In his General Theory, Keynes touched on many of the points we have

raised in this paper. The following observation, for example, is reminiscent

of what we have called the "Austrian Effect," and may indeed have been sug-

gested by Keynes' exposure to Mises and Hayek:

     In optimum conditions..., production should be so organized as to
     produce in the most efficient manner compatible with delivery at
     the dates at which consumers' demand is expected to become effective. (215)

Clearly Keynes was aware of the fact that different production activities

are necessary today in order to produce different shaped output streams

efficiently.



     1This welfare gain is contingent on the fiscal program decided on being
of a size appropriate to the excess supply that still exists when it goes
into effect. There is a danger, however, that because of the recognition
and implementation lags, it will instead be appropriate to the larger excess
supply that existed when it was conceived, leading to the familiar problem
of "destabilizing stabilization policy."
                                     42


                                                                                  .
    Consider also this passage relating to consumption:
         act of individual saving means——so to speak——a decision not to
    have dinner to—day. But it does not necessitate a decision to have
    dinner or to buy a pair of boots a week hence or a year hence or to
    consume any specified thing at any specified date....
      If saving consisted not merely in abstaining from present consump-
    tion but in placing simultaneously a specific order for future con-
    sumption, the effect might indeed be different. (1936, 210)

We would have no quarrel at all with this statement if the word "commitment"

were substituted for "decision"     The whole essence of the misintermediation

problem is that individuals' time—specific consumption decisions are not

passed on to producers. -   Conceivably, consumption plans for the future might
not be effectively time—specific, as would be the case if indifference curves

between c1 and c2 were straight lines. Misintermediation fluctuations would

not then be a problem, because consumers could be induced to consume exactly

the stream producers were planning to produce with no unanticipated change in

interest rates or welfare loss. However, the same considerations that lead

us to expect diminishing marginal utility also lead us to expect that indiffer-

ence curves will be curved away from the origin.1 We therefore believe that

consumption decisions, at least for the satisfaction of those wants that recur

in each time period, do have an important time—specificity.

     Although our model is in some sense Keynesian in that it builds on a

few ideas Keynes would have agreed with, we strongly disagree with Keynes'

crucial contention that saving "is not a substitution of future consumption—

demand for present consumption—demand," but rather "a net diminution of such

demand" (1936, 210).



     1See McCulloch and Smith (1976).

                                                                                  .
                                   43



We have attempted to demonstrate that such an assumption is not necessary

in order to explain the occasional appearance of an excess supply of all or

almost all types of current output and factor services.

     Perhaps the most significant conclusion to be drawn from our model is

that counter—recessionary fiscal policy,even (or particularly) when it achieves

its goal of full employment, actually aggravates the welfare loss accompany-

ing a misintermediation recession. We therefore regard Keynes' best—remembered

policy recommendation, which cQnstitutes the core of macroeconomic teaching

today, as being in fact detrimental to economic welfare.
                                          44


                                                                                          S
                                 MATHEMATICAL APPENDIX




       The assertion made in the text that there will be a planned excess

supply of c1 if and only if the forward rate r012 is too high seems obvious.

However, the possibility that the c0 component of S0 and D0 will not equal

that of the equilibrium stream makes the proof a little more difficult than

it would otherwise be, even in a world which may be characterized by our

representative participants.

       Let the row vectors        =   (l 5ool, S002) and Se = 0-, ooi   e         e
                                                                             OO2 ) be
the actual and equilibrium intertemporal price vectors for t0.

       Let d =    (d0, d1, d2)T and s = (s0, s, 52)T be column vectors represent-
ing the disequilibrium planned demand and supply streams represented in the

figures by points D0 and S0, so that d0 =        5.   Let 5e =   50e   81e 52e)T repre—

sent the equilibrium stream, for which supply and demand plans coincide. Let

c =    (c0,   c1, c2)T be an arbitrary stream of consumption goods.

       The equilibrium budget plane is the set of points c for which



                   —   e)     •                                             Al)


The set of points on the origin side of this plane is given by



                   — Se) < 0 .                                              A2)



Except for 5e the whole production possibilities set lies on the origin

side of this plane. Since s is a member of this set different from 5e, we

have                                                                                      5
                                                       45



                  — 5e) <             •                                      A3)



     The actual disequilibrium budget plane is given by the set of points c,

such that



            S(c—s)=O                                                         A4)



Point d lies on this plane, and d0 =                        o   so we have



            o =   (1,                002)(d — s)                             A5)


              =   (0, ooi 5002)(d — s)                                       A6)


              =   (0,                         s)
                        1, 6012)(d —               .                         A7)



Suppose, contrary to the assertion we are trying to prove, that d1 > s1 and d2 < s2

even though       r012 >         roi2e (and therefore O12 < 012e)• It would then follow
from A7) that



            (0, 1, 6e)(d —                    <0                             A8)


            (0,              6e)(d — s)            <    0                    A9)


            (1,              e)(d         —   s) <0                          AlO)



Adding A3) and AlO), we have



            6e(d —      e)   <   0   ,                                       All)
                                              46



so that d must lie on the origin side of the equilibrium budget plane.
                                                                                       S
     Since our representative participant would select point 5e from the

equilibrium budget plane, 5e must be preferred to any point below this

plane, and therefore to d. However, 5e being in the production possi-

bilities set, is on the origin side of the disequilibrium budget plane, so

we may also conclude that d (which the average participant selects from

this plane) is preferred to 5e               This contradiction of the axioms of re—
                                                                       e
vealed preference completes our proof that d1 < s1 whenever r012 > r012

     The above theorem is valid no matter how far we are from equilibrium.

Some additional propositions of interest may be proven, but only for small

deviations from equilibrium. Let "E" represent the logarithmic differentia-

tion operator, defined for any variable x by


                                                                                       S
          Ex = dx/x =          d(ln   x) .                                  A12)



Define k1 to be the share of 1—th period consumption in the equilibrium

budget:



          ki =       e         e/(e + e e + &e 82e)                        Al3)



Let a . and t.. respectively be the Allen elasticities of substitution in
     ij         13

consumption, and of transformation in production. We must always have



                 =                                                          A14)
          ajj

          T.. =
                     T.1   ,                                                Al5)
                                                 47


             2
                 k1a =       0   ,                                              A16)

and
             2
             E   k.i-.. =    0   .                                              A17)
            i=0 1 13


Convexity towards the origin of the indifference surfaces implies that

      < 0. Because of Al6),              .ill therefore usually, but not necessarily

always, have



                 > 0 ,   i   #   j (usually)      .                             A18)



We will define the sign of                 so that convexity of the transformation

surface away from the origin likewise implies that                    < 0. We then will

have



                 > 0 ,   i       j   (usually)    .                             Al9)


       For a utility maximizing individual, the o have the property that



           Ed1 =
                     k.a.EcSü0       ,                                          A20)



if utility and prices other than                      are held constant. Similarly, the

Tj have the property that



                 =
           Es —kt1EcS00                                                         A2l)
                                              48


                                                                                    .
for   movements along the transformation surface keeping the value of output

maximized and holding other prices constant. For small movements from equi-

librium, for which income effects are negligible, and using c0 as numeraire,

we will therefore have



              Es1 = —k1't11E5001 — k2r21E5002        ,    i   =   0, 1, 2    A22)



and



              Ed1 = k1a11E5001 + k2c52iEcSOO2 ,          I = 0,     1, 2 .   A23)



Because the market for current (t0) output must clear, we have

                                                                                    .
                    = Ed0                                                    A24)
              Es0             .




       We have seven equations and eight unknowns. We are therefore left

with the one degree of freedom inherent in the 3—period world. Solving

equations A22)—A24) in terms of ES012 (=E6002 — Ec5001) gives


                            k2(a02 + T02)
              E3001 =                                                        A25)
                            k0(T00 + a00) Ec5012

                        —k1(a01 +
              EtS002 =                                                       A26)
                            k0(T00 + 000) ES012

                            k1k2(001T02 — 002T01)
              =         =                                                    A27)
        Es0       Ed0             k0(T00            Ec5012 .
                                            0O)
                                                49



       In order to get A25) through A27) in terms of interest rates, we must

differentiate (2) through (4) in the text:




             ES001
                     = —(t1 — t0)dr001                                        A28)


             ES002 = —(t2 —         t0)dr002                                  A29)


             E5012 = —(t2
                          —         t1)dr012                                  A30)



Substituting A28) through A30) into A25) through A27),


                        (t2 —      t1)k2(a02    + T02)
             dr001 =          —                                               A31)
                        (t1        t0)k0(t00    + a00) dr012


                      —(t2 —       t1)k1 (001   + tOi)
             dr002 =          —                                               A32)
                        (t2        tQ)k0(T00 + 000) dr012

                       (t2 —      t1)k1k2(a02t01 — 001t02)
       Es0 = Ed0 =                                             dr012          A33)
                                     k0(T00 + 000)


The denominators of A3l) — A33) are always negative by the convexity condi-

tions on        and t... The numerators of A31) and A32) are usually (though

not necessarily) positive and negative respectively. The numerator of A33)

may   be   of either sign, but there is a weak presumption as to its sign. If

c0, c1, and c2 enter preferences symmetrically, we would expect 001                  002.

However, by arguments related to those used to support the Austrian effect,

we might expect to find T01            < T02 , making    the numerator of A33) negative.

We therefore make the following generalizations:
                                            50

                                                                                        .
           dr00
                    <   0    (usually) ,                                    A34)
           dr0 12


           dr002
                    >   0    (usually)                                      A35)
           dr012


            Es0          Ed0
and                 =           >   0 (weak presumption) .                  A36)
           ur012        ur012


      A34) and A35) show that disequilibrium cannot be associated with too

high or too low a general level of yields to maturity during the prefluctu—

ation period. Some will be too high and some too low. Rather, an impending

recession (dr012 >          0) means that the t0 yield curve is either insufficiently
downward sloping or excessively upward sloping,being too low at the short

end and too high at the long end. The opposite is true for an impending boom.

      A36) indicates that t0 consumption and production have a slight tendency

to be higher than their equilibrium value for a recession and lower for a

boom, provided the disequilibrium is small. Intuitively, the limited trans-

formation opportunities between c0 and c 1 tend to pull c0 in the same direc-

tion as c1. For large disequilibria, income effects will begin to be impor-

tant. Since U0 lies above Ue for both booms and recessions, income effects

will be positive if, as is natural tO assume, no period's consumption is in-

ferior, and ignoring distribution effects. Therefore, if the disequilibrium

is sufficiently large, and a01T02           sufficiently   close to a02t01, we would

expect to find consumption and production of c0 above its equilibrium value

in either case.




                                                                                        .
                                     51


                                REFERENCES


Böhm—Bawerk, Eugen von. Capital and Interest (South Holland, Ill.: Libertarian
Press,   1959) Translation of German 4th edition (1914).
Brealey, Richard and Stephen Schaefer. "Term Structure with Uncertain Inflation,"
unpublished paper presented at the American Economics Association meetings,
Atlantic City, September 1976.

Darby, Michael R. "Three—and—a—Half Million U.S. Employees Have Been Mislaid:
Or, an Explanation of Unemployment, 1934—1941." Journal of Political Economy
84 (Feb. 1976), 1—16.

de Roover, Raymond. "New Interpretations of the History of Banking," Journal
of World History 2:38—76 (1954).

__________________   The Rise and Decline of the Medici Bank 1397—1494 (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1963).

Dicey, A.V. Law and Public Opinion in England During the Nineteenth Century,
second edition, (London: MacMillan, 1963). Originally 1914.

Fisher, Irving. "Our Unstable Dollar and the So—Called Business Cycle," Journal
of the American Statistical Association 20 (June 1925), pp. 179—202.

Friedman, Milton. "Discussion of the Inflationary Gap," American Economic
Review 32 (June, 1942), 314—20. Reprinted in Friedman, Essays in Positive
Economics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953).

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. "Money and Business Cycles," Review of
Economics and Statistics 45 (February, 1963), reprinted in Friedman, ed., The
Optimum Quantity of Money and Other Essays, (Chicago: Aldine, 1969).

Gaibraith, John Kenneth. The Great Crash: 1929 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1955).

Georgescu—Roegen, Nicholas. "The Aggregate Linear Production.Function and its
Applications to von Newmann's Economic Model," in T.C. Koopmans, ed., Activity
Analysis of Production and Allocation (New York: Wiley, 1951).

Gurley, John C. and Edward S. Shaw. Money in a Theory of Finance (Washington:
Brookings, 1960).

Hansen, Alvin H. Business Cycles and National Income (New York: Norton, 1951).

Hayek, F.A. Law, Legislation and Liberty. (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1973), Vol. I.

Hirschleifer, J. Investment, Interest, and Capital (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prentice—Hall, 1970).
                                    52


                                                                                    S
Hunt, Reed 0., chairman. The Report of the President's Commission on Financial
Structure and Regulation (Washington: GPO, 1972).

Johnson, Harry G. "Inside Money, Outside Money, Income, Wealth, and Welfare in
Monetary Theory," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 1 (February 1969), 30—45.

________________•   The Two—Sector Model of General Equilibrium (Chicago: Aldine,
1971).

________________• "The american Tradition in Economics," forthcoming in
American Economic Review (Proceedings), May 1977.

Keynes, John Maynard. "Alternative Aims in Monetary Policy," in Keynes,
Essays in Persuasion (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1932). Orig—
inally published 1923.

________________• The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money
 (New York: Harcourt Brace & World, Inc., [1936]).

Kindleberger, Charles P. The World in Depression, 1929—39. (London: Allen
Lane, The Penguin Press, 1973).

Kiebaner, Benjamin J. Commercial Banking in the United States: A History
(Kinsdale, Illinois: Dryden, 1974).

Klein, Lawrence R. The Keynesian Revolution, second edition (New York:
MacMillan, 1966).

Lachmann, L.M. "Sir John Hicks on Capital and Growth," The South African Journal
of Economics 34 (June 1966), 113—123.

Lange, Oskar. "Say's Law: A Restatement and Criticism," in Lange, McIntyre
and Yntema, eds., Studies in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics,, in Memory
of Henry Schultz. (Chicago, 1942).

Lapidus, L., S. Cutler, P. P. Kildoyle and A. L. Castro.   Public Policy Toward
Mutual Savings Banks in New York State: Proposals for Change (New York:
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and New York State Banking Department, 1974.)


Liviatan, Nissan. "Multiperiod Future Consumption as an Aggregate," American
Economic Review 56 (Sept. 1966), 828—840.


Maine, Sir Henry. Ancient Law. (London: Everyman's Library, 1960). Originally
published 1861.




                                                                                    S
                                    53




McCulloch, J. Huston. "Measuring the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Journal
of Business 44(1): 19—31 (Jan., 1971).

__________________    "The Tax—Adjusted Yield Curve," Journal of Finance 30
(June, 1975), 811—830. [1975a]

                      "The Monte Carlo Cycle in Business Activity," Economic
Inquiry 13 (Sept. 1975) 303—321. [1975b]

___________________ and Jeffrey D. Smith. "An Austrian Proof of Quasi—Concave
Preferences," Boston College Discussion Paper #70 (unpublished), revised April
1976. Submitted to Econometrica.

Merchant, A. "The Mystery of the New Fashioned Goldsmiths or Bankers," (c. 1676),
reprinted in Quarterly Journal of Economics (Jan. 1888), 250—62.

Phelps, E.S., ed. Microfoundations of Inflation and Employment Theory, (New
York: Norton, 1970).

Rothbard, Murray N. America's Great Depression, (New York: Van Nostrand, 1963).

Rothschild, Michael. "Models of Market Organization with Imperfect Information,"
Journal of Political Economy 81 (Nov./Dec. 1973) 1283—1308.

Stein, Herbert. "Pre—Revolutionary Fiscal Policy: The Regime of Herbert Hoover,"
Journal of Law and EconomIcs 9:189—223 (Oct., 1966).

Stigler, George. "The Economics of Information," Journal of Political Economy 69
(June 1961): 213—25.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "A Consumption—Oriented Theory of the Demand for Financial
Assets and the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Review of Economic Studies
37: 321—51 (July 1970).

Tobin, James. "Deposit Interest Ceilings as a Monetary Control," Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 2 (Feb. 1970) 4—14.


von Mises, Ludwig. The Theory of Money and Credit, New Edition. (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1953). Pages 1—410 a translation of the 1924
German edition.

Wille, Frank. "FDIC 1975: Source of Strength within the American Banking
System," (Washington: FDIC, 1975).
