NBER Working Paper Series

LABOR QUALITY, THE DEMAND FOR SKILLS,
AND MARKET SELECTION
Sherwin Rosen*

Working Paper No.

162

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305

January 1977

Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.
They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

*University of Rochester and NBER. The author acknowledges with
appreciation the financial support of the National Science Foundation
and the Department of Health, Education and Welfare. He is indebted
to Kamran Norman and Robert Willis for helpful discussions.

LABOR QUALITY, THE DEMAND FOR SKILLS,
AND MARKET SELECTION

Sherwin Rosen
University of Rochester and NBER

I. NATURE OF THE PROBLEM
This paper investigates some alternative definitions of labor for produc-

tivity and demand analysis. The central issue requires introducing notions of
"skill" into the production function and revolves around the nebulous concept
of labor quality and the existence of meaningful aggregates of heterogeneous

labor services. While capital aggregation has been discussed at length, far
less attention has been devoted to labor aggregation, though the required struc-

ture is different enough to warrant independent development. A fundamental
feature of labor is that the supply of potential services of any worker typically
spans a much broader spectrum than those actually put to use in the market.
Specialization and division of labor in the organization of work activities
are ubiquitous; suggesting that labor markets might be-usefully analyzed as

marriage markets, matching workers to jobs. Central to this view is the fact
that the distribution of potential skills among members of the labor force
renders some individuals more capable of performing certain jobs than others.
The work reported below illustrates some of these issues, based on the theory
of optimal assignments (Koopmans and Beckmann), the Ricardian theory of comparative advantage (especially the development of Dorfman, Sainuelson and Solow) and
the theory of marriage (Becker).

Three approaches have guided empirical work in this field and this work
is related to all of them:

2

(1) Economists working In the human capital tradition have maintained
a distinction between "raw labor" and human capital, measuring the latter by
a wage—weighted Index of the distribution of education in the labor force,

thereby In effect including education as a factor of production. This split
obviously follows quantity/quality lines and appears to be a natural first—

approximation toward measuring labor in efficiency units. However, It has
not fully adressed the heterogeneity issue and substitution among various

types of human capital. We begin to analyze some of those factors here.
(ii) Duality theory offers a wide variety of feasible empirical specifications for production functions involving many factors of production and
empirical applications have disaggregated labor according to official skill

and occupational categories. This approach relates various labor inputs to
their functions as productive agents more closely than the human capital ap-

proach, but appears to be less than fundamental. First, the principles underlying official classifications are not transparent. Second, technological
factors alone almost never determine the content of work activity and what

is called a job. The bundling of work activities into packages labeled jobs
and occupations is at least as much influenced by economic decisions affecting

the organization of production as by the technology per Se. There is no better
example than Smith's pin factory. "Pin Maker" would represent an adequate occupational classification with the crudest kind of organization, whereas a more
sophisticated organization would call for distinguishing among wire stretchers,

point sharpeners and so on. Some examples of the endogenity of occupational
classifications are shown below.

(lii) There has been some attempt (Welch) to reduce the dimenslonality of

labor inputs using an unobserved factor approach. This method assumes that

3

labor services in production can be represented by a small set of latent, unobserved factors, with observed labor categories embodying these factors in

alternative proportions (fixed "within" but varying "between"). For example,
the latent factors might be strength and intelligence, and the observed labor
categories might be several education groups cross—classified by race, sex and

work experience. A market arbitrage argument is used to establish restrictions
among wages in the observed categories. Assuming that any vector of unobserved
factors can be achieved by linear bundles of observed categories, observed wages
in each category must be similar linear combinations of the implicit prices of

the unobserved components. The latter form a basis for reducing the dimension—
ality of the input space to the number of latent variables. A difficulty with
this technique is that it may not survive aggregation over several goods with

dissimilar latent factor technologies. Furthermore, the underlying hypothesis
that workers embody fixed bundles of characteristics that are linearly combinable does not necessarily accord with the principles of comparative advantage
and the virtues of specialization, so that some investigation of the practical
limitations of the method is worthwhile.

The paper is organized as follows: Section II considers the organization
of work activities in a simple fixed coefficient technology in the presence of

comparative advantage among various classes of workers. Assuming that the number of independent productive activities exceeds the number of comparative
advantage classes, an application of the envelope theorem shows the derivation
from first principles of a neoclassical production function with input dimension (the number of workers of each type) smaller than the engineering technology

(the number of activities). This is the basic result illustrating that occupational classifications depend on both the technology and the distribution of

4

skills (factor supplies) in the working population, a fact that may be relevant
to international and other cross—sectionaldjfferences in productivity and the

demand for labor. The situation is reversed in section III, which treats the
case where the number of worker classifications exceeds the number of production

activities. In this case the micro—technology cannot be reduced below the basic
set of work activities one starts with, and within these categories labor can

be aggregated according to efficiency units. However, the nature of factor
endowments in economies of this sort is rather different than in the neoclassical model, and leads to an output transformation function that has all the neo-

classical properties. This result is reminiscent of an example of Houthakker
(also, see Sato) who also obtained smooth neoclassical behavioral functions from

underlying distributional phenomena. Section IV examines the characteristics——
factor approach to labor aggregation and relates it to the results in section III,

noting an inherent difficulty arising from selectivity of various ability groups

of workers among work activities due to comparative advantage. In effect, the
existence of rent destroys the possibility of simple linear aggregation. The
point is also related to a general approach to income distribution originated
by A.D. Roy and carried forward by Tinbergen, Mandelbrot, Houthakker and Sattinger.
Finally, section V indicates some problems with applying the theory of marriage

directly to labor demand. These issues become most interesting when there are
incomplete markets that limit the gains from fully exploiting comparative advan-

tage, due to transactions costs. The results are limited, but some examples
show that any predictions concerning positive or negative assortive matching
of workers depends not only on the correlation of talents among members of the
work force, but also on the nature of technology and the distribution of demands
for various outputs.

5

II. AN INDIRECT PRODUCTION FUNCTION
A basic result on the virtues of specialization and optimum job assignments
in the presence of comparative advantage is most easily shown in the context of

a simple engineering production function with fixed coefficients. Capital is
ignored, without apology, in what follows. Let x be output and T1 be a produc-

tion activity. The technology is given by

x =

min(T1/a1,T2/a2,...,T/a)

(1)

where aj is the activity input requirement per unit output. For concreteness
think of (1) as the engineering production function for Smith's pin factory,

with the T representing all the independent steps in the production process,
such as drawing the wire, sharpening the points, and so forth. More generally,
it is natural and convenient to associate T. with independent "tasks," a collec-

tion of which constitutes a job. Let there be rn types of workers. Workers of
each type are differentiated by a capacity vector

(t1.,t2.,. .,t), j,. .,rn,

with t1. indicating the maximum amount of activity I obtainable from workers of

type j. These maximal amounts occur when a single activity is pursued full time.
However, a worker's time may be divided among several activities. Assume that
output in each activity is strictly proportional to the time devoted to it, with

no further interactions from mixing activities. Thus the direct virtues of
specialization due to indivisibilities, on—the—job learning and innovation dis-

cussed by Smith are ignored. Comparing workers

and 1, worker j will be said

to have a comparative advantage in task h relative to task k if thj/tkj >

thi/tki•

Equivalently, worker I has a comparative advantage in task k. Comparative advantage is assumed to exist in all tasks and among all types, i.e.,

6

thj/tkj

(2)

thi/tki

for all pairs (h,k) and (j,i).

A familiar diagram illustrates the situation when there are two activities

and two types. Two

workers

parative advantage in

are shown in Figure 1, A and B, with A having com-

and B in T1. An efficient assignment maximizes the

activity levels attainable from a given labor force and the efficient frontier

has two facets: Along the upper edge A is completely specialized to

and B

engages in both activities, since B is assigned to T1 first due to comparative
advantage there (fractional assignments will be the rule and not the exception

in this problem). A is completely specialized to 2 and B to T1 at the corner.
Only if the production requirement for T1 exceeds !lB is it efficient to allocate
some fraction of A's time to T1, and along the lower edge B is specialized to

while A does both. All other assignments sacrifice activities. For example
the most inefficient (the dotted line segments) assign inversely to comparative
advantage (B specialized to

and A fractionally assigned along the upper edge,

etc). Of more interest is the case of no specialization, where A and B act as
independent agents of production. Since the engineering technology dictates
activities in fixed proportions, the maximum total activity levels in this
case are the sums of A's and B's separate activity levels along arbitrary rays

through the origin——the dashed line. It is inefficient because no comparative
advantage is exploited. The gains from forming a production team and taking
advantage of different talents by optimum assignment are shown by the shaded

area. Evidently comparative advantage produces a superadditivity or synergy.
This interactive effect captures a fundamental notion of "complementarity" in
production.1

7

While this example is well known certain features have no counterpart
in its use in trade theory and form a more fundamental basis for production

theory. In particular, it is possible to derive a quasi—concave production
function in terms of bodies of each type from first principles. Consider the

problem

x =

(3)

max[min{ET1/a1 ET2/a2... ZT/a}]
ii

subject to

+ T2/t2 + ...

where

+ T/t N,, j =

l,2,...,m

(4)

is the number of workers of type j available. Then the envelope

theorem proves that there exist nonnegative multipliers (q1,.. .

quasi—concave function x =

x =

,q)

and a

F(N1,N2,.. .,N) such that

F(N1,.. .,N) = max[min{ET1/a1....
ET/a}
T
j
3
ij

j

+ Eq (N. —
3

ij

(5)

ET1 It1.)]
3

The function F(N) Is an efficient ttindirectt production function.2 Its derivatives when defined satisfy ax/N1 =

q1 and represent induced marginal products

of worker types rather than of production activities.3 The theory holds for
any n and rn, not necessarily of the same dimension, but gains considerable

practical interest when the number of activities (n) greatly exceeds the number
of types of workers (in).

8

Construction of an indirect production function in the 2 x 2 case follows

directly from Figure land illustrates thegeneral method. Consider theproblem

of producing one unit of x with alternative numbers of types of workers. If
only type A workers are available, then al/tiA + a2/t2A of them are required.
Similarly, if only B workers are available, then al/tlB ÷

necessary. Suppose t2AIt]A >

t2B/tlB

a2/t2B

as before. Then at the specialization

point in Figurel,B is assigned to l and A to T2, and if NA =

a1/t13

of them are

a2/t2A

and NB =

one unit of x is produced. These threepossibilities are shown inFigure 2.

However, Figure lshows that anylinear mixtures of A's and B's between adjacent

points in Figure 2 are efficient because they follow optimum assignments: The
two connected line segments in Figure 2 are dual to the activity possibility
frontier, with the upper edge corresponding to specialization of B (the lower

face in Figure 1) and the lower one corresponding to specialization of A. In
fact the connected lines in Figure 2 represent the efficient unit isoquant——
the level set of F(NA,NB) in this case——and serve as a perfectly adequate
basis for a production function.

There are inefficient production functions as well. For example, corresponding to no specialization in Figure 1 would be the straight line connecting

the intercepts of Figure 2. Here NA and B appear as perfect substitutes with
efficiency units measured by total product per worker. Corresponding to the
perverse assignment in Figure 1 are the lines connecting the intercepts and the

cross in Figure 2. This argument immediately shows that the efficient indirect

production function is quasi—concave: It exhibits substitution even though
the underlying factors are in some sense complements. The marginal rate of

substitution is tlB/t in the branch where B is specialized and is t2B/t2A in

9

the branch where A is specialized. These are determined by factor skill
endowments only and are independent of the technology. Imperfect substitution around the corner does depend on the technology, but its extent also

depends on the "distance" between skill endowments of worker types. A different configuration of input requirements, a1, changes the location of the

corner. Whatever its location, curvature around the corner depends on the
extent of comparative advantage t2A/tlA *

t2B/tlB•

The experiment resulting inFigure 2 fixed the unit isoquant in the (T1,T2)

plane and varied the number of workers of each type to maintain output, always
efficiently assigning worders to activities along the way. These variations
alter the intercepts and location of the corner of the efficient frontier in
Figure 1, but leave the slope of each facet unchanged. Where the activity iso—

quant touches a facet and not a corner of the frontier, A and B workers have
one activity in conmion and it is this commonality that determines the marginal

rate of substitution between them in the efficient indirect production function.
The same experiment applies when the underlying engineering technology admits
some substitution among activities, though the induced substitution among
worker types is somewhat tempered. Figure 3 illustrates the experiment in such a

case. Variations in NA and NB beyond certain limits result in unique tangents
between the unit isoquant and the activity possibility frontier at points C and

d (these degenerate to a single point in the fixed coefficient case). NA and
share one activity at these points, which establishes a unique MRS between

them as before. Between these limits the isoquant touches the frontier at a
corner, the A's and the B's share no activities and the indirect MRS between

and B merely follows the direct MRS between

and I2 The indirect MRS

10

is trapped by tlB/t and t2B/t and varies smoothly in between. Hence an iso—
quant of the indirect production function would appear just as it does in Figure 2,

except with a rounded corner. Whatever the nature of substitution among activities, the indirect production function displays more substitution than the engineering technology because of the substitution possibilities in the assignment
of workers to jobs in addition to direct substitution among activities.
The argument is readily extended to n activities and involves the same two
steps of first finding efficient assignments of workers to activities to construct
the efficient activities possibility set, and then varying the number of workers
of each type, maintaining efficient assignments and mapping out the indirect production function.

The efficient activity possibility set is found by solving an artificial

maximum problem (see Dorfman, Samuelson and Solow). Define a set of shadow prices

p1 one for each activity. In context these might be thought of as piece rates.
Maximize the value of production activities subject to the capacities of each
type of worker and determine how these assignments are related to the implicit

prices. There is a simple analytic solution in the nx2 case. Consider the
problem

V =

maxfp1(T +

T1B) + p2(T2 + T2B) + ...

+

pn(T + TflB)}

(6)

ij

Subject to

T/t + T2A/t2A + ... +

T/t NA
(7)

T1B/tlB

+ T2B/t2B + ...

+

TB/tB NB

)

11

The dual problem requires choosing shadow prices on worker types to minimize

V =

lnln(rANA + rBNB}

(8)

subject to

nt
A iA >p
- I
I =

l,...,n

(9)

rB/tIB Pi

rA and rB in (8) and (9) may be Interpreted as wage rates of each type. Thus

(6) maximizes production value, while (8) minimizes cost. Since the primal
problem involves two constraints, the soiition to (8) requires that exactly two
constraints in (9) are binding, so that there aren2 possiblesolutlons. Of these,

n solutions are immediate. They require both rA =

l,...,n,

and correspond to the case where

tp1 and rB =

tiBpi

for I =

is so large that both A's and B's

work only at task T1 (the intercepts in fig. 1). However, the solution to (6)
may involve two noncongruent activities, say T1 and T,., Illustrated by the in-

terior corner solutionin Figure 1. Suppose Ahas comparative advantage at T1 and

B has comparative advantage at T. Consider the solution

rA/t =

and rB/tjB =
Pj

so that A is assigned to
that

(10)

and B to T. Then it must also be true from (9)

12

rA/t.A >

pj

(11)

and rB/tB >

Equations (10) and (11) imply

tp1 > tiAPi

and tjBPj >

(12)

tiBPi

or

tiB/tiB >

Pi/Pi

>

(13)

tjA/tiA

which holds true for some pS/p.,, given the comparative advantage assumption.

If B had been assigned to Ti and A to

tiB/tiB <

Pi/Pi

<

the same logic leads to the inequality

(14)

tiA/tiA

which cannot possibly hold true given A's comparative advantage on T1, and is

therefore nonoptimal. Continuing in this way for all (i,j) pairs (i

j) it

is seen that n(n—l)/2 possible assignments of workers to activities must be

nonoptimal; and only [n + n(n—1)/2] of the possible n2 solutions form a
basis for the efficient activity possibility set.

Finding the efficient frontier requires determining prices {}

that

imply

degenerate solutions to (6). The 3x2 case illustrate the method.4 For the
sake of example, suppose t2A/tlA >

t3B/tlB

t2B/t1B t/t3A > t2B/t3B and t3A/t >

Let V1 represent the maximum value of activities in (6) and (8)

when type A workers are optimally assigned to T and B workers are assigned

13

to T. The argument leading to (13) shows that V12, V13 and V32 cannot be
optimum for this problem. Array the other possibilities in a matrix, with

row I representing the assignment of A's to Ti and row representing the

assignment of B's to T. If

does not rest on optimal assignments, its

value is left blank in the matrix. In the case under consideration

pltlANA + pltlBNB

{v1} =

p2tNA

+ pltlBNB

p2t2ANA + p2t2BNB

P2t2ANA + p3t3BNB .

(15)

p3t3ANA + p3t3BNB

p3t3ANA + pltlBNB

The fully degenerate solutions to (6) or (8) imply equality among various

combinations of the elements of V1. They can be found as follows.
Consider the assignment of A to T1 and B to T1, which is optimal if

large enough. Then V11 =

pltNA+pltlBNB.

is

Given some arbitrary values

of (p1,2,3) consistent with the optitnality of V11, find the minimum
possible value of

that maintains V11 optimal. Notice in (15) that only

V11, V21 and V31 are altered as

varies. A fully degenerate solution

t/t

corresponding to a facet of the efficient frontier therefore implies
V11 = V21 = V31, or the equivalent restrictions p2/p1 =
=

t3A/t]A

Now consider the element V21. Here two experiments are

required, since V21 is a function of both

minimum value of

and

and p. First, find the

consistent with the optimality of V21. This also

Implies V11 = V21 = V31, or the same restriction on the p's as before.
Second, change p2 and find its minimum consistent with the assumed optimality

14

of V21. Since only V21, V22 and V23 are changed when p2 varies, another
fully degenerate solution corresponding to another facet of the efficient
frontier implies V21 = V22 = V23, or the restrictions p2/p1 =
p21p3 =

t3B/t2B•

and

Proceeding in this fashion for all the elements of

leads to only one more restriction, namely p3/p1 =

tlB/t3B

and p2/p3 =

t3A/t2A

Hence the efficient frontier has exactly three facets, one for each restric-

tion. It is shown in Figure 4 (c.f. Whitin). The restriction implied by
V11 = V21 = V31 corresponds to the lower triangular facet. Here B is

completely specialized to T1, while A's engage in all three activities. The
restriction implied by V21 = V22 = V33 corresponds to the upper triangular
facet; there A is completely specialized to

and B engages in all three

activities. Finally, the remaining restriction, V31 = V23 = V33 corresponds
to the quadralateral, where A is assigned to activities

and T3, while

B is assigned to T1 and T3. Notice that within each facet, A and B have
precisely one activity in common.5 The argument readily extends to the
nx2 case, and the efficient activities polyhedron has the same number of
facets as activities, so long as (2) holds.

Construction of an indirect production function in the 3—activities

case is shown in Figure 5. Each connected line segment corresponds to a
facet of the efficient frontier, with the marginal rate of substitution

determined by the commonality of activities there. Evidently the argument
above shows that if there are n activities the indirect isoquant consists
of n connected line setments. Clearly, as it grows large the indirect
production function gets arbitrarily smooth and neoclassical.
It remains to be shown that the indirect production function is

supported by a price system. That this is so follows from the analysis

15

of (6) and (7). Suppose workers are paid in proportion to their activity
output at unit rewards

and individually choose production activities

to maximize their incomes. For example, each worker of type A chooses TiA
to maximize

p1T1A + p2T2A + ...

+

(16)

subject to

TlA/t + T/t2A + •.. +

T/t 1,

(17)

and similarly for workers of type B. But the solution to (16) is exactly
the same as the solution to (6). Therefore, the market solution is efficient.
The rest follows from the fact that the market shadow prices or piece
are prescribed by the efficient activities frontier, as shown

rates

above. Consequently, the factor price frontier of the indirect production
function (5) in terms of wage rates, r., consists of n isolated points
corresponding to each facet of the efficient activity frontier, each one
of which is dual to a facet of an isoquant.

For example, in the 3x2

example discussed above, the factor price frontier in the (rA,rB) plane
lies along the three rays rA/rB =
rA/rB =

t3A/t3B•

t/tlB,

rA/rB =

t/t2B,

and

The first ray corresponds to the lower triangular facet

in Figure 4. Here a person of type A is indifferent among all three

activities, while B's definitely prefer activity 1. Hence rA Plt =

p2t2A

=

P3t3A

and rB =

PltlB

and so forth for all three facets.6 Finally,

the construction of the indirect isoquant explicitly shows that the marginal

16

rate of substitution along each of its facets equals the wage ratio there.
Consequently, maximizing the indirect production function subject to a

wage—cost constraint on bodies truly does maximize output. Any

indeter-

minacy on the interior of a line segment is eliminated because Na and NB
are given.

We have exhibited a mechanism for incorporating the concepts of
skill into neoclassical production theory via the assignment of workers to
jobs, and shown how an observable indirect production function is mapped

out by variations in factor supply conditions. A number of consequences
follow:

(1) The construction points out some potential pitfalls in using
published occupational classes for productivity analysis, since the
definition of an occupation in terms of a collection of work activities is

not invariant and endogenously depends on factor supplies. Workers with
similar skill endowments will be found on different work assignments, since
differences in factor supplies locate them on different facets of the
indirect production function (e.g., the upper, lower, or middle branches
of Figure 5). This difficulty is tempered ináofar as occupational classif 1—
cations index "capacities" rather than actual endogenous job assignments.
The stated principles of occupational classification are not encouraging
in this regard, but examination of the actual classifications suggests
increasing logical difficulties with the level of disaggregation.

(ii) If worker types are tentatively identified with observed
economic—demographic categories such as years of schooling, the above shows
precisely how education enters production, thus providing a link between

supplies of human capital and less well—analyzed demands for them. Since

17

differences in capacities among worker types automatically induces substitution In the indirect production function, fixed wage weighted indexes of
labor input for total factor productivity Indexes are subject to well known
substitution bias that can be easily understood in terms of this framework.
A more subtle difficulty emerges if the capacity vectors among the various

observed categories change over time, as seems likely. Unless these changes
approximate uniformity over all classes, the indirect production function
Is shifted nonhomogeneously, and both total factor productivity and the

"systematic" part of the production function are altered through time. The
latter shows up as "biased technical change." It seems probable that
variable weight Divisia type indexes advocated by Jorgenson and Griliches

might eliminate part of the problem. But it is by no means apparent that
they solve it completely.

iii. For cross—sectional analysis of production and demand, one
must be reasonably confident that the observed "capacity" classifications

are more or less uniform across data points. If not, price—quantity
observations are not mapped out of a common structure. It is not difficult
to derive examples whereby estimated substitution possibilities may be
either greater or less than the true possibilities when productivity differences within classes over the observations exist but are not statistically

controlled. In particular, one might expect this problem to be most severe
in the case of international comparisons. Simple though It is, a virtue
of this framework is in clarifying the meaning of "international differences

in technology." It is possible and plausible that there exist no differences
in direct engineering production functions, yet differences among indirect
observable production functions arise if there are differences in capacity

18

endowments among the relevant populations. The often observed fact that
a factory in the U.S. is more productive than its identical twin in a less
developed country is partially due to the fact that the work assignments
inherent in the design of capital equipment areoptimal for the U.S. labor
force, but are definitely suboptimal for the foreign labor force because
of differences in the extent and distributions of worker comparative
advantage.

iv. This construction helps understand the well known phenomena
of skill bumping associated with layoffs and business cycles (see Reder).
So long as layoffs are not proportional across worker types, short run
employment declines imply corresponding reassignments of work activities
among employed workers, a kind of short—run substitution effect as it were.
Any differential adjustment costs that insulate some groups from transitory
demand shocks has the effect of flip—flopping work assignments among various

branches of the indirect production function isoquant. If in addition the
fixed factors (capital) embody work routines that are optimal for longer term,
permanent conditions, the short—term observations may even switch over to
inefficient regions of the indirect production function, implying systematic
variations in measured labor productivity that are consistent with observed

phenomena. Extending Stigler's idea of flexibility to this problem suggests
less specialization and rigidity of work routines in cyclically sensitive
industries to minimize these short—run inefficiencies.

v. That workers' skills are developed over the course of their
labor market and work experiences is central to the theory of human capital

and implies a progression of work assignments over the life cycle. Thus
life cycle variation in the capacity vectors t1. is to be expected and the

19

indirect production function suggests imperfect substitution among age groups
or cohorts, a fact that is difficult to understand in the usual neoclassical

model in terms of efficiency units. It follows that the size of a cohort
may have an effect on relative cohort earnings throughout its life cycle.
Being a member of a relatively large birth cohort may haunt one for a whole

lifetime, as in Easterlin's relative income—fertility hypothesis. This also
would appear to explain why alternative vintages of graduates in some professional markets (notably the present academic market) fare relatively better

or worse when general demand conditions are changed. It also suggests a
common cohort variance component in wage rates that renders the covariance
between starting salary and lifetime income larger than one might otherwise
suppose, and thus makes initial salary a better predictor of new entry than
the standard permanent—transitory decomposition-would suggest.

20

III. PRODUCTION POSSIBILITIES
We turn now to the case where the number of worker categories

exceeds the number of activities. Consider technologies using two
activities and denote the efficient activities frontier by F(T1,T2) =

0.

Now add a third type, C, to the construction of Figure 1, with comparative

advantage somewhere between A and B: t2A/t]A >

t/tc

>

t2B/t1B

Then

the activities possibility set would have three facets instead of two, with

slopes corresponding to these ratios. As still more types are added, more
facets appear, filling in the corners of Figure 1 and smoothing out

0.

F(T1,T2) =

Its limiting behavior can be derived by making use of the

result of (13) and (14) that a price system and free choice implies efficient

assignments. Discussion is confined to the two activity case, which generalizes immediately to ii

activities.

Consider a randomly chosen person with capacity vector (t1,t2).
Then his potential income is p1T1 + p2T2 and is constrained by
T1/t1 + T2/t2 .

1.

Potential income in the (T1,T2) plane is described by

a family of straight lines with slope —p1/p2. The time—resource constraint

is also described by a straight line with slope —t2/t1.
full time to activity 2 maximizes income if t2/t1 >

Devoting

p1/p2 and similarly for

activity 1 if the inequality goes in the opposite direction. The worker is
indifferent among activities if the ratio of his capacities equals the price

ratio. Thus, there is a convenient ordering of choice by workers according

to comparative advantage: Pick an arbitrary price ratio, p E p1/p2. Then
on the efficient frontier all workers with comparative advantage in excess
of p are optimally assigned to activity 2 and actually choose it, while all
those with comparative advantage less than p are assigned to activity 1.

21

As the number of types of workers becomes indefinitely large the pairs
and

are

conveniently described by a density function f(t1,t2), with

each worker belonging to a point in the (t1,t2) plane. The activity possibilities frontier is defined parametrically by the conditional expectations

T1 =

T2 =

pt1

J0 f t1f(t1,t2)dt1dt2 =

g(p)

(18)

t2f(t1,t2)dt1dt2 =

h(p)

(19)

J

J

and Is "swept out" of the density f(t1,t2) as p varies from zero (everyone

assigned to T2) to infinity (everyone assigned to T1). Furthermore,
differentiating (18) and (19) yields

g'(p) =

h' (p) =

dT1/dp

dT2/dp

=
t1f(t1,pt1)dt1

J

=

—

J

pt1f(t1,pt1)dt1

(20)

(21)

which Implies that the slope of the efficient frontier is the shadow price
ratio itself:

dT2/dT1 =

h'(p)/g'(p)

=

—p.

(22)

Further application of the implicit function theorem demonstrates that

d2T2/dT

0, so that F(T1,T2) = 0 is quasi—concave.

22

D
Example:

Let the distribution of t1 and t2 in the labor force be

independent, strongly Paretian. Then f(t1,t2) =
>

Ma2t1a] t1 for

1, t2 > 1, where N is the number of workers and

is a fixed parameter

greater than unity. Applying (18) and (19) gives7

kApC

T1

pl
k(lPa) + kXPa

and
T1

= k(l—p)

kAp

T2

+ XkpC

pl

-a+1

with k = Mci/a—i, A = a/2c&—1, which yields

T2 = ku + (x_l)(T1/kA)'cu] for T1 < kA

=

k[l +

(A—1)(T2/kA)1] for T1

kA

T
T2

The activity frontier is composed of two symmetric branches that link up
with a common slope of unity at T1 = T2

kA.

The shape of F(T1,T2) is determined wholly by the parameter .

As

gets large, workers' capacities become increasingly concentrated on

(1,1), they become more nearly alike, and F(T1,T2) = 0 approaches a straight

line. Clearly the construction of Figure 1 and its extension to many types

23

reveals that curvature In the activity possibility frontier depends on
worker diversity in comparative advantage, and diversity is minimized when

a is large. The behavior of F as a approaches unity is more complicated
because the unconditional means of t1 and t2 become unbounded. However,
the logic about diversity suggests that F(T1,T2) should become more like a
square, with a sharply rounded corner at T1 =

T2, and that is indeed the

case. For a between these limits F(T1,T2) has a shape rather like a portion
of an ellipse characteristic of the way production sets are typically drawn

in economics. For example, for a = 2 it appears like a flattened quarter
circle.

Evidently the envelope theorem can be applied when rn > ii, but it

is not terribly interesting to do so because the engineering technology

already is of minimum dimension. However, just as increasing the number
of activities smoothed out the indirect production function in section II,
a similar result applies here to production possibility sets in the economy

at large. Consider two goods with technologies

x1 = min{T1/a11,T2/a21}

X2 = min{T1/a12,T2/a22}.

The production possibilities set maximizes X2 given
Its construction is shown in Figures 6 and 7.

0.

and F(T1,T2) =

In spite of the assumption

of fixed coefficient technologies, the macro production set is smooth and

all workers are fully employed. Here is another example of smooth neoclassical macro behavior deriving from underlying distributional micro
phenomena that forms an adequate basis for macro equilibrium theory, but

is rather different from the usual construction. Notice how the activity

24

set of Figure 6 maps into the production set in Figure 7 by the addition
of two vectors (each representing an allocation of activities to each good)

summing to a point on F(T1,T2). Each division of output is supported by
a unique shadow price ratio p and a corresponding division of the labor
force among activities; and the effect of the distribution of output and
product demand conditions on the distribution of earnings is immediately

revealed. Also, comparative advantage in goods production clearly depends
on the distribution of talents in the labor force, a natural and manageable
extension of the Heckscher—Ohljn kind of results to "many factors."

)

25

IV.

A LATENT FACTOR APPROACH

An alternative methodology for labor aggregation has been proposed
by Welch. The technology is specified in terms of unobserved latent factors
or "characteristics", with observed labor categories embodying the latent

characteristics in alternative proportions. It is further assumed that any
given factor requirement can be achieved by linear combinations of worker
types, which implies a kind of perfect substitution among types depending

on the characteristics they embody. If all worker types are to be fully
employed, relative wage rates cannot deviate from the fixed technical rates

of substitution between them. Further, if the number of latent factors is
less than the number of worker categories, a basis for aggregating observed
classes to a smaller dimensionality has been found.
Let the production function be X =
latent factors, with i =

l,...,v.

G(Z), where Z

are the unobserved

There are rn classes of workers, with rn > v,

and each class is completely described by an endowment vector (Z1.,Z2.,;..,z.),
j =

1,...

factor

,rn.

I is

N. is the number of workers of type .

The total endowment of

= EZ .N and full employment output is determined by X =
j ij j

G(Z).

At full employment output, the marginal product of the ith latent factor

defines an implicit price for it,W, up to a factor of proportionality:
G1(Z) = bW1, where b is a normalizing constant, and

the income, ,

of

a member of the ith class must be

W1Z11 + W2Z21 +•+ WvZi = y1

for I =

l,...,n

(23)

In addition, the linear combinability assumption implies that the latent

26

characteristic vector embodied in any group can be built up by a linear

combination of exactly v other groups, e.g., there exist constants c. not
necessarily all positive such that8

c.Z
+c2jl2
Z +...+c.Z
=Z.
vjlv
lj
ljll
C1Z21 + c2Z22 + ... +

CZ2 = Z2

(24)

j =

c.Z
+c.Z
+...+c.Z
ljvl
vjvv
2jv2

v+l,... ,m

Z.
vj

Finally, by the market equilibrium property (23) of a common implicit
price for each latent factor, (24) implies

y. =

c1y1

+ c2.y2 + ...

÷

cvjyv

j =

v+l,...,m

(25)

There are rn—v linear restrictions on the observed wages of the rn groups,

or only v independent sources of variation in observed wages. These inde—
pendent categories are the basis for aggregating the rn observed categories
to v linear combinations.

For empirical implementation one uses cross—section data (subeconomies)
with the total endowments Z differing across observations, maintaining the

assumption of a common latent structure Z1. For example, suppose the
observations are mean earnings of various education—experience classes

across states (indexed by k). Assume thatZjk =

Z.

for all i,j,k, but

27

let Nik vary across states. Variation in Z1 arises from differences in Nik
and provokes differences in implicit prices Wik among the states. (23)
becomes

jk

=

WlkZli

+ W2kZ2j + ...

+ WZ.

j =

1,... ,n

(26)

and may be viewed as a factor—analytic statistical model, where the implicit
prices Wik represent v latent factors and the Z's represent factor "loadings."

Notice that (26) is not identified. However, the assumption Zijk =

Z.

implies that the same linear restrictions (24) apply to all observational

units. Hence (25) becomes

jk

=

cijYlk

+

+
C2jY2k

+

cVYVk

j =

v+l,... ,n

(27)

and may be viewed as a system of ni—v regression equations in v "independent"

variables. The c's are regression coefficients. Given a specification of
exactly v underlying factors, (27) may be estimated by regression methods,

clj,...,cvj are identified for all j, and have the ready interpre-

tation of fixed marginal rates of substitution among types. Note that (26)
is not constant across observations because differing endowments cause cor-

responding differences in implicit prices Wik. The method works because (27)
is independent of endowments, due to the repackaging assumptions imposed on

the latent factors. This suggests a test for the number of unobserved
factors: If (27) is correct and there are exactly v factors, then adding
observed numbers of workers Nik to the regressions should have no explanatory

power. It is by no means clear how such an hypothesis is nested however.

28

This model is correct and ingenious, given its assumptions. Still it
is interesting to see what happens when the assumption of a single homogenous

good is relaxed. For illustrative purposes, assume two goods with different
technologies in two latent factors. Figure 8 depicts the situation in terms
of a modified box diagram. The dimensions of the box are given by the total
endowments (z1z2) in the subeconomy (observational unit) and the contract

locus is shown as usual by the smooth curve. However, not all points on the
contract curve are feasible because workers come in fixed bundles of latent

factors. The diamond shaped area within the box represents the set of
feasible allocations and its edges represent the boundary of the parallelo-

gram sums of vectors of fixed endowments of each type of worker. The diamond
has as many facets as the number of classes of workers (in). The area between
its edges and the edges of the box cannot be obtained from feasible linear

combinations of worker types. Suppose output demand conditions result in
an equilibrium at a point on the interior (such as a). Then the mutual
tangency of isoquants there establishes unique implicit factor prices W as

before, and (26) and (27) remain valid. However, output demand conditions
may result in an equilibrium along an edge (such as point b). Now there is
no longer a single price of factors. Instead there are two sets of implicit

factor prices, one for each industry. Seemingly, this difficulty can be
handled empirically by extending the observations to industrial classifica-

tions within regions or states. This should work because the transformation
from (24) to (27) washes out factor price differences among both regions and
industries due to the fact that the same linear packaging restrictions among

workers apply to all industries and regions. Letting 1 denote industry,
the hypothesis Zjjkl =

Z

must be maintained for this method to be valid.

29

In other words, it must be assumed that there exist no industry—specific

skills, or no latent factors specific to industries. At this point it could
be argued, and maybe correctly, that (27) still applies in the presence of
industry—specific skills if the estimation is confined within industries
(i.e., a model such as (27) for each industry, allowing the c's to vary among
industries).

The basic difference between this model and one presented above lies

in the packaging assumptions. (24) implies statements such as "eight elementary school graduates plus three college graduates are productively equiv-

alent to 13 high school graduates." These kinds of restrictions make no
sense in the models presented here, because workers are selected into productive activities according to their comparative advantage and there exists

a great deal of economic rent in earnings, contrary to (25). In those models,
productivity is comparable among workers who engage in the same activity,
but not between activities because different work activities requtr.e and

make use of different talents. Presumably Billy Rose's manual dexterity
played a small role in his activities as an impressario. Indeed, section II
demonstrates precisely how imperfect substitution derives from the existence

of comparative advantage and specialization. 1se factors play no role
whatsoever in (24) and (27).
A latent factor, characteristics model is still available for these

models, however. It takes quite a different form from (26) and has some
interesting features for analyzing the distribution of earnings. Consider
the model of section III, and recall that the capacities of each worker were
taken as exogenous (though perhaps affected by prior schooling decisions,

family background, etc.). We can go one step back in this process. Consider
the following linear specification:

30

=

(28) may

be

b

+ b1Z1 ÷ b2iZ2 + ... +

b1Z

I =

l,...,

(28)

considered to be a "production function", where a worker's

skill capacity in activity I is determined by v latent factors or charac-

teristics. The "marginal productivity" b1 of the jth factor in producing
the ith skill is allowed to vary among skills and each worker is described

by a point in the space of Z. The general equilibrium In the economy, including product demand conditions, determines a set of implicit prices for each

activity as above. Potential earnings in activity i are p1t1, and

yj =

Pt = 1)ib0i + 1iiiZi + .... +

PibviZv

(29)

Now (29) bears a similarity to (25), but its interpretation is altogether

different. It Is useful to think of (29) as having a factor—analytic structure, but here the Z's are the latent factors, while the pb's are factor load-

ings that are similar to prices, just the reverse of (25). Finally, assume
the latent factors are distributed according to some joint probability density

O(ZiZv)• In multivariate analysis it is customary to assume that e is
log normal, but that is too restrictive for our purposes.
From here there are two methods of proceeding:
(1) Use (29) to transform the distribution of latent factors 0 to the

distribution of potential income, 4(y1,.. .,y). It is to be emphasized that
is a distribution of earning potential. To get the distribution of actual
earnings, employ the choice rule of sections II and III that individuals choose

activities that maximize their income. Then the distribution of observed
earnings in activity i is conditioned on the fact that the earnings of people

31

people found in it is greater than they could have achieved in other activities:
The distribution of observed earnings, y1, in activity i follows the conditional density

=

=

Pr(y1y1

Yj
'o

>

y1...,y1

>

y11,

>

i

g).dy/Pr(y1 > y,...,

>

y)

y >

(30)

This kind of model was first elaborated by A. D. Roy. The main point is that
observed earnings distributions are truncations from the distribution of

earnings potential.9 Comparison of observed means across activities lead to
ubiquitous "selectivity bias", just as in the controversies about "ability

bias"in return to schooling computations. The extent and nature of these
biases evidently depends on patterns of correlation in the distribution of
earnings potential (see Roy; also Lewis, Maddala and Heckman for more modern

development). Roughly speaking, strong positive correlations among the y
lead to greater selectivity bias. Finally, the overall distribution of
observed earnings is a weighted sum

of

these truncated distributions (see

Houthakker for a simple instructive example).
(ii) Alternatively, and equivalently, one may

partition

space (Z) into acceptance regions, where max {y1,y2,. .

. ,y}

=

the factor

y1 in region i.

This is the approach of Mandeibrot, and brings out the selection aspects of

observed earnings more clearly.10 These acceptance regions are cones11 completely determined by the relations (29). For example, suppose (29) load
very heavily on a single factor, with the effects of other factors

being negligible. This factor could be thought of as some kind of general

32

ability or human capital, which transforms differently into specific produc-

tive activity capacities. Then the sorting of workers to activities tends
to be severely stratified, with the most capable workers found in the most
remunerative jobs, the next most capable found in the next most remunerative

jobs and so forth. The income distributions across activities follows a
similar rank order, because the single factor induces large positive corre-

lations in the distribution of potential earnings 0(y). The same hierarchical
stratification would occur in the presence of many factors if there were

sufficiently strong positive correlations among them. However, casual observations suggest a much more complex pattern of loadings and correlations,
in which case observed assignments need not follow any clear hierarchical

patterns. Nevertheless, the partition of Z into acceptance sets implies that
people with characteristics within well defined limits are found in each

activity. The selection phenomena remains, whatever the distribution of
factors.

33

A NOTE ON THE THEORY OF MARRIAGE

V.

We have been able to go some distance in analyzing part of Smith's
famous proposition on the division of labor, based entirely on specialization

and comparative advantage. All results above are independent of size; and
the price system is efficient and achieves the optimal degree of specializa-

tion, given the resource constraint, for any scale of operations. Thus
comparative advantage itself provides little insight into the more profound
and difficult part of Smith's proposition linking specialization with the extent

of the market. The reason for this lies in the linearity assumptions and
absence of indivisibilities imposed on the present model, which imply that
total service flows within each of the various activities are all that matter,
independently of the distribution of embodied talents among members of the

labor force. Under these circumstances the implicit prices of services
efficiently clear all markets and depend only on total skill potential in the
economy, not on how skills come prepackaged in indivisible bodies)2 These
assumptions appear to be reasonable approximations for those activities,

such as pin making and other production work that have fairly clear—cut and
identifiable outputs. However, they would appear to fail for many other
activities where output is less clearly defined: Two mediocre economists or
doctors or lawyers do not necessarily add up to some multiple of a "good"

one. In terms of the marriage market analogy, the price system described
above does indeed optimally select workers to jobs, but the distribution of
workers across firms and the question of "who works with whom" is simply

irrelevant. In this sense super—polygamous marriages in the labor market
are pareto optimal, given the assumptions!
It is clear that any theory of selection of worker quality matched to
firm

quality

must confront the indivisibility issue at ground zero. The

34

result must be to make firms play a much more active role in the sorting

process than has been described above. In addition to Smith's elegant discussion, more recent work on the theory of the firm (Aichian and Demsetz)
and the theory of signaling (Stiglitz) suggests a possible route by way
of technical externalities and true joint production in the underlying
engineering technology, thus giving an incentive for entrepreneurial activ—
itv in assembling an optimal production team and an optimal distribution

of talents within the firm. However, the discussion above points to another
fundamental source of indivisibility and that is in the operation of markets

themselves (Stigler). At a low level of output, the fixed cost of marketing
specialized talents in point sharpening, wire stretching and so forth cannot

be covered because these markets would be too thinly traded. If so, then there
are clear gains from entrepreneurial activity assembling an optimal work
force outside the market mechanism.

The following example illustrates some of the resulting complexities.
Consider a fixed coefficients production process in two work activities,
and T2, and let there be four workers, A, B, C, and D, each described by

capacity vectors as before. We know that a marriage of the four is efficient and instead look for some second—best solutions due to market failure.
The restriction that workers must be assigned to two—person production teams
is arbitrarily imposed, thus allowing use of the assignment algorithm of
Koopmans and Beckmann or the marriage market solution proposed by Becker.
One possibility is shown in Figure 9, where there is a clear rank order

of

comparative

advantage and no absolute advantage. The second—best activity

frontiers

are built up by forming all possible pairwise frontiers, as in

Figure 1,

and

then adding them up along all possible rays through the origin.13

35

As shown, a negative sorting by comparative advantage is second best for all

technologies. The efficiency loss from incomplete markets is proportional
to the radial distance between the efficient frontier and the negatively

sorted frontier, and is close to zero for some technologies. That negative
sorting is not an automatic result of comparative advantage is shown in

Figure 10. Here the negative assortment frontier crosses the positive assortment frontier and the second—best solution is the envelope of the two.

With this distribution of talent, negative sorting is best for some technol-

ogies and positive sorting is best for others. Again, the efficiency loss
is negligible for some technologies. Note that there is a curious asymmetry
about these second—best solutions: They require four prices, one for each
worker, which combine to more than two implicit prices for activities. The
costs of assembly are greater because more information is required on this

account. Yet the differential public goods aspects of each kind of marketing
system may sustain the second—best solution even if its total resource costs
exceed operating markets in skills rather than in people.

36

I

x

7.;-

Ic',.,

t1J,i i
C

1

I
'7

' g1

7"

eli,

r3

a4

1• tt
F17. r

7;
xz

Xi

P/s. 6

Fig. '7

a..uQ*11!r

7.

EI,64,/

'

Pea,r,V So,' Cf4an)

74i/E SOJT

Sour
(qo, cz)

4.
18

4'

F,. 9

tic

/0

38

)

FOOTNOTES

1. As simple as it is, this variant of the familiar gains from trade
argument seems to be unrecognized in this connection. It shows how specialization without indivisibility leads to something that looks like an economy
of scale, though it is not a scale economy in the usual sense, since all the

production functions derived from it below are linear. Ames has attempted
to build up a Smithian technology by a series of nested neoclassical produc-

tion functions. However, if all the nested functions exhibit constant returns,
so must the aggregate function and the synergistic effects exhibited here
do not arise.

2. The following is not unlike the usual construction of neoclassical
isoquants in a linear programming framework (e.g., see Baumol), because they

are both applications of the same envelope theorem. The novelty here lies
in the nature of the constraints and in the substantive conception of the
problem.

3. In the nature of the case, constraints (4) are binding at an optimum.
Also, only left or right—hand derivatives may be defined for some N (see below).
4.

(6) and (7) of course have a solution for any nxm dimension, and

the envelope theorem always guarantees existence of an indirect production

function. However, analyzing its properties requires finding the efficient
activity possibility frontier and I have only been able to do so In the nx2 base.
The reason is that the assignment restrictions such as (13) and (14) are

39

considerably more complex when m exceeds 2. For example, see Jones for the
nxn case. It is clear that the parametric method used here is not very useful
for m >

2.

5. If the comparative advantage assumptions are different from those

specified, there will be a different pattern of blank entries in (15). Nevertheless, the same argument shows that there are three facets on the efficient
polyheron, though their orientation will be different from those in Figure 4.
Also, if there is no comparative advantage in some activities, the number of

facets may be less than 3. This same point applies to the nx2 case.

6. Recall that a point on the factor price frontier maps to a flat on
the isoquant and that a flat on the factor price frontier goes to a corner of

an isoquant. To find the absolute values of the r's on the factor price
frontier, use the restriction Ep.c& = 1 to solve for the p's along each facet
of the activity frontier, and use the choice—indifference restrictions to

solve for r and r
A
B. With n activities and complete comparative advantage,
.

the factor price frontier obviously lies along n rays.

7. The integration must be split into two regimes because of the lower

bounds on t1and t2 in the Pareto distribution. The choice of an example
based on Pareto's law is not fortuitous, but follows Houthakker's well known

example, to which this model bears a distinct family resemblance. Closed
form solutions for F(T1,T2) are not available for other simple distributions
such as the exponential or the lognormal.
8.

first V

I have arbitrarily expressed these restrictions in terms of the

types, though any v distinct groups will do.

40

9. I had originally thought that these kinds of selection phenomena
could themselves account for observed skewness of earnings distributions with

symmetrical distributuions of underlying factors. One can construct examples
where this is so, but it need not be true in general. The reason is that the
correlations among the Vs may imply truncations in some activities from both
above and below; and even if truncation occurs in the lower tail for all

activities, the configuration of implicit prices p may affect the within—
activity means in ways that do not produce the simple kind of skewness
observed in overall earnings distributions.

10. Mandeibrot begins with a formulation such as (29) and specifies
o to be (weak) Paretian, though no underlying economic structure of the model

is elaborated. Such a generating structure has been established above.
What seems odd about (29) at first glance and without a theoretical structure
is that prices of factors vary from activity to activity, a result that has
been amply justified above.

11. This is easily seen when the equations in (29) are homogeneous
(b01 =

0) and there are two factors. Then the acceptance sets are open cones

defined by rays through the origin. In the nonhomogeneous case, the cones may be
closed and the partitions are less easy to compute.

12. This discussion abstracts from assortments of workers across firms
according to nonpecuniary aspects of work and other consumption values offered

by firms. Such a theory is available (Rosen) and could be grafted onto this
one without too much difficulty. The presence of income effects would seem
to imply observed talent stratification of workers across firms, but that is beside
the point here.

41

13. A point on each pair's frontier defines an element of K—B's payoff
matrix and their solution maximizes the sum of payoffs. There is sufficient
structure on this problem to derive a graphical solution. In the presence
of a continuous distribution of talents, some additional insight might be
obtained by setting up an optimum control problem, but I have not been able
to do so.

42

REFERENCES

Alchian,

A. A., and H. Demsetz, "Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization," American Economic Review, 1972.

Ames, E., "That's No Paradox, It's a Pin Factory," Purdue University, 1965.
Baumol, W., Economic Theory and Operations Analysis, Prentice—Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1965.

Becker, G., "A Theory of Marriage," in T. W. Schultz (ed.), The Economics
of the Family, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1974.
Dorfman, R., P. Samuelson, and R. Solow, Linear Programming and Economic
Analysis, McGraw—Hill, New York, 1958.

Easterlin, R., "Toward a Socio—Economic Theory of Fertility: A Survey of
Recent Research on Economic Factors in American Fertility," in
S. J. Behrman, L. Corsa and R. Freedman (eds.), Fertility and
Family Planning, A World View, University of Michigan Press,
Ann
Heckman,

J.,

Arbor,

1969.

"The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,

Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables," University of
Chicago, 1976.

Houthakker, H., "The Size Distribution of Labor Incomes Derived from the
Distribution of Attitudes," in W. Sellekaerts (ed.), Econometrics

and Economic Theory: Essays in Honor of Jan Tinbergen, Macmillan,
New York, 1975.
_____________

"Pareto

in Demand

Distributions and the Cobb—Douglas Production Function

Analysis,"

Review of Economic Studies, 1955—56.

Jones, R., "Comparative Advantage and the Theory of Tariffs: A Multi—
Country, Multi—Commodity Model," Review of Economic Studies, 1961.

43

Jorgenson, D. W., and Z. Griliches, "The Explanation of Productivity Change,"
Review of Economic Studies, 1967.

Koopmans, T. C., and M. Beckmann, "Assignment Problems and the Location of
Economic Activities," Econometrica, 1957.
Lewis, H. G., "Comments

on Selectivity Biases in Wage Comparisons,"

Journal of Political Economy, 1974.
Maddala, C. S., "Self—Selectivity Problems in Econometric Models," University
of Florida, 1976.

Mandeibrot, B., "Paretian Distributions and Income Maximization," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 1962.

Reder, M., "Wage Differentials: Theory and Measurement," In Aspects of
Labor Economics, NBER, Princeton University Press, 1962.

Rosen, S., "Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in
Pure Competition," Journal of Political Economy, 1972.
Roy, A. D., "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford Economic
Papers (new series), 1951.
Sato, K., Production Functions and Aggregation, North—Holland, Amsterdam,
1975.

Sattinger, M., "Comparative Advantage and the Distribution of Earnings and
Abilities," Econometrica, 1975.
Stigler, C., "Production and Distribution in the Short Run," Journal of
Political Economy, 1939.

____________

"The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the Market,"

Journal of Political Economy, 1951.
Stiglitz, J., "The Theory of Screening, Education and the Distribution of
Income," American Economic Review, 1975.

44

Tinbergen, J., "On the Theory of Income Distribution," in Selected Papers,
North—Holland, Amsterdam, 1959.

Welch, F., "A Linear Synthesis of Skill Distributions," Journal of Human
Resources, 1969.

Whitin, T., "Classical Theory, Graham's Theory, and Linear Programming in
International Trade," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1953.

)

