               NBER Working Paper Series




                   THE GAINS AND LOSSES FROM

                   INDUSTRIAL CONCENTRATION


                         Sam Pelt zman*




                   Working   Paper No.    163




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                         January 1977



                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for coents only.     They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

*University of Chicago and NBER. This study has been supported
 by a grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research from the
 National Science Foundation for research in law and economics
 (#S0C74—l9218 Aol). The author is indebted to Gerald Dwyer and
 Stephen Entin for research assistance, and to Gary Becker, Yale
 Brozen, Harold Demsetz, George Stigler and Lester Telser for
 helpful coumients on an earlier draft.
                                                                 Preliminary: Comments invited




                    ThE GAINS AND IDSSES FROM INWSTRIAL CONCENTRATION



                                       Sam Peltzma.n



                                                                          well
           No field in the industrial organization literature has been as

plowed as the relationship between concentration and profitability. Weiss

(19711),   in his   latest review of this literature, d.iscusses over 4O such

studies since 1951, and      this   is not a complete census. The reader has by

this late date earned the right to demand strong justification for a new

entrant. Mine is simply that,despite its bulk, the            literature   fails to inform


us   how to interpret its main      findings.
           Those findings are well known: with few exceptions, market concen-

tration and industry profitability are          positively   correlated. since the

correlation     is usually weak,    the literature has tended to become a search

                                                                     that
for more complex and/or accurately specified relationships. I eschew

approach to focus on a more basic question: if concentration and profitability

are indeed related, what market process produces the relationship? The

traditional answer has been that high concentration facilitates collusion and

hence super marginal-cost pricing, for which some profitability measure is a

proxy. Unfortunately, this answer does not logically follow from the usual

evidence, so its acceptance by economists and practitioners of antitrust policy

is little more than an act of faith.

           Any profitability measure implies a corresponding difference between

prlee and average cost. As a matter of simple arithmetic a causal relationship

running from concentration to profitability can operate either through an

effect on price (the usual interpretation) or on average cost, or, of course,
                                       2


both. Acceptance of the pure collusion interpretation of the evidence has

so far hinged on the largely untested assumption that concentration has

little or no connection with the implied average cost measure. However,

indirect tests of the assumption, most notably by Dernsetz (1973), imply

that it may not be useful, and his finding is one motive to the present

work.

        In essence, this paper will try to decompose the concentration-profits

relationship into separate concentration-price arid concentration-cost

relationships. By doing this, I hope to shed light on some of the allocative

and distributive issues that, I suspect, give the subject its intrinsic

interest, but which have not so far been confronted empirically: les high

concentration save or waste resources? 1es it lead to higher prices? Who

gains and loses from a social policy hostile to high concentration? Since the

unique aspect of the paper is its focus on a concentration-cost relationship,

most of the analytical effort is spent here. I review the theory underlying

such a relationship, and develop and implement a model designed to estimate

its importance. Subsequently, I try to estimate how much of the usual profit-

concentration relationship is due to cost effects and how much to price effects.

The main conclusion is that, while price effects are not absent, the cost

effects so dominate them as to cast doubt on the efficacy of any general legal

rule hostile to industrial concentration.
                                                 3
p.

     I. Market Structure, Costs         and Prices

                The possibility that nrket structure and costs are related has of

     course long been recognized. An unconcentrated industry in which a

     technological     advance produces "natural monopoly" or oligopoly cost
     conditions     will become both more concentrated    and more   efficient over time.
     The process by which the old technolo is rendered economically obsolete will

     also   entail a fall (or at least no increase) in price. The price decline need
     not   be   great enough to eliminate producer rents, either because the associated
     increase     in concentration permits collusion or because the new technology

     diffuses     slowly enough   to   leave room in the market for a fringe   of' old-

     technology firms. Whichever force operates, there is a clear dilemma for
     antitrust     policy: attempts to thwart increased      concentration will merely
     waste      resources without benefiting consumers.1

                The concentration-profitability literature has so far given little

     weight to "natural oligopoly" interpretations of the data. Two reasons for

     this neglect are important enough to affect the structure of this study:

                 1. A "natural oligopoly" interpretation is asymmetric. Some techno-

     logical progress can be scale-reducing. If this sort of' change diffuses

     slowly enough, or cannot be implemented as efficiently by all firms, the

     large firms will be the marginal firms and smafl firms will earn rents. Thus

     we    should observe unusually low      (or declining) as well as high concentration

     associated      with unusually high rates of return. By and      large, such a U-shaped

     concentration-profits relationship has not been found. One inference could
     bc that rents to size-specific technical change are unimportant empirically.
     However, it would be just as easy to conclude that large size-related

     economies are simply more prevalent. Or, to the extent t.hut such economies
     are    specific to   a few oranizaUons, the largc'-size-relat.eI et'onomie; wM       I
                                         14




dominate    in the usual data: Three clever firms producing 1,000 cars per week

at half of General Motors' unit cost will have trivial impact on automobile

prices or the measured efficiency of the automobile industry. I shall attempt

to disentangle the possibilities empirically rather than intuitively. The

model I develop permits any kind of change in market structure to reflect

size-related   technological change, and       leaves   the importance of the relation-
ship to be determined empirically.
         2. The empirical literature on economies of scale seems to conflict
with a "natural oligopoly" interpretation.         A common finding of this literature

is   that of long-run constant costs at the firm level over a wide range           of

output, wide enough to encompass many         existing-firm   sizes and a large fraction
of industry output. To Illustrate, Bain (19514) and           Stigler   (1958) both find
that the nUnimurn-efficient-size steel firm       produces something like 2 percent

of   national output. Smaller firms had less than 20 percent of national

capacity in 1951 (Stigler, 1958). While some efficiency might be gained by a

decline of this inefficient fringe, any substantial change in market structure

would. likely involve a reallocation of output among efficient-sized firms.

         However,   that sort of inference might     only mean that      the economies-of-
scale paradigm is not    very   useful, rather    than that market      structure and
efficiency are unrelated. Indeed, the imprecision of scale-economy
rationalizations of market structure can itself be of help in formulating
such a relationship. If there is no unique          efficient firm      size, but only
a wide band encompassing many existing firms, then any of           these firms    can

grow to the upper end of the band before it incurs size diseconomies. This

kind of expansion by a firm becomes likely, instead of merely possible, if

the firm discovers a lower cost 1cchno1or which is not invnediatc],y

available   to others. The potential profits from the cost advantage will then
                                             5

attract   capital and   permit   the firm to grow     at   least to the upper end of the

band, though,     to get   there, the firm   may also have     to reduce prices. Thus,

the   fo.rturiate firm, or firms, become big instead of merely "average" (concen-
tration increases), and resource costs and prices are lowered by this
unusual growth.
         This argument, which can be found in Demsetz (1973) and McGee (1971),
is    sketched in   Figure 1.
          Let P1L     be the long-run   supply    curve of a competitive industry with

demand, D. Let P1RM be the long-run firm supply curve, so, following the
scale-economies literature, firm size is indeterminate in the range OB. We

observe an actual (or average) firm output of OA. The industry is in

equilibrium with a price of 0P1, zero rents and               a four-firm concentration
ratio    of, say, 14.(OA/OC). Now, one    representative firm       discovers a way to
lower marginal costs to QNBM. In this perfectly-competitive-industry
example, it cuts      price trivially, and       expands from OA to OB. There are
now positive rents      for this firm   (and for the industry aggregate) equal to
the resource cost saving, P1QNR, and concentration has increased by (AB/OC).
Statistically, the increased concentration will be correlated with the in-
creased rents, but there is a more substantive connection: the increased

concentration is the mechanism by 'which          part (AB x NR) of the       resource cost

saving is realized.

          If enough firms make the same cost-reducing discovery, consumers

will share the resource cost saving. For            example,   if   (s/oii)   firms

make the    discovery, industry supply becomes QSTL. Price falls, but

there are still positive rents and concentration increases (so long as

demand is sufficiently inelastic to kecp CC'/OC < AB/OA). If the

discovery    is   sufficiently general, of course, the rents will disappear.
               6




                                   L




                               U
Q




0
    A   B             C   C'


            FIGURE1
                                              7

However, with an industry supply like QU, the correlation between efficiency

and   concentration    can   still hold.   As new firms catch on, each grows toward

maximal    size,   and eventually this maximal size becomes the typical firm size.

Of course,    with   a sufficiently elastic demand, this firm         growth   need not

imply    increased   concentration. But, given the very large maximal            sizes
usually    encountered   in the scale economies literature, increased concentration

would    be the outcome usually expected.
         While the constant-returns-to-scale case is important empirically and
useful    didactically, some of the ambiguities entailed by the more conventional

(by text book standards) diminishing returns            case merit elaboration. This
requires distinguishing between increasing costs at the firm and industry
level. If the industry is         constant cost, the preceding analysis needs no

qualification:       in the long-run a uniquely efficient firm will expand as
much as others contract, and        it will   collect as rent all of    its differential
productivity.        The more   interesting case analytically    is   increasing costs for
both the firm      and industry. This implies rents for some factors, and hence
an equilibrium excess of marginal cost over average cost (net of rents) for

intra-marginal     firms.    This means,    in turn,   that any efficiency     induced
output   expansion has two offsetting effects on a firm's average cost: the

efficiency    lowers the level of its average cost curve, but the output

expansion causes a move up along the curve. Under some supply and demand

conditions, the latter effect can          dominate,   so that average cost increases.2

To see just what these conditions are, write the total industry supply (sT)

curve

(i)                              sT(P) =(p) + SA(p, x),
                                           8


where

        p =   price,
          =   the aggregate of all firms but one (A), and
        X =   shift    parameter.

Then suppose A becomes more efficient, so its supp].y curve shifts rigbtward

(i.e., X increases and S> 0, the subscript denoting a partial derivative).

Assume for now that the resulting Increase in A's output also increases any

rneasure of industry concentration. Let us then see what is required for

average cost to decline while profitability increases.

        Since costs and rents (R) must exhaust industry receipts, industry

unit costs (C) can be written


                                           RT        IR+RA\
(2)
                                C=p---=p- Q
where

        Q =   industry    quantity sold.

The effect of A's efficiency (the increase in x) on C can be shown to be


                               dC                                 1
()                                              A
                                                     Q2J
                                                            L         ED
where

        ED,S =   absolute    value of the industry demand and supply elasticities.3

The first term on the r.h.s. of (3) is the pure "efficiencyt' effect and, were

this a constant cost industry (T 0,                 Er, =   00)       that would tell the whole

story: industry unit costs and unit rents would change by equal and opposite

amounts. The second        term, the "output" effect, can              offset the first if (a) the

supply shift,             is large   enough, and (b) industry supply is            sufficiently

inelastic     (other firms save few resources by cutting their output) or demand
                                              9

sufficiently elastic (so output expands enough to make the diminishing returns
important).1'
         There is a further ambiguity in the relationship between unit cost and
unit rent      (i.e. profitability). Since


                                   d(RT/Q).       —  - dC
                                                  dX dA'

a negative relationship between the two requires that price fall by less than

unit   cost.    Whether or not this holds again depends on supply and demand

elasticities, but here it turns out that more elastic demand, on ba].ance,5

favors an increase in rents.

         All the preceding results--and ambiguities--would hold if A were

initially  a small firm, except, of course, that concentration could decrease.
More   generally, where differences in firms' costs underlie changes in their
market shares, one ought to expect any change in market structure to promote
efficiency. However, with constant returns-to-scale, there is a clear bias
toward    increased concentration as the main source of lover costs. So long as

a firm's superior tcchnolo' simply lowers the level of its horizontal

marginal cost curve, the firm      will   expand to maximal efficient size.

         Demsetz tests for this bias by comparing rates of return of large and

small firms by industry. He finds no difference in these rates of return in

low-concentration industries, so small firms do not seem to have a cost ad-

vantage there. However, in highly concentrated markets, the large              firms have
the    higher rates of return, so Demsetz concludes that they have lower costs,

and, by inference, that     this   cost advantage is the source of their large size.

          even if one accepts that inference, thise results can be consistcnL

with either competitive or obgopolist.ft pricthg.           1'or exampie, an
                                                10

 iriduntry whose supply schedule passes through V in Fiure 1, while some
 firms       have marginal costs like Q1M could be characterized as competitive,

while the cost difference generates both high concentration and producer

rents. However, in another industry the aggregate marginal cost of the

superior firms could pass through U, while a collusive agreement among them

keeps the price at P1. In that case, a smaller firm could survive, and the

same disparity among rates of return would be observed. Indeed, once one

allows for both the traditional connection between concentration arid

collusion and         for   differences among firm costs, still less benign solutions

become consistent with Demsetz'c results. For example, let the long-run supply

from less efficient firms be increasong. Then let the process described by

Demsetz and McGee generate increased concentration which incidentally

decreases the cost of collusion. The large firms may now find it in their

interest to set a price above the previous competitive price (P1), even

though they must yield some market share to do this. The marginal firm in

this case would be both "small" and           earning   a "competitive" rate of return,

arid this result would also be consistent with the Dernsetz data.

(Se,e Demsetz, l97, pp. 178-179.)

             My intent here is not to catalog possibilities, but to indicate that

there is insufficient evidence for a conclusion that the effects of

concentration are either wholly beneficial or costly.

              If an eclectic integration of the prevailing theory cannot therefore

be ruled out, it becomes a useful framework with which to evaluate the main

costs        and benefits empirically. In the remainder of the paper I try to         do

•u;t thi:;. Spcei firn.lv. 1. ruk the foulowi rig quentions:
              1. ll 1m1)(lrLirlt. 1:; hr r,1.:i1 iOrl:hII) between market structure arid
('I)::L: ?
                                           11


         2. How much of any resulting change in costs is translated into

price changes?

         3.    How important is the relationship between market structure and

collusion, and how much are prices thereby affected?

        While answers to these questions would be useful in clarifying an

important academic literature, they also have important policy implications.

The merits of an anti-concetration policy can hinge on whether the collusion

effects of concentration outweii the cost effects.

         The discussion so far can be summarized symbolically as follows.

The prevailing view on the effects of market structure on the price of any

good would be


(5)                                   p = p(X,C,MS)

where

         p =   price    of the good

         X =   set   or index of demand shifters

         C =   index    of supply shifters, which can be subsumed under the rubric

               of    tcostsIt
        MS = some measure of market structure, i.e., the number and size

               distribution of firms, which is a proxy for the cost of

               collusion.


         Putting aside important qualifications about the effects of varyinp.

'temand elasticities, the measurement and relevance of the various components

of C,     etc., low cost collusion is azumed to lead ystematica1ly to an

increase in the ratio of price to either muri'inal or average cost, so that
                               0     (where hipher MS implies lower
                           S
                                     cost collusion)


        The underlying theory permits (5) to be applied acros: isolated markeL

for a homogeneous good, or to a particular market over time. For my purposes,

it will be useful to treat the variables in (5) as (logarithmic) time deri-

vatives rather than levels. The essential eclecticism is then introduced by

a companion function for costs


(6)                                       C =   c(y,Ms)

where

         Y   =   set   of exogenous determinants of the cost index, e.g., factor

                 prices.

The MS term in (6) is meant        to   summarize what    is   really a two-way

(and non-moriotonic) relationship: changes in MS (in either direction) both

cause costs to decline and are induced by changes in costs. Once a

relationship like (6) is admitted, the total effects of MS on p become

more complex. Specifically,


()
7
                                   adC
                                   is as            c is
If, in the particular case of increased concentration,                   < 0, the prevailing

view that the first term on the r.h.s. is positive can be correct even though

the total derivative is negative. Moreover, if some of the effect of a cost

change shows up in producer rents (p/C 1), the prevailing view can be

wrong, but measured profitability will be positively related to MS.

         The next section specifies (6). This is subsequently estimated, and

the   results are used to estimate (5) and (fl.           These, in turn, provide the

answers to the questions I have posed.
                                         13


II.     The Relationship Between Costs and Market Structure
         For simplicity,   classify the firms in any industry into two groups:

Type L firms are or will become the largest in the industry; type M firms are

all the others. The industry's cost per unit of output (C) at any point in

time is then


(8)                                C = sL +   (1 - s)M,


where

         L, M =   the unit cost of a firm in each group, which is assumed
                  to be the same for all firms in the group.

            s = Type L's share of industry output (e.g., a four-firm
                concentration ratio, if the type are defined as the
                largest four).

Since we will be interested in percentage changes over time in C (C), note

that



(9)                C = [ L L+ (1- s) MM] + [L
                                                           M]dS
The last term on the right-hand side of (9) captures the effect of market

share changes on efficiency. It says that if, for example, the type L are

more efficient (L < M) and their market share increases, the resource cost

of industry output is thereby reduced. Now, express each type's unit cost

change as



(10)



(ii)                            M rm,
where r is the sum of      all forcez changing costs whic'h arc' torwnon   to the two
types   such as secular productivity growth and factor price changes,      and     ni
                                              l'1
                                                                                             )
suninarize forces peculiar to each group.           This allows (9)   to   be ecpressed as



()
                             c=r+f+(ls)6+[M1,
where




This says that        the   level, as well as the change, of market shares matter. For

example, if the type L are becoming relatively nre efficient over time

(f   < 0, 6 >   0),    then   industry   costs will grow nre slowly   the    greater the
                                6
type L' s mrket share.
         rther rearrangement of the terms leads to the following alternative
expressions, both of which will be useful subsequently:


(13)                         â=r+f+                        ,   or




(13)'

where
         D= IJM -       1

           =    M/L - 1

The meaning of these equations can be grasped by focusing on (13) when D > 0.
In that case, small firms have a cost advantage. If ds/dt < 0, industry
                                                       15

                                                                                   gain   market share
              will improve, because the more efficient firms
efficiencY
                                                               is greater the larger is the small
(    declines).      The degree of improvement

firm     advantage (i.e., the smaller is the l/D term in the denomiflator-
                                                                         due to
assume      6= 0  for the moment), and the larger is the share of output
                                                            (13)' applies
the more efficient firms (i.e., the smaller is s). EquatiOn
symmetrically wtiere the large firms have the cost advantage.
     It is now necessarY to specify the link between market structure
                                                         the following simple
changes (ds/dt) and cost differences (D or D'). I assume
relationships.

 (iii)
                                                      -     = a'       ,     and



 (iJ4)'                                         G.M_GL=cZ2D ,

where
                             and are constant S
           Cli, 2 > o
              =   output   growth rate of type i firms.
                                                       that the type of firm
 Each equation is applicable for D' or D> 0. These say
                                             faster over time in proportion to its cost advantage.
 with a cost advantage grows
 Adjustment       costs affect      the size of the proportionality constants, :i and a2,
                                     may have different                            costs than divestitureS,
 and i allow these to jffer__mergerS
                                                               process     is only indirectly affected
 for example, Notice that the adjustment

 by differences in the rate of change of firm
                                                                     costs    (6). These will affect

                                                      I make   no allowance for forecasting: That
 D or D', but, for simplicity,
                                             to 'be    maintained,     the   future   values of' D will
    is, it' the ó are expected

              and this could affect the repofle                   to   the current      D. The procec
    han'',
                                                   however, completelY myopic           in this regard.
    described by     (1l.)   and   (ill.)'   is,
                                                     16

          Since

 (15)
                                       =       s(1_s)(GL_GMJ

the adjustment process can be expressed


(16)                           Z =   8(1 - a 1D' ,          if       ds/dt   > 0


(16)'                          Z =   s(1 - S         ,      if       ds/dt   < 0

where

          Z =   Ids/dtJY

The next step is to introduce the adjustment process into (13) and (13)' by

solving    (i6) and   (16)'    for D and         D' and replacing             these in the former
equations. This yields

                                         —z2/(i-s) + [z+a1s(1-s)J6
(17)                  C=r++
                                                                     for ds/dt > 0
and

                                                 +a
(17)'                 C-   r   +
                                               z +              s)
                                     +               a:(l   -



                                                                 for     ds/dt < 0

Next,   I introduce an assumed relationship between 5--the differential

between large and small firm cost changes- -and market growth.

The motivation for this is the empirical relationship between market structure

and growth. For example, Nelson (i3) reports a significant                           negative   corre-

lation between the 1935-54           change    in industry concentration ratios and growth
                                               17



in value added. This is also present th the 1947-67 sample I shall use sub-
                                                                            to differ-
sequently.8 In a model which purports to link market structure
                                                       must logically be cost related.
ential costs, such an empiri(al regularity

                                     market growth reduces the small firm cost change
Therefore assume that        rapid
                                                              it permits the smallest firms to
relative to that of large firma, perhaps because

adjust cheaply to minimum efficient size more quickly or creates favorable "learning

curve" effects for them.9 To incorporate this relationship most simply, let


(18)


(19)
                                         m=bg, so

 (20)
                                         6 =   (b-a)g

where

        a,   b = constants
        g    =   growth   in demand for output.

                              be specified, but if growth is advantageous
 The sign of a and b need not
                                               negative.10 If that is true, then (17) and
 for small firms, (b-a) should be

 (17)' imply that, given large firm cost changes (i),
                                                                   growth reduces industry
                                                    the growth promotes lower small firm
 costs. This occurs generally because
                                                         concentration, there is another
 costs. In the specific case of increasing

 force at work, captured by the           z6 term in      (17).   Increased concentration

                                                     small firm costs) would imply
 in the face of rapid growth (declining
                                                     unusual decline in industry costs as
 unusually low-cost large firms, and an

 they increase their market share.
                                                           of (17) and (17)' by
        To allow for empirical implementation

  conventional techniques, I shall use 3-term Taylor
                                                                  expansions about z =   0.
                                                                   18


These    capture most of the important non].inearitles in the model,11 and they
can    be   written as the single equation

(21)                 C=   r   + ags + bg(1              -   a)


                          + (b   -   a)g
                                             rz
                                             I 2
                                             La1x1
                                                            -
                                                                 41 -
                                                                 1J     i'
                                                                        a   .2
                                                                                - 5/   + Remainder Term   ,




where,      if da/dt> 0 then i =                            1,    and if ds/dt < 0 then i = 2,                and



                 =   -1

         M2 = +1

         xl =

            ç2=      (l-s)
                                                                                                                        )
        Finally, to obtain an enirica1 counterpart                                 to    r, the cost changes
common to all firms,                 assume for              simplicity that each industry's         total     output
(Q)    can be described by a Cobb-Douglass production function


(22)                                 Q.. =       F(t,       0)   T I,       E a1 = 1,



where

             I = input        amount

            a.   =   constants, and
             1
             F = input productivity shift function, depending on secular (t)
                     productivity growth and other (0)                           forces.
Then assume; again for simplicity, that if some firms become more efficient,

this efficiency is not specific to any one input. At the industry-aggregate

level, this efficiency and its subsequent spread through any change in market

structure, can then be included among the other forces (0)                                      in   the shift
                                               19


function in (22). As a further simplification, assume that the competitive

profit maximizing conditions for a firm             can   be used in approximating industry

unit cost changes, so



(23)
                                      C =   -F   + E
                                                     a1 p.1



where

        p1 =     input   prices, and now                          -




        a1
             =   (constant)    input cost sFiares.

Then assume a constant percentage secular growth ()                   of   industry input

productivity, so that F can be decomposed



(214)
                                      F = F($) +



We can now relate (23) and (21;) to (21): r,                s11nrtRrizing the productivity

and input price     trends con       to all firms, is simply - + Z a1 .,               and

everything   else on     the   r.h.s. of   (21) equals      - F($).
        In   the   next section, I    estimate the scheme in (21), (23) and (24).
                                             20

ii]. Enpirical Results: Costs and Market Structure

          The basic cost relationships just developed are estimated here for a

subset of 11-digit SIC manufacturing industries. The subset consists of those

industries for which a meaningful change in unit cost (essentially industry

expenditures   deflated by an output index) can       be   computed for 19117-67. Since
this is   the longest period practicable, we face the risk that the basic cost

relationships will be obscured by technological change. However, I felt the

greater risk was that       short-period changes in   market structure would hide the

more fundamental relationship we seek to measure, a relationship which after

all purports to rationalize a nontrivial part of the existing variety of

market structure. Even 20 years is not long enough to permit as much change

in this variety as we might like.

          Many current 11   digit   industries had to be dropped because

of changes in classification between 1947 and l967, or because reliable

output indexes were unavailable from 1947.13 To limit potential measurement

error, "industries" with low or changing coverage or specialization ratios

were also de1eted. Finally, I deleted two industries--drugs and

ballpoint pens--which experienced profound technological change in this

period. They met all the formal tests for inclusion, but their measured

productivity growth was so atypical as to obscure some of the results and

raise questions about the comparability of their earlier and later outputs.

This left a sample of 165 industries.

          Cost data available at the 11-digit level include only labor and raw

material expenditures by Census establishments. This leaves out expenditures

(e.g., advertising) typically incurred by administrative offices rather than

plants, and it excludes capital costs. I discuss later a modest adjustment

for the former deficiency. I assume that capital costs are proportional to an
                                          21

industry's gross book value of plant and equipment, for which data are

available   or can be estijBated.16 The factor of proportionality is derived

from Berndt and Christensen'S (1973), estimate of annual capital cost shares

for all manufacturing. I simply choose the proportionality factor that yields

for my   sample the Berndt-Christeflsefl cost shares for 19147 and 1967. 17
        To calculate the cost-share-weighted input price changes on the r.h. s.
of (23), distinguish three inputs: labor, raw materials and capital. The
input cost shares are set at their 1947-67 means, and the input price changes
are calculated from the fou.owinR data:
         1. Labor--payroll per employee. (Compensation per man hour is not
consistently available for 19147.)
         2. Raw materials. Purchase price indexes are       not   available by
industry.    However, the major change   here   is a decline in the relative price

of agricultural to manufactured materials between 19147 and       1967. Therefore,
using 1963 input-Output (Office of isiness Economics, 1967) data on the
direct and indirect purchases of agricultural products per dollar of purchases

for each SIC industry as weights, I estimate separate raw material price
                               18
indexes   for each industry.

          3. Capital. Since industry-specific      data are unavailable, I assume

 that   the change in the rental price of capital is the same for each industry.
          Finding empirical counterparts to the crucial market structure
variables on the r.h.s. of (21) poses a major difficulty. The relevant theory
applies to firms classified by terminal re:iative size regardless of initial
size. Unfortunately, corresponding pub1ihed data do not exist. We have only
OnVeI,L, ionl   concentration ratioi, which do not reveal where today's largest firms
came from. Therefore, I must make the strong asuntion that the large firms in
 196! are the same as   (or   at least dominated by) those in 19147.    In keeping
                                         22

with the simple size dichotomy embodied in (21) and    to make the   results of
this study comparable with the bulk of the literature, £ is then defined
simply as the absolute 1947-67 change in an industry's u-firm concentration
ratio   (and s is the average of the two concentration ratios). The reader

should, however, be aware that the model predicts cost effects for turnover

of large firms   as   well as for net changes in their relative size.19 Finally,

g is defined as the log of 1967 divided by 1947 sales net of the log change

in the manufactured goods WPI. This variable's accuracy as a demand change

proxy depends on an implicit assumption of u.nlt elastic demand for each

industry's product.
          I want to test Demsetz and McGee's conjecture that the process describec

by (21) is more important for increases in concentration than
                                                                 decreases.       The


formal model does not allow for this except through differences in cx.

Therefore, I simply estimate separately the effects of increases and

decreases in concentration, and see whether these effects are indeed dif-

 ferent. The basic reessiOn is given in Table 1 for the values of a. which

minimize residual variance (see Note to Table i).

         The results lend some support to the basic model and uncover a few

 puzzles. For example, the model predicts a coefficient of +1 for the first

 two factor price variables, and indeed both are insiiificant]-y different

 from 1. However, the results show neither the expected difference between

 large and small firm cost changes (the coefficient of G2 should be less than
                                                              to those of G2 and
 that of Gi), nor the relationship of the CR1 coefficients

 01 (the former should equal the difference of the latter two). And the

 coefficients of the CR2 terms deviate from their theoretical value of -1.

 In spite of' these drawbacks, a market share effect on costs does show through,

                                                              Moreover, this
 and as I demonstrate litter, it Is empirically important.
                                         23


                                       ?ABIB    3.

      RgGRRgsIoN ISTD4ATE OF EPTECTS OF WIGES IN CONCENTRATION
                   011 QIANGES IN UNIT COST, 1947-67
                               4-digit   SIC Industries


              Independent Variables

Symbol                      Description                      Coefficient   t-ratio

              Input Cost mares (at) x
                Input Price thanges ()
1. LAB              i —   labor                                 1.211        4.639
                    I -   raw materials                          .991        1.1e80
2. 1.ft
3. CAP              i — capital    (cost share only)              .980       2.053

              ovth in demand:




                                  i
4. 01               55                                            .079        .901
5.   02             g(1-a)                                        .116       2.150

              Oiange in Concentration:

6. CRl+             5 I —s—— - r-         for                   -2.245      -3.245

                      Lç1c        iJ
                    increases in    concentration
                    (0    otherwise)

                                   for increases in              -.oo6        -.026
7. C+
                    concentration (0 otherwise)
                    (a • .856 for (6) and (7))

8. CR1-             Sons as (6), for      decreases              -.645       1.5ie6
                    in concentration

                    Same as (7), decreases in                    -.484       -1.006
9. C3-
                    concentration
                    (a — -1.046 for (8) and (9))

Constant
                                  --                             -.328

      B2        Coefficient of Determination                       .342


      si        Regression Standard ror              x 100      20.760


Ibte: The dependent variable is the log difference of 1967 and 1947
       unit costs. Unit costs are total industry costs (labor + raw
           materials + capital) deflated by an output index. Total costs
           are from the 1947 and 1967 Census of Manufactures (with capital
           costs estimated--see text). production Indexes are from the
           Census of ManufactLu'es, Index of' Production volumes. The 1947
           value is set at 100, and the 1967 values derived by successive
           multiplication of cross-we1gted l95, 1958, 1963, and 1967
           intercensus output ratios.
           De factor cost shares are average, of 1947 and 1967 values.
           See text for sources of factor price changes. Since the capital
           cost price change is assumed to be a constant, only the capital
           factor share is entered on line 3.

           Growth in industry sales and concentration ratios are frois
           Census   of MnufIwturøs.
           The a1 are estimited by         running     the   regos:1cn on the compon.flt!

           of CR1 end dividing the coeffccnt of g241 by that of gZ2M1/K1.
           (Since this uses 2 degrees of freedom, t-ratio& are exaggerated
           by about 1 percent, given the simp1c size of 165.)
                                            214.




effect is asymmetric in just the way       implied   by Demsetz and McGee.      Decreases

in concentration do reduce costs, as predicted, and this does not depend on

the aberrant negative a.2° However, the effect is statistically insignificant

and only   a   fractibn of that of similar increases in concentration. Essentially,

only increases in concentration matter very much.          Their   effects,   moreover, are

consistent with all of the nonlinearities emerging from the basic model.21

This consistency, though, hides a qualitative discrepancy between the empirical

results and the basic thrust of the model. npirically the main link between

market structure and costs comes via the term (CR1+) in which market structure

change and growth interact. An increase in concentration in a nongroving market

has trivial cost effects. In the model, this interaction term is supposed to

have effects proportional to differences in firm         cost   growth rates. However,

the coefficient of this term in Table 1 is much larger than any plausible
                                                                                              )
difference in cost growth rates, so it seems clear that the model incompletely
specifies the interaction of growth       and market   structure with costs. The
size of this interaction is a puzzle that demands further work, but here I shall
merely   draw out its empirical implications.

          These are suninarized in Tables 2 and 3. These show the estimated

reduction in unit costs implied by Table 1 for several combinations of the

relevant growth     and   market. share variab les. These are chosen     so as to range
roughly one     standard deviation on either side of the sample means. (No "low

growtht' calculations are shown, because these would uniformly yield trivial

cost savings.) Since risk of error increases with distance from sample means,

it is best to focus on the upper left-hand-corner entries in both tables. These

point to two conclusions: (i) Market share effects can be substantial. With

total factor productivity growing at around 2 percent per year in manufacturing,

about    1/5   of this growth can be attributed to post-war market structure changes

for   a typical industry with increased concentration. (2) Th t.,ffect. i much
                                       25




                                            TABLE     2
   REJCTION IN UNIT COSTS. 19147.67, FOR VARIOUS C01.8ITOiS
         OF COXENTRAT tOtE, IXREASE IN COnCrrRATr )1,
                    AND SALES GROWN (NATURAL LGGS x 100)

                     A.    Average Salem Growth               (g   •14)

 Increase in                               Concentration Ratio (CR)
 Concentration
 Ratio                                               Concentrated     Unconcetrated
 19147-67    (2.)         (CR   . 36.3)
                           Average
                                                       (CR 60)            (CR     15)

 Average
 tncrease                       8.0                        9.2              3.5
 (2+    8.8)
 I*re
 Increase                       9.9                       13.9             (14.8)
 (2+ 16)
 al1
 Increase                       2.14
                                              I            2.14             2.1
 (2+    2)


                           B. High Growth (g                . 1)

                                                    Concentrate2      UflC:Cen:r3ted

Averee                       16.6                         19.2              7.3
 Increase


                            20.14                         29.0            (10.2)



Snail
Increlse                         '
                                149                       50
                                                           .                4L
                                                                             '


?iote (      )      thcreae      in uiit cotz.
        The entries jhow the estUated (continuouji cirowde)
        percent' decr'ze in the unit coztl 01' Ut iutr.
        with the pcifio chir3cteriti.•s ornnire1 c.., .i indu-
        try with w.thzui.;ed concentrtivn. The                                  ire
        derjvd .y ci1cu1'tttr. the CR1. wti CR.                            ee T.bL.?
        Tib L) 1op1i by Utee ch.iricteritic,                                   ifl
        by the cot•zcient of these vwri b1 i _L.:-.r,:.
        The chir   ri.tjc. 4re tnsen to r:in e r.u ttlj e t in-
        dsrd iF'tittjon Citi.r ..ide of the rnt,tnt Cr       :ub-
        sa.ipLc of in1u..rie.; with jnrr..a.ij,i cuncr:t- r.i:n.
        Th' roL..v'.nt m23Jt. (stisidtrd J:vL.fli,n5) L'_r t:i. .uC.-
        sirpIe (e9        indu.trj.)         .jre'
                                             e.s (7.t)
                                      CR     3S.3 (..L.3)
                                              .1450   (.5')
        (.nu..tri.s etth '.ii,eU                      c er.rtl..n         nc1.. :'J
        in u)th     trcl:...
                                                26




                                           TABLE 3

      REDJCrICN ni  urrr cosTs, 19.7 -6i. VARIOUS ctMBr:AT Iorzs
             OF COtCE1TRATION, DECREASES tfl COUCE:.'rRATION
                AND ALE3 GROWDI (NATURAL LOGS * 100)

                    A. Average Sales Growth (g                  .727)



 Decrease th            1
                                         Concentration Ratio (CR)
 Concentration, I
 1947-•S7 (z-)
                            Average              Concentrated Unconeentrated
                            CR.5.8                   CR'70              CRa2O
 Average
 Decrease                     2.9                       3.1              2.1
 2- • 8.1

 Large
 Decrease           J
                              1e.2                     L8                1.7
                    I



 55*11
 Decrease                     0.9                      0.9               0.8
 2-     2




                            B. H1h Growth (g — 1.25)


                            Average              Concentrated     Llnconcentrated


Averge
Decrease                      5.9                      6.                5.0



Large                        9.9                      11.3
Decrease                                    I                           6.9


Snail           I

Decrease
                             1.5                       1.6              1.5




?te: See    note to Table 2. Means (standard deviations) or
        variables for the 77 industries in the decreasing-
        concentration subsample are:

                                            8.1 (7.1)
                                     CR              (23.8)
                                     g      .727     (.535)




                                                                                    2
                                              27

                              concentration than for decreases. A given increase
longer for increases in

in concentration lowers costs roughly two to three times as much
                                                                           as   does an


equal decrease.
                                          sensitivity of these results to the model
          It is worth examining the

specification. Note, for example,          the   implausible negative value of the

                                   which underlies the estimates for decreases in
adjustment coefficient, a,
                                            indeed any, plausible value of a on the
concentration. Forcing a nxre, or
                                                                       the equation in Table I
estimates turns      out   to make little difference. I estimated

                                    to   take on various values from -30 to +30.     Except
constraining both of the a
                                  = 0    (where the CR1 variable essentially reduces to
in the neighborhood of a

a single term and the explanatory power of the regression deteriorates

                                    very much      the same: the mean cost changes are
noticeably), the results are
                                                   values in Tables 2 and 3, and the
always    within   a percentage point of the

 regression
                 standard error is also virtually unchanged.
           Another    aspect of the model that merits examination is the complexity

                                    variables dominate the main empirical result,
 of the CR1 variables. These

                     a   relationship between costs and the level as well as
 and they imply
                                                 In Tables 2 and 3, this level effect
 the rate of change in concentration.
                                           concentration reduces costs, holding
 is almost always such that higher
                                                   This relationship is most pronounced
 constant the change in concentration.

 where concentration increases. This result merits skepticism, first because
                                              constructed, and second because the under-
 it    depends   partly on the way CR1 is

  lying model predicts it unambiguously only when concefltraUO!1 >

           As a crude check on the validity
                                            of bnth the         theoretical underpinning
                                                                 L estimated a regression
   i   t.n' CR    variable and its tmpirical implications,
                                                                                       14
                                    variables (6-9) in Table 1 were replaced by
  in which the 1 market share

                             separated   the concentration change from leve]. effects:
  simpler   telins which
                                            28

 a growth interaction term (gZ) and the concentration ratio (s) were

entered separately for each subsample. The essential results were:

           (1) The explanatory power of this regression is slightly smaller

 (R2 =    .33 v. .31i) than in Table 1, which lends slight support to the more

complex formulation shown there.

           (2) Coefficients of gZ and s are both significantly negative

(t =     -2.2   and -2.3) when concentration is increasing and insignificantly

negative when it is falling. This corroborates the basic result of Table 1

and the general pattern of results in Tables 2 and 3.

          (3) The magnitude of the cost changes implied by this regression around

the sample means tends to be larger than in Tables 2 and 3. For example, the

changes corresponding to those in the first row of Table 2 would be 10.7,

15.8 and 6.2; for the first row of Table 3, we get 5.5, 8.0 and 2.8.          Thi,s

implies that both the concentration change       and level   effects in those tables

may be conservative, but the patterns here and in the tables are sufficiently

similar to support the amalgamation of these effects into the single CR1

variable.

          So far I have been lumping productivity and input price effects on

costs together. To explore any interaction between market structure and

input prices, as well as to check on the reasonableness of the preceding

results, I estimated market structure effects on two productivity measures.

The first is an estimate of F in (23), derived by imposing the Cobb-Dougln.s

restriction that the coefficient of each weighted-factor-price change is unity.

This is essentially an estimate of total factor productivity. The second is

a conventional labor productivity (change in output per worker) estimate,

which is motivated in part by the measurement error in the nonlabor factor

prices. When thesc were regressed on the last six variables in Table 1,
                                          29


the pattern in that table   was repeated:      only increased concentration signi-

ficantly raised productivity. The magnitudes of the productivity improvement

are also familiar. At the sample means, these were:

        Total factor productivity: 8.6 percent, if concentration increases;

3.1 percent, if' concentration falls.

        Labor productivity: U.4 and 3.5 percent respectively.

        Finally,   I examine the sensitivity of the results to the time period
over which they    are estimated. The relevant issue here is how long it takes

before long-run effects dominate. A shorter time period will, for one thing,

make the production function-cost curve relationship in equations (22) and (23)

inappropriate. The more     substantive   risk of specificatn error arises from

the need to distinguish the transitory from the permanent changes in market

structure upon which the theoretical link to cost changes rests. Over short

periods, concentration changes will be dominated by forces, like differences

between the shape of large and small firm short-run marginal costs, which

are ignored by our theory. Moreover, firms which are expanding rapidly to

take   advantage of their lower   long-run costs can incur a short-run adjustment

cost penalty. All this suggests that if we focus on too short a time period,

the market structure-cost relationship will be unreliable and attenuated.2'

          Theory, though, gives no guidance on what is "too short" concretely.

Consequently, Table      shows the sample-mean cost changes derived

from replications of the regression in Table 1 on data from various subperiods.

For ease of comparison, the cost changes are shown per percentage point

 change in concentration. I also show the t-ratio for the coefficient of

 the growth interaction variable (CR1), since this turns out to be as concise

 a sununary test of the significance of market structure effects on costs for

 any subperiod as it is for the whole period.
                                                   30


                                                TABLE 4

                      COST REXJCTION (loGs) PER PERCENTAGE INT CHANGE
                         IN CONCENTRATION, ESTD4ATED AT SAMPLE MEANS,
                                    VARIOUS SUBPERIODS, 1947 -67


                            Industries with                      Industries with
                       Increasing Concentration             Decreasing Concentration
 Period
                     Cost Reduction
                         --
                                         t-ratio for
                                       Coeff. of CR1+         -?    -
                                                          Cost Reduction    t-ratio for
                                                                           CoefL of CR1-


 1911.7-67                    .91           3.25                   .36         1.55
                 J



1947-63                       .47           2.03                   .08         1.28

 1954-67                      .55           2.29                   .26         1.85

1947-58                       .6o           2.39*             (.12)            1.28

 1958-67                      .03            .393                  .li3        1.511.




Source: See text and Tables 1, 2, 3. Figures for 1947-67 cost reduction
         are the upper left-hand-corner entries in Tables 2 and 3 divided
         by the associated Z. All other cost reductions are derived
         analogously from regressions on subperiod data.

             Columns headed "t-ratio . . ." show absolute ratio of the
             coefficient of the CR1 variables to its standard error in
             the relevant regression.
             (       ) = cost increase
                 *     = coefficient of CR2 also had t > 2. All other t-ratios
                         for CR2 are less than 2.
                                           31

                                            the full period tends to hold for the
        The general pattern observed in

subperiods: changes in concentration are         associated   with cost reductions,

                                      concentration increases. However, the
and these are more pronounced 'when

siibperiod effects tend to be smaller than the full-period effects. This

                                           generating the cost reductions indeed
indicates that the underlying process
                                      two decades--to work itself out and/or that
takes considerable time--at least

it can be partly obscured    by impermanent      changes in market      ruur26
         In broad summary, then, the main result of this section is that long-

period changes in market structure are accompanied by increased efficiency.

                                                'where concentration is high and rising
This efficiency gain is nist pronounced

and where demand    is growing. In   the   next section I     discuss   the implications

of   this   result for output prices and for     the lengthy   literature on concentra-
tion   and profitability.
                                          32
                                                                                          )
III.    Market Structure, Prices and Profitability

           The existing literature on profitability and      concentration   provides a

convenient starting point for our analysis. Its almost universal conclusion

is that high concentration and high profitability go hand-in-hand. Since the

data used here share a coimnon source with Collins' and Preston's (1968)

contribution,  their results provide a useful starting point. Their
profitability measure is the "price-cost margin" (M) which is essentially:


                      Revenues - Coats   - (price
                                                    - unit   cost\
                          Revenues                  price
                                                                )

They make no explicit adjustment for capital costs, so that their costs are

essentially plant payroll +   material   costs.27 Their sample, like mine, is

drawn from the 14.-digit SIC universe. Their essential result is the regression

reproduced on line 14 of Table ,   in   which M is made dependent on the 4-firm

concentration ratio and the ratio of gross book value of fixed assets to

industry sales. (The latter is meant to adjust for capital costs.) Their

results can be compared with those of similar regressions for each census

year for the sample used in this study (lines 1-6). The pattern is clear:

the coefficient of concentration is almost always siificantly positive and

on the order of .1. (The generally superior results for the capital intensity

variable in my sample, while encouraging, need not concern us here.) The

concentration effect seems weaker in the two earliest samples,        but confidence
in   the basic result is greatly strengthened when the equation is estimated in
first differences ('.ines 7-9). Here the already weak level relationship
survives   the noise introduced by differencing, and its      maiitude consistently
                                                 33




                                               TABLE 5

      RRESSI0NS OF PRICE-COST MARCIU on CONCETRATtOt1 AND CAPITAL
           DrrENSITI. -DtGI7 SIC. ::UJSTBIES. VARIOUS YEARS


                                       Coefficients
                                   (t-ratios) of                    S.E.
      year of Census
                                       CR       GBV
                                                          R2       ,00        N




1.    1967                         .112         .097      .21       8.2       165
                                   (3.9)        (l.3)
2.    1.963                        .11.8        .103      .23       8.0       165
                                   (I.3)        (L2)
                                   .099         .069      •lI       8.o       165
3. 1958
                                   (3.6)        (2.)
I..   1958                         .122          .01].    .13        •        288
      (ColLins and                (>2.6)        (<1.6)
      Preston        (1968),
      p.   99)

5.    1954                           .069        .086     .10        7.8      165
                                     (2.6)       (2.5)
6.    19'e7                          .02k        .122     .10        7.1      165
                                     (1.0)       (3.9)
      Dtferences
7. 19674947                            .103      .018     .0"        5.9      165
                                     (2.s)        (.8)
8. 1967-1958                           .137     -.031     .oi        .7
                                       (2.9)      (1.7)
9.    1958-1947                        .120     -.025     .04        5.2      165
                                       (2.5)      (.8)

Note: Source for &U d3ta Census of M3nufctures end Anrui
      Survey of Manufsctures (various years). Dependent vrito1e
       ii). (vtlued awAei - payroll cost)/valuC or ip?1eflt. ror
             4-diit      SIC industry.

             CR =    4-firm    concentration ratio.

             G3V groz boo. rilue of              depreciibie issets/Y1.u f
                       shipeteutz.

             Line 4 i reproduced fr a reres3in which irtcLues to
             additiofl1  rriib1. de.ifled to me1ure the ocrtic extent
             of the euritt. The coefficient of     variuI. w: in-
             51,nificant at the .1 level. The simple regrs:cn of 4
             on CR 'jtltod 1 coeffiCiCflt of .125 (t         R    .12.
              Ccc Collifl3 end rre:ton,         p. 99.
                     sastple   size.

                 .n.t rerorted.
              Llnea 7, 8. 9:                thctC ehir,'ea 1 t bet jelr.
              it1citcd r r';r.d on c'ir.:e in                   CR and .51.
                                           314                                           fl

duplicates   that in the Collins and Preston data. This comparability of

level and change effects is extremely important, since it permits comparison

between the main body of my results (which are necessarily estimated in

changes) and that of the literature typified by Collins and Prestonts study

(which invariably employs levels).

       A typical inference drawn from results such as those in Table 5 is

that they signify inefficiency in concentrated markets. The problems wit1

this inference may be seen with the aid of the following simplified linear

representation of equations (5) and (6). Let the analogue to (5) be


(25)                                  P=C+as,

where a =    positive   coefficient measuring the impact of collusion, which

increases with concentration (s), while the analogue to (6) is


(26)                                 C=C0-bs,

where b is another positive coefficient, arid C0 =         constant.   Here, all

markets are lnitally atomistic (s — 0).          Then some firms in some markets

discover lower costs and gain market share. If these firms are sufficiently

few, (26) will approximate the cross-market deviations of C from C0.              Now,

even if (25) and (26)     hold   simultaneously (see below), the reduced form

typically estimated in the literature will entirely conceal the process in

(26). e 'margin" in this context can be defined as P - C,              and (25)

implies tat

                                        = p - C = as
(27)
                                             35


That   is, a regression estimate of (27) reveals only the collusion effect,

when the reduced form for P is


(28)                                   p= C0 +     (a-b)s

The net allocative effect of concentration depends on the relative magnitudes

of a and b. Matters become more complicated if P responds differently

to the components of C in (26). For example, suppose that low-cost firms fail

to capture all the market because they eventually run              into   scale diseconomies, so

that   their marginal cost exceeds average cost. Then P will not fall by the whole
bs term in (26). Approximate this, by rewriting (28),

(29)                                 p=l.C0-kbs+as,
where k <       1   is a constant. In this r1d, the reduced form (27) becomes

(30)                                 "M" = (a +    (1-k)b]s

Note that both () and (30) imply the same sign for the coefficient of s,
and that the sign in (30) is positive even if there is no collusion (a = 0).
Thus, the conventional finding of a positive sign is               consistent with an entirely
noncollusive        process. There are    then    two main   empirical   problems that have to be

confronted: essentially, (1) what is the relative magnitude of a and b, and

 (2) is a positive?

          The   qualitative answer to the     first question can     be   gleaned   by looking
behind the results in Table          5. Using     Collins   and Preston's   result on line

and assuming        that   something like (28) rather than ( 30)    holds (i.e., that
k = 1),     the definition of the       margin    implies
                                                     36


(31)                              =    .122   =    (1 - M)       -
                                                                     d%nC]


so that the relevant total derivative is


                                       d%np  .122  dLnC
(31)'                                  ds — (1-M) + d.s


where the first term on the r.h.s. is the assumed "collusion" component. In

these samples,     (1 -ii)       .8, and the          top left-hand entry in Table 4     is    an

estimate of the second r.h.s. term when there is an increase in concentration.

Thus, in this case, an estimate of (31)' yields


                                   dLnP
(31)"                                             .15 -   .91 = -.76

This    result--that the cost effect dominates strongly                 over   any collusion

effect--will survive the subsequent refinements. So a major inference of

the received literature needs to be reversed. In fact, increased concentra-

tion signifies a net improvement in efficiency, and                    this   is a substantial

multiple of .ny   collusion effects.
         To get at these price effects more directly, we want to estimate the

structural equation (5).          In   the present context, this requires estimates of

(log) changes in industry price indices. The Census' industry "unit value'

indices provide such estimates, but their use entails a major statistical

problem. The unit        cost   variable is industry costs deflated by an             output
index. Th. the same output index Is often used to deflate industry sales in

order o estimate the price irldex.28 Thus any measurement error in the output

index will be shared by both price and unit cost changes, and straightforward

OL estimat?    of' (5)    will   yielc?. biased and inconsistent coefficients.
                                           37


        To overcome this problem, I use a two-stage procedure in which the

predicted values of the unit cost variable from the Table 1 regression are

used   as regressors explaining price changes, thereby "purging" the cost

variable of the measurement error it shares with price changes. The resulting

estimate of the price change structural equation is in Table 6.               It   includes

the following independent variables in addition         to the    change in unit cost.

         1. The change in concentration, to capture the partial (i.e., costs-

held-constant) effect of market structure on prices.

         2. Growth in sales. This Is a proxy        for   growth in demand, and this

should increase price if most markets have long-run increasing costs, or

adjustment     to equilibrium takes    over 20 years.

         3.    A correction (OCST) for costs excluded from        the    Census. The
establishment basis of census reporting means that the Census' cost measure
excludes items like advertising and central headquarters overhead. These

excluded      costs ought to affect price changes when they do not change proportionately

with the included costs. However, Internal. Revenue Service data from tax returns

include total deductions by item for 3-digit industries. The largest item ("cost

of sales and operations") corresponds roughly to the             costs   measured by the Census.

Therefore, it is possible to compute a proxy for the ratio of total costs to costs

measured by the Census from the S data at the 3-digit level.                  The log change in

this ratio (0CST) is then entered for each 14-digit industry falling within any

3-digit class.29 Unless OCST is a perfect proxy, it should have a positive co-
                                  30
efficient below that of COST.
                                                                         and all of the co-
         The results are consistent with prior expectations,
                                                                         standard error.31
 efficients are considerably greater than their asymptotic
                                      38




                                    TABlE 6

 EFFECT OF UNIT COST AND CONCENTRATION (RANGES ON PRICE QLANGES,
                      1947-67. 1#-DIGIT SIC LNDUSThS


        Independent Variables                                Coefficient
                                              Coefficient         —
  Symbol              Description                           Standard Error

 DCR            thange in 4 firm                 .212           3.818
            V
                concentration ratio

COST            tog change in unit   cost        .934          21.767

GRO             Log change In total              .050           4.630
                revenues

 OCST           tog change   of ratio of         .323           3.773
                "ES" to "Census Costs                                        T)
 Constant                    --                 1.200           0.911



Note: Dependent variable is log change of 1947-67     industry
      price index. Census unit value indexes are     used where
        available,, otherwise industry value of shipments is
        deflated by an output index.   (flie latter procedure
        introduces error where there is net accumulation or
        depletion of inventories.) Source: Census of
        Manu: :tures, various years.

        COST is Dred.icted value from Table 1 regression.
        See text.

        See text for description of GRO and OCST. Sources:
        GRO-Census of Manufactures, 1947 and 1967; OCST-
        internal Revenue Service, Source Book of Statistics
        of Income, 1947 and 1967.

        Sample size: 165. All variables x 100.
                                              39


It is especially interesting that a 95          percent    confidence interval for the

COST coefficient barely overlaps unity.            This   means   that,    at least over two

decades, sellers appear to retain some small part             of   any    unusual   productivity

             bear part of      atypical cost increases). This coupled with              the
gains (and

finding   that   high   and rising   concentration is conducive to lower costs may

help explain part of the observed correlation between concentration and

profitability. But       there   is more to this story,      since   the DCB coefficient

in Table 6 is also       positive. We      can get at the net effect of an increase in

concentration by using the information in Tables 2 and 6 to evaluate the

total derivative in (7). For the "average" case of increasing concentration

(DCR =    +8.8),   the approximate total effect is:


                         coefficient of DCR x      +8.8    = .212 x 8.8

                         -   coefficient of COST x           - .934 x 8.o
                             cost reduction if
                             DCR = +8.8 (see Table 2)

                                                           = +1.9% - 7.5%

                                                           = -5.6%


or _.6li% per percentage point increase in concentration. This last figure

is   directly   comparable to, and not very different from, (31)", which now
enables    s to understand the process underlying the main result of the
concentration_profitability ilterature. Briefly, more concentration raises
profitability, not because trices rise, but 3ecause they fall by less than
 costs.    If we   ignore doubt about the significance of the cost effect when
 co!lcentration    falls, a similar calculation yields a price reduction of

 I.i.L percent for the average (DCR =        -8.1)   case (or .55    percent    per point

 reduction in concentration). The two effects are roughly comparable, because

 the weak cost effect is reinforced by the pure price effect in the latter case.
          These relults pose an immediate question about the meaning of the

pure price effect. Is it plausible to attribute that effect to collusion?

Recall that an alternative interpretation would rely on rents to differential

efficiency, and these could be consistent with a competitive process. These

alternatives can be distinguished by estimating the effect of DCR        separately
for the rising and falling concentration subsamples. Since costs decline for

both    types of change, the "rent" interpretation implies an offsetting DCR effect
for both types. In particular, this means that the coefficient of a decrease in
concentration      should be negative (or, since the cost effect is weak, at least not

positive), which offsets some of the tendency of the cost reduction to lower prices.

         This "rent" interpretation is not, however, borne out empirically.

When   the DCR variable in Table 6 is    bifurcated, with each new variable equal

to    the DCR with a comnn sign and    zero   otherwise, the coefficients of both
are positive      and virtually identical to the value in Table 6.   This   means

than when concentration falls, prices decline by more than costs and measured

industry   profitability falls. This process seems inconsistent with a pure "rent"
interpretation, so the     asymmetry between the profitability effects of increasing

and   decreasing concentration renders the "cost of collusion" interpretation more
             32
plausible.
         Noncollusive    interpretations cannot, however, be entirely ruled out. For

example, when an output expansion by an efficient firm imposes losses on other

firms,   there    is no need for the industry   in the aggregate to earn rents from this
efficiency. And the likelihood of negative aggregate rents is greater if the
efficient,    growing firm is small initially    than if it is large, simply because
the   small firm has fewer inputs on which it can earn the efficiency rents that

migit outweigh everyone else's loss. Unless the small firm gets to be sufficiently
large, concentration will decline. Thus, coexistence of declining rents with

declining concentration can be consistent with competition.33

       Even if the results in Table 6 are consistent with some collusion, they

may overstate its importance. The theory which      permits   some rents to efficient

firms implies that concentration-induced cost changes have a smaller effect on

price than   industry-wide    changes in, say, wage rates. The positive coefficient

of DCR may, in part, be correcting for our failure to allow, for such differential

effects by lumping all sources of cost change into the one COST variable. To

test this, I implemented something like (29) by breaking COST into the component

due to the change in concentration and that due to all other forces. The co-

efficients of these were .75 and .98, respectively, while that of DCR declined

to .16. The implied total effect on price of an average increase in concentration

becomes 1i..5,   instead   of -5.6 percent. While this procedure does not allow a test

of significance, the difference in the cost coefficients is consistent with some

rents for innovating firms even in the absence of collusion.

       The direct effect of concentration on price seems to have a shorter gesta-

tion period than the cost effect. This is evident in Table 7, which gives the

coefficient of DCR in subperiod estimates of the regression in Table 6. These

are uniformly positive and close to the full period estimate. This means that

prices adjust completely to a change in concentration within a decade and that

temporary and permanent changes have equally powerful price effects. This pattern

may help explain the survival of the erroneous conventional wisdom about concentra-

tion. Consider a merger which permanently increases concentration and reduces

collusion costs. This permanence may hinge on efficiencies which, however, take

a 1on time for the merged firm to implement. Thus, the immediate and perhaps

most easily detectable effect of the merger may well be an increase in price.
                                          142


         Since efficiency effects take hold so gradually, it would be desirable

 to observe the full price effect of changes in concentration over periods even

longer than two decades. The only data currently available for this are crude,

but they are suggestive. For a handful of 1-digit industries from 1939 to 1967

output indexes can be pieced together. Since sales data are not uniformly avail-

able, deflating value added by output is as close as we can come to a price in.-

dex. In Table 8, the change in this "unit value added" is shown for 214 industries

which experienced a large (10 or more percentage points) change in concentration,

from   1939 to 1967, and whose growth in output or value added over the period was
at least half that of all manufacturing or of their 2-digit groups. On average,
these industries' "price" performance is about 20 percent better than that of
either their 2-digit groups or all manufacturing. While      it   is hardly uniform,
this superior performance characterize virtually all the large deviations. Like
the previous results, the degree of superiority is similar regardless of the direc-
tion of change in concentration (but, here it is more reliable for decreases).

Since the   average change inconcentration here is about 17 percentage points, the
average price effects here are about double those for the l9k7_67 sample.
bt too much can be made of this result, but it hints at the danger of
ignoring the longer run   consequences   of a change in concentration.
        The Role of the Number of Firms in an Industry. The empirical work has so

far focused on concentration, since this allows comparability with a large litera-

tu.re. However another structural characteristic, the number of firms, merits ex-

aznination, for it may affect both costs and prices. Telser (1972) has shown that,

holding concentration constant, the price-cost margin increases with the number

of firms. While this may    disappoint   Cournot's descendants, Telser suggests that

it is consistent with an alternative, competitive dis-equilibrium explanation:
                     43




                   TABLE 7

   PARTIAL PRICE EFFECT OF CHAIE IN
           CONCE?11RATION, VARIOUS
             SUBFRIODS, 1911? -67


               Coefficient     Coefficient/
Period            of CR       Standard Error


19117-67          .212               3.816

19147-63          .233               14.130

19514-67          .251               4.219
19117-58          .159               2.628

1958-67           .286               14.346
                                                                       I44
                                                                     TABLE 8

                                                C1WGE IN UNIT VAWE           I..DDED, 1939-67
                                                      INIXJSTRIES    UrN lARGE CI4ANGE
                                                               IN CONCENTRATION



                      Increasing Concentration                                                     Decreasing Concentration
                                         (1)               (2)                                                        (3)                (14)
              SIC                   lDg Change  in    (1) -Average                      SIC                   Ing Change       in    (3) -Average
and     Industry                     Unit Value        Change for          and      Industry                   Unit Value            Change for
                                   Added (x 100)          Group                                              Added (x 100)              Group


!22                                 111.1                     -—
                                                                           !.2                                111.1

20143     Cereals                            110.2            -0.9         20146 Corn         Refining                      91.5        -19.6

2071 Candy                                   119.2            8.1          2073 Chewing            Gum                      59.6        -51.5

2072 Chocolate                               128.0            16.9                                            89.6
                                                                           printing
208V Beer & Ale                                           614.7
                                                                                               .

                                             146.14                                                                                     -25.2
                                                                           2753      Digraving                              614.14
2087      Syrup                              21.1         -90.0
                                                                           Chemicals                           26.3
2098 Macaroni                                120.5            9.14
                                                                           2813       Industrial Gases                      -4o.6       -66.9
Chemicals                            26.3                     --
                                                                           petroleum
                                                                           —                                  103.7
284A Toiletries                              57.3             31.0
                                                                           2951      Asphalt Paving                         38.3        -65.4
Metal Products                      122.5                     --
                                                                           Rubber                             103.1
31496 Collapsible Thbes                      88.7         -33.8
                                                                           3021 Rubber ioes                             125.5            22.!.
Machinery                           714.14
                                                                           Stone, Clay, Glass                 105.1
3555      printing    Mach.                  85.6             11.2
                                                                           3291 Abrasives                               102.0            -3.1
Electrical Eqpt.                     72.0                                  3293 Gaskets                                 115.2            10.1.
                                                                                                                                                    )
3633 Washers & Dryers                        65.9             -6.1
                                                                           Metal products                     122.5
 Instruments                        108.8                                  31425 Handsaws                               132.9            10.!.
 3871 Watches                                56.5         -52.3            3181 'racks &           Nails                    90.0        -32.5
Miscellaneous                       100 .2                                   Instruments                      108.8
3953      Markers                            53.5         -46.7            38143      Dental       Eqpt.                    88.14       -20.14


                                                          .                Miscellaneous                      100.2*
                                                                             3953     Pins & Needles                        63.0        -37.2


Column                                                                     Column

        Average                     100.2*   79.14        -18.2                     Average                   100.2* 77.5               -23.2

        Standard Error                         9.9            11.0                  Standard Error                          13.5          8.5


Note: Columns (1) and (3 are logarithms of a 1967          index of value added per unit of output (1939 =                             i.oo).
          V1ue      added per uni' is value added deflated by an index of output.

          Valie ac'ded    and   output   indexes are from Census of Manufactures various years.

          "Group' r'fers to the 2-digit SIC class.

          914'7 output
                       indexes were unavailable for the following industries: 281414, 31496, 3555, 3953, and all
          "decrea:;ing concentration" Industries, except 20146, 2813, 3021. In these cases, the 2-d11t industry
          output thdexes were cubstitutec!.

          0   • tut'U   menu    '-'turinc.
the high   margins   are attracting entrants. But our theory of structure-related
efficiency raises yet another alternative. In its broadest                form that theory

posits a relationship between efficiency and
                                             inequality, of              which concentra-

tion    is just one indicator. Thus, consider the case where concentration in-

creases even   though the number of firms also increases, so smaller firms are
losing   market share. This means that        the   discrepancy in size between the largest

firm and the "typicalt'    firm grows     wider than   it would   if   both were gaining mar-

ket   share. On the other hand, when concentration declines in the race of an exit

of firms, this size discrepancy is narrowing more than otherwise. In either

case,    the unusually   rapid   growth   of one type of firm ought to be related      to an
unusual    cost advantage. To test this, I added two terms to the regression in

Table 1: the log change in number of firms if concentration decreased (zero

otherwise), and the same variable for industries with decreasing concentration

(zero otherwise). On the preceding argument, these should have negative and

positive coefficients respectively. They did, though the effects were not overly

powerfu.1. (both elastricties were around .1, with t-ratios of about 1.6).

          To ascertain the competitive effects of a change in the number firms, I

then added this variable to the regression in Table 6. On Telser's tentative

explanation for his result, more firms would be attracted by rising prices,

holding costs constant. However, the coefficient of the log change in number

of firms is virtually zero (.003, t =          0.2).   Thus my data hint that the main

role played by the number firms is on the cost side of the profitability equa-

tion.


Conclusions

          Most practitioners have chosen to interpret the profitability-

concentr:ttion relationship as evidence for collusion. A minority has
                                       i6

emphasized the concentration-efficiency nexus. The evidence here is consis-

tent with an eclectic view, but one in which efficiency effects predominate.

An important implication of this finding is that, for an its bulk, the

concentration-profitability literature is incomplete. Since it has largely

been motivated by a collusion model, most of its growth has been elaboration

of that theme. However, attention to the efficiency effects of concentration

may yield the larger research payoff. For example, one major task is to

separate the symptomatic from the causal elements in the statistical relation-

ship between concentration and efficiency. A firm may stumble onto a cost-

reducing process and then expand its share of the market. The two events

yield distinguishable efficiency gains. The former of these is not caused

by the increase in concentration, but both will be statistically related to

it. More commonly, perhaps, efficiency does not come free, and this creates

an immediate complication. Investment   in   search   for   efficiency will be

induced by low costs of expansion, so in that sense the Increase in concen-

tration and the initial discovery are causally related.4

       If the literature is incomplete, so is the rationale it provides for

legal hostility to concentration. The possibility that an anti-concentration

policy can retain most of the efficiency gains associated with concentration

and rield a net improvement in resource allocation cannot be ruled out.

it if the magnitudes of the effects we have measured here are close to

correct, the odds are against that   possibility.     It is not clear that U.S.

antitrust policy restricts concentration very much (Pashigian, 1968; Stigler,

1966). However, if it does this, it is more likely to reduce efficiency, raise

prices, and reduce owner wealth.
                                         17

                                     risks facing an anti-concentration
      To get at the magnitude of the

policy, we can   focus   on industries which have a four-firm concentration

                                        concentration ratio in this sector is
ratio greater than .5. The average

around .7, and the typical member spent something over 70 cents per dollar
                                               Now imagine that through a divesti-
of output for payroll and raw materials.
                                              such an industry is reduced to .5.
ture action the concentration ratio for
                                       could raise unit costs on the order of
Given our empirical results, this

20 percent, which in turn wouldraise price by 10 to 15 percent. Assuming
                                           would impose a cost on consumers of
unit elastic demand, the lower figure

around 9.6w per dollar's worth of output, of which 9.l would be a transfer

to producers. Resource costs would increase by around l2.7 per dollar of
                                     3.6 per dollar, ar. the total loss would be
output, so producers would lose
                                 concentrated sector currently accounts for around 1/1
 just over l3& Since this

 or $250 billion of manufacturiI sales, any extensive deconcexltratiofl program

 would risk imposing losses which are many times greater than the typical
                                                                                   es-
                                          of the benefits such a policy might have
 timates (e.g., see Harberger, l95li)

 been thought    to   produce.
                                              Footnotes

         *
          Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago and National

Bureau of Economic Research. This study has been supported by a grant

from   the National Science Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic
Research for research in       law   and economics. The paper is not an official
Bureau   publication since it has not yet undergone the full critical             review
accorded     Bureau publications, including review by the Bureau's Board of

Directors. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not

necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

         I   am indebted to Gerald Dwyer and Stephen           &itin for their researc.h

assistance,      and to Gary Becker, Yale         Brozen, Harold Dernsetz, George Stigler

and   Lester   Telser   for helpful comments on an earlier draft.

         1See Williamson (1968) for           a discussion of this kind   of problem.


         2Thjs   does not, of course, mean that efficiency, appropriately de-
fined, deteriorates, but only that average cost                is an inappropriate efficiency

proxy in this case.

         3This follows from

                                     A           T        sT




when we impose a supply-demand equilibrium condition on dP/dX.                  This    con-

dition comes down to




                                     i3 ___
                                         dP
                                        ED+ES                                                   )
                                  cases--a constant shift in        s,    and   a constant
         For two familiar                                                                 A =
                                                                     A           1 and
                                   is always    < 0. In the former, S
percentage shift__dC/dX

so (3)      is

                                                E         T
                                  dC_-C           S      R
                                  dX           Es+ED Q

In    the   latter   case,



                                       4R
and

                             dC    _5A RA RT RT               E3




                                                                                         T T
 if    A is initially         an average       firm,   so that its unit   rents   equal R Is

 this    too is negative.

            It attenuates the price decrease, but also retards the fall in unit

 cost.
            6There is another sense in which           the   level of market share matters,

 which turns out to be empirica]-li important:                  the bracketed term gets larger,

 the larger the share of the most efficient type firm, because C gets smaller.

 Thus, for a given increase in that type's share, the cost effect is larger the

 larger its market share.
                                          50

      7Note that there is an implicit conjecture here.that Z is correlated
with s(l-s), because the aD terms affect only relative firm growth rates
directly.      In fact, in the sample we shall use subsequently, the correlation

of the 19147_67 Z with the 1911.7 s(l-s) is a significant ÷.22.


      8The     simple correlation is -.23.
      9That     is, the small   firm in   a growing industry could accumulate a given
volume of output (and experience) as quickly as a larger firm In a dec1inin

industry.


     10There is an ambiguity here in that the empirical regularity we are

seeking   to incorporate   applies to small      firms generally, while the m

variable applies to firms which end up small whatever their original size.

I treat the effect of this ambiguity later, but it is essentially forced by

the available data.


     UThe important nonliriearities arise from the dual role of Z as an

indicator and implementor of cost changes. Ignoring the growth Interaction

implied by (20), this feedback leads to C < 0. The growth interaction

complicates this:          becomes uacertain for ds > 0,            because higher Z

implies loSs of the growth benefits on small firm costs. These benefits

depend on the level of small firm costs, and this makes Czg 0 for

ds   0. For example, if ds >        0,    dZ > 0 implies an increase in the ratio

M/L (or D'). Since the beneficial effect of g on C is amplified at

higher levels of' M and diluted by the positive ds, this implies further

that C < 0.         These results for C          and C        hold both for (17) and (17)'
          zg                                zz           zg
and their Taylor expansion (21).
                                          51


          'The main changes in classific3.tiOfl occur in 1958. in some cases, the

post 1958 SIC
                   combines pre-1958 industries. These were retained in the sample

only Ifpre-1958 concentration ratios could be reliably inferred for the post-
1958 industry. In practice, this means that the industries merged have firms
so small that none could conceivably be among the four largest prior to 1958,
because the total output of the merged industry's largest four is much less
than the average output         of the merging industry's largest four.


       The 19511. Census       of   ManufactUres, volume 5, singles out industries with
unreliable output indexes. I deleted such industries where the 19511. index
(19WT   100) was more than 50 percent different from that of its 2-digit

class.
                  specialization means    that   the plants in the SIC industry produce

 substantial amounts for other markets, thus calling into question the relevance

 of the market definition. Low coverage means that plants elsewhere produce a

 large part of this industry's output, thus calling into question the meaning

 of   narrowly     based market structure measures. I deleted industries where the

 1917 or 1967 product of the specialization aod coverage ratio was under .6

 or where either changed         by over .1 between    these   years.
                                                                             for
          15A list of these industries is available on request. They account

 about half of U.S. manufacturing sales.

          l6Gross book value (GBV) data are available from           19511. (Annual Survey of

 Manufactures),       but the coverage expands over time.         Where   gaps      had to be

  filled, a log linear form of GBVt1 =              f'(G1t, x) was      first   estimated, where X

      t   vctor    which includes capital expenditures         between t -      1    ai'd   t (o
           art   inverse   form of the relationship running     from GBVt_i to G!3V),
                                                52

industry sales      (which is used as a size deflator), and Internal Revenue

Service data on assets for the 3-digit industry superclass. The missing

GBVt1 are then filled in using the regression weights and known values of

the independent variables. The entire set of GBV17 had to be estimated

in this fashion, since pre-1954 GBV                    data   are unavailable.


       None of the results reported subsequently are substantially                     different
if   capital   costs are excluded. The               correlation between the capital cost

inclusive and exclusive cost changes is +.98.


       The industry price indexes are:
         Endexi = W        +            -
                               AGi(PA
               FM   =   Manufactured        products wholesale price index,
               PA = Farm products WPI,

            AG1 = 1963         direct and indirect purchases of agricultural products
                        per dollar of SIC industry l's total           purchases of materials.

For 1957 = 100:                 = .759,       PA7 = 1.099,           = 1.072,    PA67 = l.00kl.

       l9      addition,       if my   implicit assumption about the importance of adjust-

 ment costs is wrong, effects of intraperiod changes in concentration will not

be captured. For example, both a brief rise in concentration and a subsequent

 fall which offsets it might be cost-induced, and these effects are assumed

 away here.

       20Much the same cost effect was found by assuming any of a wide r&nge of

 positive values for a for that subsample. See subsequent discussion.
                                                    53


           Specifically,      at the sample means, we obtain the following signs

fcr partial derivatives from the regressic (with the                       signs   derived from

(17)., or 5 =      ( - a c 0 in parent.eses):
                                       C
                                           z
                                               <0         (<c)
                                       Czz >0             (?)
                                       Cg<O
                                                          (<o)
                                       CZg<O              (<o)

         221he   importance of the growth interaction                is clear when the regression

 in   Table 1 is estimated without some of the other nonlinearities. No explana-
 tory   power is gained by adding              only the change in concentration, or CR2, to
 the    first 5   variables.     However, most           of   the able 1 results a.re        reproduced
 when linear      growth    interaction terms (gZ1)               are   added. See subsequent dis-
 cussicn.

          23There are      two types   of   cost changecoflcefltratiOfl level relationships
                                                      t3 above.
 embodied. in the model. One is described in footnote
          The other resides in the market share adjustment process ((16) and

                                                                         the   rows of Tables 2 and
 (16)'.      If we hold Z constant, as is done along

 3, and    the .djustment coefficient is also constant, then the large firm-sma

 firm    :st difference       (the D' or D in ((16)                 or   (16)')   is   implicitly a fur-

                                                                                              C. Specif-
 tion of s, and the           extent of this difference obviously affects

 ically, the      $azne Z implies a higher D' the                   ftrther s is from .5. Thus
 ie relatic;           o   be'een   C and s is reinforced                 for s >      ., but offset
  or
                 a d       term--ch               che tio c':'      book value     o asset for nc'n-

                                               ductivity       regress'., t              c       rr ..'
  .lix.
 //
     //
                                         54


       2ne   also has to be aiind.ful   of    the reciprocal nature of this relation-

ship. A firm--and therefore the industry in which it is classified--can

become more efficient today, while its cost advantage is only subsequently

translated into larger market share.

       2ne reason for this is that more general long-run equilibrium cost

changes occur slowly. The subperiod regressions underlying Table 4 tend to

be   characterized   by insignificant or implausible negative coefficients for

the   factor-share-weighted input price change terms, which is a symptom of'
incomplete adaptation to these price changes. Like the market share effects,
these input price effects also tend to be more erratic over the two shorter
subperiods.

        2See Collins & Preston (1968), p. 119 for qualifications.

       28d the rest of the time the output index is estimated by deflatirg
 industry    sales by the price Index.

       '9More precisely, our main cost variable is census costs +            estimated

 capital (interest +     depreciation)   costs. In computing OCST, therefore, the

 denominator includes depreciation, interest and          .2   x stockholders equity


 (roughly    the postwar average pre-ta.x return on equity in manufacturing) as
 well as "cost of sales" and operations. The numerator is reported total
 deductions plus the imputed cost of equity.

        30It the     true relationship be

                                             p = aC*


 where C* =     change   in total costs. Let C =       costs   included   in COST, so

                                          C* R C
                                         55


where R = C*/C.     However,   we know only the proxy for R, OCST. If

                                  R =   b + d(OcsT)


the estimate of p is


                                P = ab + ad(OCST) + aC



If   there is no measurement error, b =       0,   d = 1,   and   ad = a.   3it since


OCST is not a perfect proxy, d < 1 and E(ad) < a.
        So long as d > 0, we want to take account of any market share
effects on the costs not in C. For example, If the share of central office
overhead in total costs grows with concentration, part of the previously
calculated cost reduction would be offset. However, regressing OCST on the
market share variable in Table 1 yielded insignificant (and numerically
trivial) effects of both increased and decreased concentration.
       31The coefficient of GRO may be partly spurious, since the dependent
variable   is GRO-change in    output. If GRO is deleted, the remaining co-
efficients are    virtually unchanged and their standard errors increase by
about :/.

       Stigler (1961i.) argues that the Herfindahl (H) index is superior to the con-
 centration ratio as a proxy for the cost of collusion. Since the Herfindahi
 index is unavailable for our sample, this argument cannot be directly tested.
 However, Nelson (1963)   provides H for a sample of Ii.-digit        industries.    I
 regressed   the log of H on the log of concentration and its square, and

 found an essentially constant elasticity of about 1.8. This crude empiricism

 and Stigler's theory suggest that      raising concentration to a power and sub-
 situting the change in this varialbe for DCR in Table 6 will improve the
                                                    56


results, if     the   "cost of collusion" interpretation is correct. I attempted

this    transformation for powers ranging from .25 to 2, end the results are
encouraging for Stigler's model. The coefficient of this transformed variable
rose steadily relative to its asymptotic standard error as the power was
increased. At a power =         2,    this ratio was 4.97 (compared to 3.82 for power =
1),    and the coefficient is .25 x 10 -2
          pirically, this means that the                 total   price effect of a change in
concentratlonis essentially invariant to the level of concentration (s),
because the differing price and             cost    effects cancel. To illustrate, for
DCR =   +8.8,    and the    sample average CR (= 36.3),                  the    partial price effect
is     .25 x 10_2(1l0.72 -   3192)        = 1.6%,     and the total price effect is -5.9%.

For CR = 6o,       this calculation is .25 x lo_2(61.14.2 -                     55.62)   = 2.6%,     but

note from Table 2 that the cost effect is also larger (9.2% v. 8.0%), and the

total effect (2.6 -        .94(9.2)   =    -6.0)    Is the same.


             am indebted to Yale Brozen for pointing this out. A simple numerical

example may clarify his argument:              Consider      a five—firm industrj where firm A

initially has 6o percent of the market and B, .                        . .,E   each have 10 percent.

Let "CR" then be 60 percent. Initially P = C =                    1,     and there are zero rents.

Now let any one of these firms (a) discover a way to lower C to .8, (b) cut

P to .9 and (c) add 20 points to its market share. The efficient, growing

firm   then   gets rent per unit      of    its output =         .1,   while all other firms suffer

a loss of .1 per unit. If A is the efficient firm, CR will Increase to 80,

and industry rents per unit will be +.o6 =                  .80(.i)      +     .20(—.1).       If B is the

efficient firm and gains sales proportionately from other firms (including A),

CR will decline to I6_2/3; B Is bigger (30 percent of the market), but still

not as big as A. In this case, unit rents are _.014 =                           .30(+.l)   +    .T0(—.i).
                                        57



                                     together with decreasing concentration if B
There would be increasing rents
                                       of the market and thus replaces A as the
obtains between 50 and 60   percent
                                         of the example is that the firm discovering
dominant firm. The essential logic
                              (and earn rents) to all its output, not just the
the efficiency can apply it

output it adds; and A has the larger output base.


        This is at least one way   to interpret   the importance   of   the interaction

between growth and   concentration   in explaining efficiency. The growth       can


both   lower expansion costs and   increase   the payoff to a cost-saving discovery.
                                             58

                                        References
                                                                          in
Bain, Joe, "Economies of Scale, Concentration, and the Condition of Entry
         Twenty    ManufactUriZ Industries," American Economic Revie5 14.1, 1
         (March, 19514), 15-39.
                                                              and the
Berndt, nst and Christensen, Laurits; "The Translog Fu.nction
         Substitution of Equipment, Structures and Labor in U.S. anufacturiflg,
         1929-68," Journal of EconometriCs 1 (1973), 8i-ll11.
Collins, Norman, and Preston, Lee, Concentration and Price-Cost MarginS_p
      anufaCtUriflg Industrie!, Berkeley, 1968.
                                                       and Public Policy,"
Denisetz, Harold, "Industry Structure, Market Rivalry,
         Journal     of Law and Economi i6 (April 1973), 1-9.
              "Two   Systems of Belief About Monopoly," in Goldscbzflid, et aL
          Industrial Concentration: the New Learning,             Boston, 1974.
(ed.),
Harberger,    Arnold, "Monopoly        and Resource    Allocation," American Economic

         Review 11.14., 2 (May, 19511.), 77-87.


McGee, John,         In   Defense of Industrial Concentratiofl, New York, 1971.


Nelson,    Ralph, Concentration in the Manufacturing Industries of the United

          States, New Haven, 1963.

 Pashigian, B. Peter, "Market Concentration in the United States and                Great

          itain," Journal         of   Law   and Economics   11 (October, 1968),   299-320.

 St.g1e. George, "The Economies of Scale," Journal of Law
                                                          and Economics 1

                          1958), 54-71.
          ,
          (October,

              "A   Theory of Oligopoly,-" Journal of political Economy, 62, 1
          (February, 1964).
          ,  "The Economic Effect of the Antitrust Laws," Journal of Law and

          Economics 9 (October,         1966),    225-58.
                                       59


Telser,    Lester, Competition, Collusion,       and Game   Theory,   Chicago, 1972.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Annual Survey of Manufacture,

        various issues.

_______, Census of Manufactur, various issues.

u.s. Department of Commerce, Office of Business Economics, Input-Output

          Structure   of   the U.S. Economy, 1963 Direct and Indirect      irchase,
        Washington, 1967.
U.S. Internal Revenue Service, Source Book of Statistics of Income (unpublished),

          various years.
                                                   Relationship and Antitrust," in
Weiss, Leonard, "The Concentration-Profits

          Goldschmid et al. (eds.), Industrial Concentration:           The New Learrtirtg,


          New York, 19711, 1811-233.

Williamson, Oliver, "Economies as an Antitrust Defense," American Economic

          Rev,    58, 1 (March, 1968), 18-36.
