V•0S




                     ALTERNATIVE TRADE STRATEGIES AND EMPLOYMENT
                       — PLAN OF RESEARCH FOR COUNTRY STUDIES

                                    Anne 0. Krueger
                              NBER and University of Minnesota


                                  Working Paper No. 164




                   (Also   issued as Project Working Paper No. ].in the
              project      on Alternative Trade Strategies and Employment)



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, Inc.
                                26]. Madison Avenue
                               New York, N.Y. 10016



                                     January 1977




            NBER working papers are distributed iziformally and in limited
       number for comments only. They should not be quoted without written
       permission.

            This  report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
       publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
       by. the Board of Directors.

            The research on Alternative Trade Strategies and Employment is
       supported by a research contract with the U.S. Agency for International
       Development.
                                                               January 1977

                       Project   Working   Paper   No.   1

                  PLAN OF RESEARCH FOR COUNTRY STUDIES

                             Anne 0. Krueger

     Preface
 I. Introduction                                                           I

                                                                           2
II. Objective

        Alternative Hypothese                                  5
        Current State of Knowledge on Trade Strategies —
                                                          — —  8
        Issues with Regard to Trade Strategy and Employment — 13

           The Role of Human Capital                                       14
           Other Hypothese                                                 16
           The Impact of Distortion                                        19

III. Basic Data Requirements for Country Studies                           20

        Trade Dat                                                          23
        Production and Employment      Data —                              28

           Employment Estimate                                             29
           Labor   Per Unit of What? —      ——                             31

        Trade   Regime Dat

           Effective Protection Estimate                      36
           Direct Price Comparisons and Tax Treatment — — — — 37

         computation of Factor Proportion                                  40
         Preliminary Analysis of Findings                                  45
         Summary of Basic Data to be Presented                             46

 IV. Analysis of the Trade Regime and Its Effects                          47

         Effective Rates of Protectio                                      48
         Impact of the Trade Regime on the Commodity
                          Composition of Trade                 50
         Impact of the Trade Regime on Factor  Proportions — — 53

            Export Promotion                                               54
            Import Substitution                                            55

  V. Analysis   of Factor Markets and      Skill   Requirements — — — 57

         Factor Market   Distortions                                       59
         Human Capital                                                     63


                                                             (continued)
PLAN OF RESEARCH FOR COUNTRY STUDIES
Contents (continued)

 VI. The Determination of Efficient Production and   Trade   Patterns   66

VII. Additional Considerations                                          71

         Primary Production                                             72
         Regional Implications                                          74
         Multinational. Corporations                                    75
         The Impact of Uncertainty and Dynamic   Comparative
                                    Advantage                           77
         Additional Topics                                              78



      Appendix                                                          80

         Contents of Appendix I in Country Studies                      81
         Contents of Appendix II                                        83



      Table 1. Desirable Aggregates of Employment Per Miflion Units 44


      Sample Master Tabi                                                85—6




                                                                               .
                                         i


                                      PREFACE


          This paper was originally prepared as part of the first stage of the

research project, Alternative Trade Strategies and Employment. The project

as a whole is focussed upon identifying the relationships between alternative

trade strategies —    export   promotion and import substitution — and growth In

the demand for labor. The project has altogether three stages: (1) the

preparatory stage, in which the theory underlying the relationship between

trade strategy and employment was developed and a methodology for undertaking

empirical research was formulated; (2) the second stage, in which project

participants undertook the empirical research for individual countries and

also for particular topics of special interest for the project as a whole,

based upon the papers prepared in the first stage; and (3) a summing up,

in which the results of the individual studies are analyzed in order to

ascertain   what insights into the trade—employment relation seem generally
applicable. At the present time, the second stage of the project is nearing
completion.
           This   paper   constituted one part of the first stage of the project:
it spells out much of the basic methodology that underlies the individual
country studies. In early draft form, it was prepared in the summer of
1975, and all project participants commented upon it, suggesting Improvements
and   alterations,   as well as correcting errors. After the first Working Party
of   project participants in     December 1975, at which the paper was   discussed,

it was revised, and has served as a partial basis for the methodology used
in   computing employment coefficients, net factor content of trade, and

related   items, in the ongoing research for the country studies. Not all
country   authors have been able to follow      the procedures suggested here, due

sometimes   to a lack of data and in other instances to the belief that
                                   ii


circumstances in their particular countries warrant alternative treatments.

Nonetheless, all participants have attempted to estimate the variables

discussed in this paper and, when departing from the suggested procedures,

they have indicated such a departure clearly.

         Because the paper in revised form has been an input into the

individual studies, it was deemed desirable to make it generally available

in a form as close to that used in the country studies as possible. None-

theless, in the course of the research, difficulties have arisen on a few

points, and some errors have been discovered which required correction.

However, the intent in preparing this paper f or the National Bureau series

of Working Papers has been to keep the document as close to the revised

version as is consistent with experience in using it. Thus, the Introduction,

originally addressed to country authors, has been left unaltered, even

though this Preface might better replace it were the original document not

of interest in itself. That same practice has been followed throughout,

except as noted in footnotes or where ambiguous statements required

clarification or errors needed correction.

         The purpose of making the paper generally available Is twofold:

on the one hand, it provides some detailed material which will not be forth-

coming elsewhere in the project and it is a part of the record of the project

which should be available to interested scholars, both to enable them to

have full information on the procedures used In the Individual studies and

also to provide details of the methodology which are not otherwise available;

on the other hand, the procedures spelled out may be of interest to

researchers undertaking studies of countries not covered in the Bureau

project. To the extent that the methodology devised for the project
                                     iii
represents   an improvement over past procedures, it is hoped that further

empirical research on the trade—employment relationship will be encouraged.

To the extent that choice has to be made among alternative, equally satis-

factory   procedures, following the same   methodology in the Bureau project

will   enable comparability of results.



January   1977                                     Anne 0. Krueger
                                                   Minneapolis, Minnesota
I


                                   I. INTRODUCTION


            This working paper should be regarded as a companion paper to

    "Growth, Distortions, and    Patterns of   Trade Among Many Countries," which is

    intended to provide a statement of much of the theory that underlies the

    National Bureau of Economic Research Project on Alternative Trade Strategies

    and Employment. It is assumed that individual researchers have already read

    the "Growth, Distortions, and Patterns of Trade Among Many Countries" paper.

             The purpose   of this paper is to provide a statement, agreed to by
    project participants, as to the general way in which          the   individual country
    studies   can proceed to answer the general questions (to be discussed below)

    raised by the project. In first draft form, it provided a starting point

    for discussion among individual country authors and other project partici-

    pants. It    has been revised along lines suggested at the first Working Party
    of   the Project. While the content of each country study will naturally

    vary    somewhat, based on data availability, past research results, and
    conditions in the country, it is intended as an outline of the major
    topics, and promising ways of analyzing them, that are likely to be relevant
    in most circumstances.
              An important aspect of the philosophy underlying this project         is
     that   each country has its own unique set of institutions and circumstances

     that influence the workings of every policy measure. It is for that reason

     that   the country studies will all be undertaken by individuals who are
     already experts in the functioning of those economies. The suggestions
     made below will have to be interpreted by each individual researcher in
     light of the conditions in his     own country.    In some   instances, data
     availability Will, determine a direction of       research, or limit the extent
                                                                            L


                                     —2—




one can go in a particular area. In other instances, researchers will have

to use their own judgment as to the extent the lines of inquiry suggested

here are pertinent, and the extent to which other avenues of analysis,

less germaine to other countries, are the ones that are likely to yield the

greatest insights into the questions at hand.

       The working paper is organized as follows. First, Section II is

devoted to setting forth the questions we hope to answer in the course of

the project. In Section III, means of getting at the basic descriptive

statistics needed to answer the first question — what are the current

employment implications of alternative trade strategies —    are   discussed.

In Section IV,   avenues   for exploring the impact of various aspects of the

trade regime on employment are set forth. In Section V, problems likely to

be encountered in analyzing factor markets are discussed, and means of

handling them are suggested. Section VI is concerned with the possibility

of using progrannning techniques to estimate what would happen under

optimal resource allocation. Section VII sets forth very briefly some

special-topics that receive attention in other working papers.



                       II. OBJECTIVES OF THE RESEARCH


       The overall research program of the NBER Project on Alternative

Trade Strategies and Employment Growth is aimed at analysis and investiga-

 tion of the employment implications of export promotion and import subtitU—

 tion, and to ascertain the reasons for those implications. Part of our

 concern will be simply with the question: how much employment is generated

 by an additional dollar of value added in exporting compared to an

 additional dollar of value added in import substitution? However, that
                                            —3.-



will   only be a starting point. Major emphasis will be upon the explanation

for whatever empirical findings em.rge in answer to that question.

         The decision to emphasize import substitution or export promotion

has important ramifications upon virtually every aspect of economic

activity. Those ramifications depend not only on which strategy is chosen,

but also on the policy instruments used to implement the choice and on the

degree of emphasis given to the chosen strategy. Thus, mild encouragement

to   import—substitution activities via, for example,           an across—the-board

25   percent tariff may have different qualitative as well as quantitative
implications     for the results of an import—substitutiot policy         than would
the    same strategy implemented through the prohibition of imports of any

commodity once domestic production starts.

          These overall ramifications of the alternative trade strategies have

been extensively analyzed in a series of studies. Some of the salient

 results of those studies will be briefly mentioned below. For present

 purposes, what is important is to note that a significant omission in the

 research has been the employment effects of the alternative strategies and

 of ways in which they are implemented. The purpose of the present project

 is to analyze and investigate those effects, and not to evaluate the

 overall impact of export promotion or import substitution. It is perfectly

 possible that, e.g., export promotion might          lead   to a rapid rate of economic

 growth   but   a lower   rate   of   employment growth. Such   a conclusion would not

 necessarily    imply a conflict between the goals of growth of output and
 employment, but would instead suggest that the one            policy   instrument —

 trade strategy — could not simultaneously be used for the attainment of
 two separate     targets.
                                    —4—


        Estimation of the current employment levels associated with given

amounts of import substitution or export promotion activity does not

explain       those levels occur. Consider, for example, the case where ex-

ports are encouraged by granting exporters favored access to imported

capital goods and credit. In such a circumstance, trade policy itself

might well make the exporting of goods with high capital—labor ratios

profitable, and it is conceivable that alternative means of fostering

exports (or import—substitution) might well have different employment

ramifications. And that conclusion might follow even if exports were

relatively more labor—using than import substitutes: other means of

encouraging exports might induce the selection of even more labor—intensive

products or technology in export industries.

        The example given in the last paragraph relates to the possibility

that various policies used in implementing the trade strategy might affect

the factor proportions observed in exporting and import—substitution

Industries. It is also possible, however, that other govertment policies

(or autonomous factors), not necessarily related to the chosen trade

strategy,   could influence the employment coefficients of different
activities.1 If, for example, minimum wage legislation is enforced and
sets   the real wage rate sufficiently high so that extremely labor—using

industries cannot compete ott international markets, it is possible that

exports will be relatively capital—intensive, and   of   course all industries

will use more capital—using techniques than they would at a lower wage—

rental ratio.



          See "Growth, Distortions, and Patterns of Trade Among Many Countries."
                                    —5--



      The objective of the research project, therefore, is not only to

ascertain what employment coefficients are associated with alternative

trade strategies, but to analyze the reasons for those coefficients. And,

by and large, it is the latter part of the project that will present the

major challenge.


Alternative Hypotheses

       There are several levels at which one can imagine effects of the

trade regime upon employment and its rate of growth:

   1. One strategy might result in a higher rate of growth of the overall

       economy due to superior resource allocation, and faster growth would

       presumably entail more employment growth.

   2. Different trade strategies imply different compositions of output

       at each point in time. Under an export—promotion strategy, export

        industries grow faster, and vice versa under import substitution.

        If employment per unit of output is greater in one set of industries

        than in the other, then enmloyment growth would be faster, on this

        account, under the strategy that lets the labor—intensive industries

        grow relatively faster.

    3. Alternative trade policies could influence the choice of technique

        and capital—labor ratio in all industries, as, for example,

         through implicit subsidization of capital goods imports.   If

         such policies lead to greater capital intensity and fewer jobs

         per unit of output in all lines of economic activity, then

         employment opportunities will grow more slowly as there is

         continued   capital deepening.
      It is apparent that not all three classes of effects need to be in

the same direction. It is possible, in particular, that the first effect —

a higher rate of growth of employment due to faster output growth associated

with export promotion —   might go in one direction, while the second effect
could go in the other. However, the first issue must of necessity remain

outside the scope of the present study, as to investigate it would require

the rehashing of all the issues involved in the analysis of the merits of

export promotion versus import substitution.

       The objective of the present research project is to come to grips

with the second and third possibilities. Three alternative, mutually incon-

sistent, hypotheses are all possible given existing knowledge:

   1. The amount of employment generated is relatively independent of

       the trade strategy.

   2. Import substitution generates significantly less employment growth

       than does an export—promotion strategy.

   3. An export—promotion strategy is unlikely to entail significantly

       more employment growth than an import—substitUtion strategy and

       may in fact conflict with efforts to expand employment.

       The first possibility —   that   trade strategy does not affect employment

very much —   might be true in several ways. First, one might be able to
establish the direction of difference in labor—intensity of production,

but find that the difference, if any, was sufficiently small that, within

 the conceivable range of relative growth rates, the effects on employment

would be second—order small. Second, one might find that a particular

 policy (such as subsidization of capital—goods imports) not really

 essential to the trade strategy adopted had adverse effects on employment
                                        —7-.



and   that a different set of policies could achieve the same trade strategy

without the adverse employment effects. Finally, it might be that the

influences determining the composition of exporting and        import—substitute
industries are            independent of factor intensities, and that

different relative rates of growth of the two groups of industries would

not necessarily affect the rate of growth of employment.

         The second possibility —     that   import—substitution Industries require

considerably less labor per unit of capital and per unit of output —         is
the forecast that would arise from straightforward interpretation of the

two—factor Heckscher—Ohlin model of trade. Developing countries would

presumably have their comparative advantage, at least in the early stages

of growth, in exporting labor—intensive commodities and importing goods

with    relatively higher capital (and perhaps skilled labor) requirements.
 If that is so, it is important to know it and also the magnitude of the
 potential for employment creation through an export—promotion strategy.
          Finally,   there are   those who argue that export promotion and
 employment growth may be conflicting objectives. There are several
 possible reasons given. One view is that developed countries themselves

 have   erected, or would do so if export—promotion 8trategies were seriously

 adopted, sufficiently high barriers to imports of labor—intensive goods

 that the developing countries can only compete in capital—intensive exports.

 Another basis for the argument has       been   the casual empiricism suggesting

 that the exports of some developing countries — notably Colombia and
 Brazil — are capital—intensive. Yet others have claimed that most of the

 exports   of manufactured goods originating in       developing countries are
                                    —8—




produced   by branches and subsidiaries of multinational corporations which,

it is alleged, use capital—intensive technology of the home country.

       If,   indeed, export—promoting growth is capital—intensive, there
remains a question as to why it is so: the answer might lie partly in the
mix of export incentives granted in the developing country and in domestic
policies   affecting the relative profitability of different industries. If

instead developing countries' potential manufactured exports are capital—

intensive not because of distortions but because of factors associated with

comparative advantage, it is important to ascertain it and to obtain some

idea of the empirical magnitude and importance of the phenomenon.


Current State of Knowledge on Trade Strategies

       The basic theory of resource allocation under competition and of

comparative advantage has long since provided the theoretical rationale for

advocacy of relatively free trade with balanced incentives for export

promotion and import substitution so that the marginal cost of earning and

saving foreign exchange can be equalized.1

       Early advocates of import substitution based their case on some form

of pessimism   about the prospects for growth of export earnings, a secular
tendency for the terms of trade for primary commodities to decline, and     the

need for "industrialization."2 Under the    influence of these arguments and




       1See Jagdish Bhagwati, The Theory   and Practice of   Commercial Policy:

Departures from Unified Exchange Rates, International Finance Section, Prince-

ton University, Special Papers in International Economics No. 8, January 1968.

        2Raoul Prebisch, "Commercial Policy in the Developing Countries,"

American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 4ay 1959.
                                        —9--


foreign—exchange    crises    induced by excessively ambitious development and

other   governmental expenditures and/or the end of the Korean War boom and

the consequent drop in export earnings, most developing countries adopted

import substitution as a development strategy.

         The practical shortcomings of such a strategy have become painfully

evident to virtually all observers, and have been extensively analyzed in

research undertaken at Williams College on import substitution and by the

National Bureau of Economic Research on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic

Development.' Briefly, initial emphasis on import substitution led to:

   1. Overvaluation of the exchange rate with         consequent     disincentives

         to   potential exports, failure of foreign exchange earnings to grow,
         and thus an increasingly stringent exchange—control regime.
   2. A series of partial, ad hoc incentives for exports, with Increasingly
         complex, often Internally inconsistent bureaucratic regulations, red
         tape,   and complexities which were a consequence of recognition of the

         scarcity   value of foreign exchange. The        result   was increased
         demands on   the   bureaucracy, ever greater incentives for evasion of
         regulations, and mutual suspicion between the business and govern-
         ment sectors.
   3.    Increasingly   high—cost industries as the "easy" import—substitution
         activities were     undertaken first. This led to the loss of any

         gains   that might   otherwise have been realized from efficient size

         of plant, economies of scale, and     so   on.



         1See also the series     of studies done by the     O.E.C.D. The synthesis

volume, which     contains references to the individual studies,         is: Ian   Little,
Tibor   Scitovsky, and Maurice Scott, Industry and Trade in Some Developing
Countries, Oxford Press, London, 1970.
                                       —10-S


                                                                  Because of the
 4.    Lack of competition among newly established firms.

       small size of market, it seldom was feasible to allow many firms

       in an industry, and licensing of imports of machinery precluded

       free entry. The result was that import—licensing mechanisms, capital—

                                                   inevitable concomitants of
        goods licensing procedures, and other

        exchange control led to the development of "lazy" entrepreneurs

        whose inattention to cost—consciousness, quality control, and good

        management was not penalized as profitability stemmed from monopoly

        positions and the ability to get licenses.

  5. Implicit subsidization of capital goods imports.            Although one might

         think that import—substitution policies would be across—the—board in

         their application, almost all countries with overvalued        exchange rates

        were reluctant to impose surcharges and high duties on machinery and

         equipment imports for fear of discouraging investment. One of the
                                                                                over—
         effects of import—substitution policies and consequent currency

         valuation was therefore to provide implicit subsidies for imports of

         capital    goods for such firms as were   able   to obtain permission to
         invest .
         1That   there has been implicit subsidization of capital goods imports
has   long since been recognized. However, there have been very few attempts

to quantify or estimate the importance of these subsidies and their effects

on choice of techniques in developing countries. Two interesting exceptions

are: James McCabe and Constantine Michalopoulos, Investment Composition and

Employment in Turkey, AID Discussion Paper No. 22, October 1971, and Ibrahim

Ongut, "Economic Policies, Investment Decisions, and Employment in Turkish

Industry,"   in Duncan      Miller (ed.), Labor Force and Employment in TurSy1,

USAID,   Ankara,    1970.
                                      —II—


     6. Increased dependence on permitted imports, largely confined to

         'essentials." Whereas consumption levels were dependent on imports

         at an earlier stage, import substitution led to dependence on imports

         of raw materials and intermediate goods for production, employment,

         and consumption.    With "foreign   exchange shortage", underutilization

         of   capacity resulted. Economies therefore were sensitive to
         fluctuations in foreign exchange earnings for production, as well
         as   consumption, levels.

         In addition, import substitution policies have often interacted

with domestic economic policies in ways which theory might not have fore-

cast. The     National Bureau of Economic Research project on Foreign Trade
Regimes and Economic Development has provided documentation as to some sorts
of interaction: between Import licensing and investment licensing; between

domestic agricultural policies and the effects of the effective exchange

rate in inducing additional exports; in affecting the choice of industry,

and so on. A major result of that research effort has been the demonstra-

tion of the importance of analyzing the totality of policies affecting a

given issue.1

         The advantages of export promotion, by contrast, appear to go some-

what beyond those suggested by the microeconoinic theory of optimal resource

allocation    although, of course, there can be overemphasis on export promotion
as   well as on import substitution. Briefly, these additional advantages

include the following: 1) competition can be provided by the international

market   place and thus attention to quality control, to new techniques and


         1See   Jagdish Bhagwati, Foreign Trade Regimes   and Economic   Development:
Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes, NBER, forthcoming.
                                      —12—


            and to good management practices is likely to be encouraged;
                                                                                     .
products,
2) since export promotion generally entails subsidies in a variety of forms,

the costs of excesses are more visible than    in import   substitution and there

are    forces within the government, especially the Ministry of Finance, which
therefore places pressures against greatly inibalanced Incentives; 3) efficient
firms and industries can grow rapidly, without being limited to the rate of
growth of domestic demand, and whatever economies of scale or indivisibilities
there are can be   exhausted; and   4) governments   cannot achieve their ends by
reliance    upon quantitative restrictions when fostering export growth, and

must therefore create incentives for exporting.1

        Thus, the argument is strong that an outward—looking export—promotion

strategy is more conducive to development than an import—substitution

strategy. In addition, focus upon exports is likely to interact with

domestic policies and variables better than import substitution, although,

of course, there are better and worse ways of implementing either strategy.

Moreover, there has been a significant switch in the emphasis of the

developing countries over the past decade, as emphasis on import substitution

has gradually lessened and encouragements for the development of exports




         1These conclusions emerge from the NBER project. An     initial   version

 is   presented in Jagdish N. Bhagwati and Anne 0. Krueger, "Exchange Control,
Liberalization, and Economic Growth," American Economic Association Papers
 and Proceedings, May 1973. A more complete statement is contained         in Anne

 0.   Krueger, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development:     Liberalization

 Attempts and Consequences, Ch. XII.
                                     —13—


particularly of non—traditional products, have begun. The question as to

how that switch in policy will affect employment is therefore extremely

important.


Issues with Regard to Trade Strategy and Employment

           In view of the above findings, it is surprising that the employment

implications of alternative trade strategies have not been carefully examined.

There are several interrelated issues: 1) the determinants of the commodity

composition of exports under ideal resource allocation;            2) the effects of

output—market imperfections and/or incentives upon the mix of output and

trade; 3) the effects of factor—market interventions upon the output mix;

and 4) the effects of factor—market distortions upon the choice of technique.

The theory underlying these issues is complex, and is dealt with in the

paper, "Growth, Distortions, and Patterns of Trade Among Many           Countries,"
which is a companion paper to this one.

           In that paper, the hypotheses that emerge from the lieckscher—Ohlin

 factor.   proportions explanation of trade are spelled out in the       context of a

model   wherein there is a primary—product sector using labor and natural re-
 sources, and a manufacturing sector wherein there are n commodities, each
 employing labor and capital in    the   production process. Those hypotheses can
 serve as a basis for the empirical work to be done in the country          studies,

 although authors may    wish to delve beyond that, especially into issues
 pertaining to the determinants of factor proportions in primary commodities
 and to alternative theories of the determinants of        trade   patterns in
 individual     cases.
            The hypotheses that emerge from   the   "Growth, Distortions, and Patterns
 of Trade Among Many Countries" paper are several, and gathering data for
                                        —14—


testing them will constitute one of the basic tasks of the country studies.

They are therefore discussed in Section III below. For present purposes,

it is only necessary to note that those hypotheses pertain to the factor

proportions explanation of trade for the manufacturing sector in the con-

text of a two—factor (capital and labor) model of manufacturing. In some

countries, it may prove desirable to delve extensively into factor propor-

tions in primary commodity production, although in many        cases   data

availability will stop that line of endeavor. Insofar as data are available,

the same basic techniques to be employed in estimating factor proportions

In manufacturing will be usable for estimating labor coefficients In primary

commodity production. There are, to be sure, some special issues that arise

in dealing with natural resources and NRB industries, especially agriculture.

Those topics are dealt with in Section VII.

       In addition, alternative explanations of the commodity composition

of   trade have been put forth, and    country authors will undoubtedly want to

explore them especially when their original tests of the HOS model prove

inconclusive. It therefore seems appropriate briefly to spell out those

alternative explanations, remembering that factor and good market distortions

can   alter   observed trade flows   regardless   of which explanation of trade is

valid, and that the analysis of Part II of the "Growth, Distortions, and

Patterns of Trade Among Many Countries" paper can therefore be applied.

        The Role of Human   Capital.   While there have been several efforts at a

richer interpretation of the Heckscher—OhlIn—Samuelson model (hereafter HOS),

the one of importance for present purposes relates to the incorporation of an

additional factor of production into the model: human capital, or skills.

Several authors have argued that recognition of the role of investment in
                                     —15—



human capital   is the missing ingredient in interpreting the
HOS     model, and that incorporation of that element will yield    satisfactory
interpretation of the factor intensity of world trade flows.'

         There are two ways in which   investment   in humans can be regarded:

1) as one type of capital formation; or 2) as a separate factor of

production. In the former interpretation, one could proceed along the

lines suggested by Reman, arguing that employers invest in machines and in

training their workers, and that both forms of investment are simply "capital.'

In that case, measurement only of the physical capital associated with a

given activity would be in error: the relevant amount of capital per unit

of output in a given activity would be the value of the services of the

physical equipment used plus the value of the human capital used per unit

of output. If indeed saving can be allocated in any proportion between

physical and human capital accumulation, it might be that the appropriate

concept of "capital" within the HOS model would be one valuing both sorts.2

This variant can therefore be readily tested whenever data on either the



         'See P. B. Kenen, "Nature, Capital and Trade," Journal of Political

Economy, Oct. 1965, and A.   0.   Krueger, "Factor Endowments and Per Capita

Income Differences Among Countries," Economic Journal, September 1968.

         2 there is no market in humans, the question arises as to how to

value   the human capital. One    way is   to estimate the relevant discount rate,
and capitalize the difference between skilled and unskilled wages       to get an

estimate of the value of the stock. This method was follows by Kenen in

 "Nature, Capital and Trade." An alternative is to add the differential

wage to the value of capital services.
                                    —16—


skill   composition of the labor force employed in alternative activities, or
                                                                                   .
the wage differential I or skilled workers in each activity, can be obtained.'

         If, however, human capital is a separate factor of production, a

major difficulty is that few empirically, testable predictions are forth-

coming. Even defining the factor intensity of trade in a meaningful way

is difficult, if not impossible, in a three—factor model, unless there is

some hypothesis about the systematic interrelationship between the inputs

of two of the factors. If, for example, human and physical capital were

separate factors but complements, while unskilled labor was a substitute

for those two factors, then meaningful testing would be possible if one

was prepared, also, to state that a particular country is relatively well

or badly endowed with both human and physical capital. Means of examining

these questions are suggested in Section III, although in many cases the

degree of emphasis given to examining the role of skills and human capital

will be limited by data availability and also by the presence of topics

with a higher research pay—off within the time available for the study.

         Other Hypotheses. Although none have been formally developed as a

model, there are several other hypotheses in the literature as to the

determinants of the conmtodity composition of trade. They are noted here,

mostly   so that country authors can be alert for factors that should be
evaluated if they are found in individual countries' circumstances.


          LSSS Section III below for details. It should be noted that wage
 differentials    can be used only if   data are standardized with respect to
 large—scale   and small—scale firms    and   other systematic sources   of wage

 differentials.    See Section V below.
                                 —17—


      Most of these models, such as Linder's,' relate the determination of

a country's exports to/diestic demand patterns. As such, they imply that

there will be little or no relationship between the commodity composition

of trade and factor endowments, unless domestic demand patterns are somehow

influenced by the country's factor endowment. It hardly seems likely that

this sort of hypothesis will be relevant to the explanation of developing

countries' employment coefficients in exporting and import—substitution

industries. An exception, perhaps indicative of the limited explanatory

powers of the hypothesis for developing countries, would be exports of local

handicrafts. Even then, handicrafts may be In demand domestically because

labor is cheap, and thus there is a question as to whether domestic demand

or factor proportions is the appropriate explanation.

       The Vernon2 model uses the HOS model for determination of low—cost

location at each point of time, but adds the notion that there are stages

in a product's life, and that each stage is associated with a particular

factor—intensity of production: innovation and development (a human capital

Intensive phase), shaking down (presumably capital—intensive) and standar-

dized production (presumably labor—intensive). Each of these stages is



       1
        S. Linder, An Essay on Trade and Transformation, Wiley (New York)

1961. See also I. Kravis, "Availability and Other Influences on the Commodity

Composition of Trade," Journal of Political Economy, April 1956.

       2W. D. Gruber, D. Mehta, and R. Vernon, "The R and 1) Factor in Inter-

national Investment of United States Industries," Journal of Political Economy,

Feb. 1967, and R. Vernon, "International Investment and International Trade

in the Product Cycle," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Nay 1966.
                                       —18—




implicitly   identified with a least—cost location, and   thus   a commodity's

status as an export or import substitute is determined by its stage relative

to the country's factor endowment. In that sense, the Vernon model really

puts forth one additional hypothesis: developing countries, which are

presumably labor—abundant, will have a comparative advantage in producing

commodities that were invented and produced elsewhere earlier on. It seems

highly unlikely that any country's employment relation will be sufficiently

clear—cut from initial examination that authors will find it desirable to

explore the Vernon hypothesis in depth. Nonetheless, it should be borne in

mind in evaluating the empirical findings on the individual country studies.

        The alternative hypothesis to the HOS model that appears to be most

relevant   from the viewpoint of investigating the trade strategy—employment
relation is the one that originates in the multinational enterprise litera-
ture,   namely that multinational corporations are the only organizations with

capacity for rapid development of sizable manufactured exports from developing

countries.
             1   The argument then proceeds with the assertion that the   NC s
use their parent technology in the producing country regardless of the

             factor proportions, and that 1C's tend to be capital—intensive

 in their techniques of production. Testable hypotheses can be developed

 from this argument,    and   the data needed for such a test are discussed in

 Section III. At this stage, it is only necessary to note that some argue



         is hypothesis can be related to the Vernon hypothesis in that, as

 casual observation suggests, multinational firma are especially likely to be

 alert to possibilities of shifting production to new low—cost sites as

 comparative advantage changes over the life cycle of products.
that multinational corporations attempt to prevent their subsidiaries from

exporting. If it is believed that those subsidiaries would otherwise

export, such constraints must be regarded as a distortion influencing the

commodity composition of trade away from what it would be under an efficient

allocation. Of course, to the extent that multinational corporations

invest in a particular country only to take advantage of a sheltered domestic

market, the real question will pertain to whether the industry would be

part   of the countrys pattern of specialization in the absence of protection,
an   issue   covered   when discussing tests of the HOS hypothesis in the presence
of   goods market distortions in Section IV.1

        The Impact of Distortions. Since much of the "Growth, Distortions,

and Patterns of Trade Among Many Countries" paper is given to an analysis of

the effects of interventions and imperfectly       functioning markets on observed
trade   patterns, little needs to be said here. There has been a great deal

of work in recent years on the issue of resource pulls resulting from various

interventions in the goods market, and the outcome has been that little can

be said in theory: empirical work is required to resolve the issue.2 These



         1Robert   Lipsey will   be doing a special paper for the project in which

be investigates multinationals' choices of technique across countries. That
paper, however, will relate to substitution possibilities, and not to the
reasons why multinationals       choose to invest in particular countries.

         2See   the discussions by W. Ethier   and B.. Ruf fin in Ii. Grubel and

I. G. Johnson (eds.), Effective Tariff Protection, GAIT (Geneva), 1972;

W. 14. Corden, The Theory of Protection, Oxford, 1971; J. Bhagwati and T. N.

Srinivasan, "The General Equilibrium       Theory of Effective Protection and
 Resource Allocation," Journal of International Economics, August 1973.
                                         —20--



theoretical considerations will make it necessary to delve into effective

protective rates and related aspects of the incentive structure for import

substitution and exports.

         Distortions do not occur only in the goods market. Just as price

changes can    generate   resource pulls, changes in factor prices affect the

relative profitability of various activities or of alternative factor

combinations in any given activity, and hence alter the pattern of output

and factor use from that which would occur under optimal resource allocation.

As shown in 'Growth, Distortions, and Patterns of Trade Among Many Countries,'1

in countries where there is reason to believe that significant factor

market   distortions exist within the      manufacturing sector, considerable

attention    will   have to be devoted to analyzing the effects of these

distortions.



               III. BASIC DATA REQUIRENENTS FOR COUNTRY STUDIES


         For all countries included in       the project, the common data gathering

effort will be devoted to obtaining good estimates of the labor Inputs             per
unit   of   value added   in exports, import—competing and non—competing import

industries)         Once those   estimates are made, the individual   researcher   will
have to decide, on       the   basis of his findings   and knowledge of circumstances



               important question is when It is        appropriate to use domestic value
added    (DVA) and when international value added (IVA) should be used. In
 general, domestic values are appropriate for inputs, and international values

 for outputs, but much depends on what question is being asked. The specifi—

 cation of DVA or lilA in the discussion that follows should be carefully noted.
                                           —21—


in his country, how to allocate his efforts arid           analyses   among factor market


phenomena,      factors in   the trade regime influencing the commodity composition

of trade, and estimating optimal trade patterns. In every study some
attention to each of these three avenues of inquiry will be warranted)
but the amount of emphasis on each will            vary greatly from country to country.

Each country study will        thus have   at least four parts, which are     discussed

in   turn in this and the following three sections.           The basic data described

here   (arid elaborated upon further in Project Working Paper Number 2) will
require   a fair amount      of attention in      all the countries, whereas the relative

importance of      the topics dealt with in Sections IV, V, VI and VII can vary
considerably from country to country.
       It will prove useful to all project participants if data that are
available are presented on a comparable basis in all the country studies.'
For    that reason, Appendix I Is       devoted to setting up a numbering system for
tables    and   modes of presentation that can be        used by all. Concern here

 (and in PWP 2) is with the substantive issues that arise in collecting,

 rectifying, and     meaningfully   assembling data.

          Individual researchers will have to make a choice, at an early
 stage of their work, even        for   the basic data requirements set     forth in this

 section:       research effort can be devoted to obtaining more disaggregated
 and better data for a particular point in time, or it can be allocated to
 obtaining comparable data for a number of time periods. In general, a
 resolution to      that question should depend on the degree to which the



          'One of    the biggest advantages of this approach is that it saves
 others long searches for data that are, in fact, unavailable.
                                        —22—



findings   for the first period conform to a priori expectations, on the

amount   of   effort required to obtain each type of data, and on the extent

to which   meaningful   hypotheses can   be    formulated   as to   the expected nature

of changes that would be observed between periods. In South Korea, for

example, if the     employment implications of exports, import substitutes for
non—natural—resource products, and non—competing imports were known for the
late   1960's when incentives were biased toward exporting,' it would be of

great interest to examine the employment content 'of the same category of

commodities for the late 1950's, when incentives were still biased toward

import—substitution.2
         In choosing the period of time for which the basic data are to be

collected, data availability will usually be the critical factor. In general,

it will be preferable to have trade data, data on the incentives provided by

the    trade and   payments   regime, employment coefficients, and       factor market

data all for      the same year.3 When they      are not all available for the same




          1For the definition of bias in the trade and payments regime, see
Anne 0. Krueger, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development
tion Attempts and Consequences, Chapters IV and VI. Briefly, the bias in the
regime is the ratio of the domestic to international price of the exportable
divided by the ratio of the domestic to the international price of the import
 commodities.

                addition to substantive interests in differences between periods,

 obtaining data for adj acent      periods can   yield valuable information about

 the   relative    stability of different coefficients.

           3Here and later, I assume that a Census of I1anufactures is available
 for the same year as the input—output table. If that assumption is not the
 case, it is probably preferable to employ the year of the Census of Manufac—
 tures for most purposes.
                                      —23—


year, choice of a year for which the data are available at closely

neighboring periods will   probably   be the consideration of greatest importance,

but the year chosen will almost certainly have to be one for which a

Census of Manufactures (or Industries) exists.

       In some cases, it may,   of    course, be possible that the marginal cost

of obtaining the time series data will be quite low.        In those instances,

researchers will be enabled to test additional hypotheses as well as to

have greater confidence in their findings.


Trade Data

       The first problem is to disaggregate the data to the desirable extent.

The desirable levels of disaggregation will depend on the availability of

trade data and labor coefficients. Procedures for deciding on when dis—

 aggregation has the highest payoff are discussed In       Section   VI.


        In   general, trade data are readily available and    will   not constitute

 a major dataobstacle. The only problem, therefore, is to devise a criterion
 for appropriate classification of industries. If, in fact, goods and factor
 markets were perfect, the procedure for so      classifying would be straight—

 forward. One   would separate out    trade   in natural—resource—based (NRB)
                                           —24—


commodities,1     and then divide trade flows of other goods (HOS goods) into
those with     countries presumed to have more capital relative to labor than

the country in question        and those   with countries presumed to be more labor

abundant. In practice, it is likely that most deve1opin countries will

have the bulk of their IIOS trade with developed countries, so that the

direction      of trade may not   be a significant factor and   partitioning   may   be

unnecessary.       Individual   researchers should,   at any early   stage of the

analysis, examine trade flow data to see if the commodity composition of

trade with countries presumably more labor abundant differs appreciably

from   that with countries presumably more capital abundant.
         In    practice, however, most countries have protected some industries

to enable domestic production to get started. It will therefore be desirable



                important question is how natural—resource—based commodities can          be

defined. In principle, all one needs do is to define manufacturing as a value—

adding activity, and      to    treat the export of, e.g. refined copper, as an export

from two separate sectors: the value of the raw copper would be included as

part of the export of the primary sector while the value added in refining cop-

per would be included as manufacturing value added. In practice, some manu-

facturing operations are location—oriented toward the raw materials source.

Researchers will have to use         their judgment as to whether a particular manu-
facturing operation is "raw—materials—based" or not. Unless the activity is
truly tied      to the source of raw materials, it will be preferable, as discussed

below, to divide manufactures into those with a significant raw materials base

and    those   without. Apart from the question of value added in manufacture, it

seems   straightforward    to treat raw—materials—based industries as those

included under agriculture, mining, forestry and          fishing.
                                             —25—


to attempt a four—way classification of HOS corniodities those that are

exported, those which are import substitutes, those which are imported for

which there is no domestic production (if necessary with an origin break-

down)   and    home goods which would not be traded within the relevant range

of   possible   price variation.

        It will probably prove desirable to aUocate coimnodities to various

categories at the lowest level of aggregation and then aggregate to two—

digit totals for each category. For example food processing often contains

bakery products, which are usually nontradables, as well as canning           industries
whose output may be destined        for export. Rather than assigning all of that
industry   initially to one   group it will be preferable to allocate the

various   subcategories   of the industry to their different categories and to

treat tradable food processing as a different two—digit industry from

home—goods      food processing.1
          It is not possible to provide a classification of comndity categories
that should be applicable to all countries, because the same industry may
belong in different categories In different countries. For example,

printing and publishing is a home good in most countries, but it is a traded
goods industry in Taiwan and        Hong Kong.

          In   general, it will   be   desirable to regard construction and the
various services sectors — transport communication, electricity, gas and
sanitary services, wholesale and retail trade, finance, insurance and real
estate, and other services —           as   being home goods. Even then, there are

          1See   below, under 'Computation of Factor Proportions" for a discussion

 of the various types of categories that may be of Interest for each trade

 classification.
                                            —26—


exceptions as finance is an important tradable for Singapore and Hong Kong.

By and large, disaggregatiofl efforts should                 be directed toward tradable

goods, as home goods sectors need not be disaggregated in most instances.

         Once the desirable level of disaggregation is reached, the problem

is one of deriving a criterion for allocation of commodities, and then of

forming meaningful aggregates..

         The best procedure is to obtain data for each commodity on domestic

production and consumption —         including         all intermediate uses of the

commodity —    for   a period of time comparable with the period for which             the
                                                                 would obtain these data
trade statistics apply. If possible, also, one

for a period of several years, and use averages to avoid the influences of
                                                           and other factors on trade flows.
timing patterns, inventory fluctuations,
         For each commodity i, one could then compute the statistic:


                                        T
                                            i
                                                       c1

                                        domestic                      production, and classify
 where   C domestic utilization and P =
 according to:

          i is     exportable if            <

          i   is import—competing      if       X0 <        <

          I   is   non—competing if             <      <

 where X1's        are   chosen as   cutoff     points, which     would presumably vary with

 the level of aggregation. If X were set at zero, for example, a negative

       would mean the commodity       was classified as an          exportable. If

                                                                                      to allow
 was positive) there would be import—competing production; however,
 for the possibility that domestic production really represents
                                                                a non-

 homogeneous commodity (as in the case, for example, of repairs which
                                                                      are
                                        —27—



included   under transportation equipment), it is suggested that a cutoff

point for           be used.        might   assume a value somewhere between .5 and

.99, depending on the homogeneity of commodity categories and the degree

of   disaggregation.     Finally, when there is little or no domestic production,

the    ith commodity can be regarded as a non—competing iriport, and
would usually be 1.
         The fact that the import regime may contain import prohibitions will
lead   to some modifications of the rules, as can the fact that currencies may

be overvalued and exports subsidized. For, when they are, there may be some

commodities for which domestic production equals domestic demand, but which

would be exported at a realistic exchange rats, some commodities exported

that would not be at a unified exchange rate, and other commodities which
might not be produced at all under an efficient pattern of resource alloca-
tion but for which all domestic consumption is satisfied by domestic
production    as a result of     the import regime. In cases such as those, there-
fore,   individual authors will have to use their judgment to allocate the

commodities    among those domestically      produced   goods that would be non—competing
without protection, those that would be competing, and           those that would be

exportable.        While it is impossible   to provide adequate      guidelines for all
cases, one possible criterion for determining whether a particular commodity
might be exported under a more realistic exchange rate would be whether it
was, in     the past, exported.'
           In many instances, authors will wish to use several allocation rules,
 and   to make their    estimates on alternative bases simply to test the

           he programming model, described in        Section   VI,   may be of help   in
 refining    the   categories.
                                         —23—



sensitivity    of their results to their classification decisions. One way

would be to classify all commodities on the basis of T cutoff points

deemed appropriate and then to attempt an alternative classification based

on the author's judgment (and knowledge of export subsidies, the height of

protection,    and other relevant variables) as to what commodities would lie
in each category under the ideal resource allocation.
         Once classification is made,      authors may wish to form a   number of

subcategories.       As mentioned above, one might wish to break exportables

into HOS goods and NEB goods, but then further subdivide HOS goods into

manufactures where domestic raw—material availability is important (as,

perhaps in some metal      refining)   and others   where it is not. Likewise, each
major   category might be subdivided into trade with developed countries        and

trade   with   developing countries. In iany cases, it may well be that vir-

tually all HOS—based trade is with the developed countries. In that case, a

simple tabular presentation of the percentage of trade in each commodity

category with those countries will suffice. In other instances, when

trade with other developing countries is important in some HOS goods but

not in others, it will prove desirable to categorize commodities, not only

according to the T1 statistic, but also according to whether the com-

modity is exported predominantly to developed countries, predominantly to

other   developing countries (as, for example, partners in a customs union)
or to both. (See Table 1       below.)


Production and     Employment Data'

         As already seen production data will be required simply to compute


          1Project Working Paper Number 2 contains additional       suggestions on

 the   topics covered here.
                                        —29—


Ts in order to allocate commodities into the appropriate trade categories.1

Some data will undoubtedly originate from input—output tables, which are

discussed in Section VI below. In almost all instances, however, researchers

will find It desirable to disaggregate at least some Industries below the

level    found In the 1—0 tables. For that purpose, they will probably find
the Census of Manufactures the document of greatest value.
         In almost all    cases,   the Census should contain data on: 1) value
added,   at domestic prices, in the activity 2) purchased inputs at domestic
prices 3) number of employees in the Industry; 4) wage and salaries paid;
and 5) payments made for electricity and perhaps other domestic services,
Including transportation. Those data will form a basis, when combined with
data on the trade regime, for disaggregating the input—output table to the
                    2
desired   extent.

         Employment     Estimates. The most    important use   of   these data will   be
to   obtain estimates of employment per unit that are as comparable as
possible.3 A number of issues arise in this connection: part—time versus
full—time employment, seasonal employment , the comparability of employees
in different activities, and the location of employment.


              separate estimates of domestic consumption of cotmuodities are
available, they can be used in computing the T1.           Usually, however,
consumption can be calculated as equal to domestic production plus imports
minus exports.
          2One problem of importance here and      elsewhere is disparities between
firms of    different sizes. See Section V below for a discussion.

          3The   units are discussed below.
                                     —30—



       Ideally,   one would wish to measure hours of employment per unit,

rather than either weeks (where hours may vary) or months.       In most in-

stances2 however, this will prove impossible, and researchers should be

alert for such pieces of evidence as will enable them to infer the extent to

which their data (e.g., man—years) are biased by non—comparability of days,

weeks, or seasons. In some instances, alternative data sources, including

manpower surveys, may enable conversion of amen" into a more meaningful
                                                                               unit.1
       For present purposes, however the really critical issue will be the

extent to which "labor' is homogeneous. In particular, the entire range of

issues associated with skills is of importance here. To some extent, the

data required here will be needed also inthe analysis of factor—market dis-

tortions (see Section V), but even in countries where there is no a priori

basis for believing that distortions are significant, some analysis of skill

content will be required. A first, and simple, statistic wiU consist of

computing wages per employee in different industries when both pieces of

data are available from the Census.2 Ana1ysis of labor market conditions will

be required for proper interpretation of that statistic, but under suitable

conditions, industries paying higher wages per man—hour can be regarded as

industries using more skills per unit of output. Even in countries where



        1Another   important question will   be the   number of shifts employed
with given capital equipment and reasons for that number.
        2The wage—per—unit—of—time statistic may be heavily influenced by
 the extent to which the industry has firms in the large—scale and small—
 scale sectors. It might be desirable, when that was believed significant,
 to take the wage   ratio   separately for large and small   firms.
                                    —31—

the labor market does not seem the appropriate focal point for In—depth

analysis, researchers should make every effort to obtain Industry—specific

estimates of wages per employee, or some other variable to indicate the
                                           1
skill requirements of different industries.

        Labor   Per Unit of What? Assume first that there are no traded Inter-
mediate goods, so that there are only domestic (primary) factors of production
employed in producing commodities. The question then is whether units should
be output at domestic prices or output at international prices. For purposes
of evaluating factor inputs, domestic value added should be employed.2

        11n some countries, of course, there may   exist   categorization of
workers   into 'skilled and "unskilled.   That statistic should be examined
with care when used, and its meaning explained fully. Turkey, for example,
classifies something over 70 percent of Turkish workers going to Germany as
skilled, while Germany so classifies only about 15 percent of those workers.
        21f the HOS two—factor model were valid, it would make no difference
whether domestic or international prices were used because any industry using
more   labor per unit of output would use less capital. In reality, however,
cases are encountered where more capital and more labor are used in one
country than elsewhere. Consider, for example, a two—commodity case in which
commodity x was protected by a 100 percent tariff, with both commodities
having domestic prices equal to one peso, with the exchange rate of one peso
equaling one dollar. Suppose, further, that it took 30 centavos of labor to
produce   1 peso of x and 50 centavos of labor to produce 1 peso of y. The
commodity y is clearly labor intensive, In that it would require less labor
and more of other resources to produce x and more labor and less of other
resources to produce y. Consider, now, the ranking at international prices.
It takes 50 centavos of labor to produce $1 of y, and 60 centavos of labor to

produce $1 of x; it also takes 50 centavos of capital to produce y and 140
centavos of capital to produce $1 of x. The point is that the wage is
equated in both industries when equal to domestic price times marginal
product. It is therefore domestic values that imist be employed.
The reason is that concern here is with employment implications and

examination must therefore be focused upon the opportunity cost of expanding

one activity or another. Domestic values are the appropriate unit for

comparison in that instance.

         Even when domestic values are used, there is still a question of how

to   treat intermediate goods and   home goods   when the assumption that only
primary factors are employed is abandoned. Here, the solution must be to
use domestic value added rather than value of output and to include that
                                                                 home goods
component of home goods prices which reflects value added in the
inputs per unit of     output of tradables.    The reason for using value added,

rather than value of output, is the same as the reason for using effective

rather    than nominal tariffs: concern is with the employment       of domestic


 resources   in   value—adding activities. Otherwise, if value of output is used,

 an activity   with a high   proportion   of value added to output would almost

 certainly appear to be. more labor (and capital) intensive than another where
 intermediate goods constituted a very high fraction of product price.1
        Direct labor requirements, therefore, should be computed per unit of
 value added measured at domestic prices, where value        added is the domestic


 output price less the cost of all purchased inputs per unit of output. The
                                                                 should be
 appropriate concept for direct plus indirect labor requirements

 the   direct labor requirements, as measured above, plus the requirements of

 labor used in home goods per unit of value       added,   with value added itself




          1This is because both labor per unit of output and capital per unit of

 output would be likely to be higher in the activity with the high proportion

 of value added. It would not happen, of course, if capital—labor ratios

 were used.
                                        —-)J—




adjusted   to include the primary factors employed in producing home goods

used in producing a unit of domestic currency of output.

         Suppose, for example,   that   a peso's worth of textiles is produced

with 30 centavos of cotton (tradable), 10 centavos of electricity and

transport   (hone good), 25 centavos of labor, and 35 centavos to all         other
domestic factors of production. Suppose further that electricity and

transport require 20 centavos of labor per unit of output, and 40 centavos

of other domestic factors of production, with no indirect requirements of

other home goods. Then, the direct labor requirement per unit of otnestic

value   added   is 25/60, since 25 centavos is paid to labor and      value   added is

60. Direct plus indirect labor requirements are 27/66, since there are

2 centavos of indirect labor used in producing electricity and transport,

and   6 centavos of domestic primary factors (including labor) employed in

producing   electricity and transport services used in producing one peso of
textiles.
         Given the ambiguity of words when it comes to concepts such as
direct requirements of labor plus Indirect requirements in home goods,V
it may be useful to express the     above algebraically. The       direct labor
requirement     per unit of domestic value added In        the jth activity, L
can be   computed from data on employment       in   j ,       (measured in the st

appropriate     unit available, being sure that units are comparable in
different activities), the domestic value of output (V) and the domestic
value of purchased inputs W)            as



                                                                          (1)
                                         v
                                         -.34-.




Indirect labor requirements in home goods1 per unit of output of the jth

tradables is ajhV where a.h is the input of home goods per unit of

traded goods output. Indirect labor requirements for home goods per unit

of value added of the jth tradable, L are therefore the labor

requirements per unit of output times the ratio of value added to output in

the jth tradable. That is

                                                P        V—M
                               Li=a •.                       :1

                                                                  Vi
                                                                                         (2)
                                 j      jh Vh

Total requirements of labor directly in the jth tradable plus Indirect

requirements in home goods, L              are therefore


                                                              —        +
                                                    .   VI                 alh Eh/Vh           1
                         - N. + aj h Vh
    Lt
     j
           L1 +
            j     jV
                   =
                                                              Vi
                                                                             Vi -
                                                                                    Hi

         Of course, if home goods are an input into home goods alb should

be interpreted as direct plus indirect use of home goods per unit of

tradable and ajh(Vh —                should be domestic value added in 'direct
                          14h)
                                                                       2
 indirect plus indirect indirect use of home goods.



         1Authors can,   if they wish,      also computetotal indirect labor require-

 ments   (including those emanating from domestic production of import—competing —
 or prohibited — commodities).          It is     not    obvious, however, how that statistic
 should be interpreted.
         21n practice,   it   may    well be    that     1indirect indirect home goods
 requirements are so small that a single figure can be computed from the
 input—output table and used for all sectors without any sizable error.
                                           —35—



         Once the Ls and L's are computed for individual industries,
the remaining problem is to form estimates of labor per unit                  of   value added

for different co=odity categories, and that requires a weighting scheme.

Consider the ith category, which            might     be a two—digit SIC category which

was to be summed        separately for exportables and import—competing             goods from

the    disaggregated data available at the three— and four—digit level.1
Domestic production is not a satisfactory weight for import—competing
commodities. One must,          therefore, use value—added in domestic production

plus   exports            ,   for weights.2 Then, labor per unit of value added
in the ith category is

                                               EL X
                                        L1 —                  k — d,   i, t         (4,   5, 6)




Trade   Regime Data
             For analysis of   the   reasons why the labor coefficients are whatever
they are, trade regime data will prove essential, and some of these should
be regarded as part of the basic data set common to all country studies.
Ideally, one would like estimates of domestic and International prices of
all outputs and inputs, so that domestic and International value added per


             'For non—competing imports, of course, the procedure should be the
same    as    those outlined here, but of course coefficients will have to be
taken from another country's data and adjusted according to the procedure
defined in equation 6         below.

             21n most   cases, that will probably mean using      American or       Japanese data
from input—output tables to estimate value—added per doilar of imports.
                                      —36—


unit of output could be computed in all lines) In most cases, however,
                                                                                          •
prior   work will have been done on the trade and payments regime, and re-

searchers will probably be well advised to use that work to the extent

possible rather than attempting new estimates.

         Effective Protection Estimates. The ideal set of data would be a

set of estimates of effective protection rates (ERP's) appropriately

calculated: on a basis comparable to the individual industry categories

used for calculation of labor requirements per unit of value added. In

the absence of distortions, EiP's provide an estimate of the proportionate

excess of international value added (IVA) over domestic value added (DVA).

Researchers    will generally find that the available estimates do not conform

to their classification and will undoubtedly have to devote some effort to

providing     estimates on   a comparable basis.3

         In   addition to estimates of effective protection rates) it will be
desirable,     in each country study, to have a brief description of the



         1With foreign and domestic prices denoted as pf and d respectively,

 the ratio of international to      domestic value   of   outputs is         .   inter-

 national value    added per unit of output of j          is p —   ap   ,   while

 domestic value added is p. —
                                                                                    of
          2See Section IV below for a fuller discussion of ERP's and means

 computing them.

          31n many cases, it will be necessary to assume that all items in a

 particular category are subject to the same average tariff on inputs, or

 otherwise to estimate output tariffs. Sometimes, sectoral EBP estimates will

 have to be used. Authors should try to avoid using these estimates across

 exports and import—competing subsectors.
                                     —37—


evolution of the trade and payments regime. In many cases, the researcher

will be able to cite other work (as, for example, the studies resulting

from the NBER project on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Developtient

or the O.EC.D. studies) and provide a brief synopsis of it. The major

purpose of describing the evolution of the regime wii. be to evaluate the

environment that determined the coilm2odity composition of trade. For

countries where little work has been done, researchers will         probably   wish

to   provide a delineation of their country's experience into the phases
described in Chapter II of    the Krueger synthesis.

         Direct   Price Comparisons and Tax Treatment. In some cases, authors
may themselves wish to construct ERP estimates, to disaggregate available
estimates into subsectors, or to develop data on the protective effects of

quotas plus tariffs on individual industries. This will prove especially

desirable when existing estimates fail to take into account the protective

effect of quotas or when the sectora]. classification under which ERP's are

available cuts across categories of traded commodities.

         When   quantitative restrictions are important   and not   included in
existing   ERP estimates, it may prove desirable to gather quotations on

domestic and foreign prices. In general, it will be useful          to collect
commodity—specific data on: 1) the c.i.f. price (although even here the
data must be scrutinized to insure that the import has       not    come from a
high—cost source such as a bilateral—trading—agreement partner country)
of the commodity; 2) the landed cost of the commodity, inclusive of duties
and other landing charges; and 3) the domestic wholesale price of the
commodity.
         Estimation of the 'normal' wholesale margin can usually be
accomplished either by using other research results or by examining such
                                    —3C—


margins for commoditIes for which quotas are not imposed.1 With such               S
estimates in hand one can then derive estimates of the total nominal
protection afforded to a commodity by subtracting the wholesale margin

from the wholesale price and then dividing the wholesale price by the

ci.f. price and subtracting one. The division of tha protection into the

tariff component and the premium component then follows automatically,

as the differential between the c.i.f. price and landed cost represents

the tariff protection while the differential between landed cost and

wholesale price net of normal margin represents the premium.

       Sources of data on individual prices are many, and if the researcher

has basic estimates of EPs at a given level of aggregation, it should be

possible to disaggregate wherever data are available, checking to see that

disaggregation procedures result in comparable estimates across sectors.

Potential data sources include: 1) data underlying the wholesale price

index 2) price quotations reported by Chambers of Commerce or manufacturers1

associations 3) records of import license applications in government

offices 2 and 4) direct interviews with large buyers and sellers of the

produce. In cases where the product is an intermediate input used directly



       1One   can,   if in doubt use upper and lower—bound estimates and examine

 the difference the assumptions make. It is quite possib1e of courses that

 margins are a function of size of shipments, etc., and one might wish an

 estimate as a function of several variables.

        2There is a question of course, as to whether license applications

 contain reliable data.
                                                                                   S
                                     —39—

by the importer, black market quotations are a possible source, although

those estimates must be used with care.

       One difficulty that often arises in the cornparison of domestic and

international prices is the problem of taxes. There are four cases. 1).

When a tax is applied to the duty—inclusive price of the import and to the

ex—factory price of the domestic product at the same rate, there is no net

additional protection accorded to the firm by the Imposition of the tax.

2). When the tax is paid by the domestic firm and not on imported products,

that tax represents a partial offset to whatever protection is accorded to

domestic producers, and the ad valorem equivalent of the tax should be sub-

tracted from the tariff and the remainder divided by one plus the domestic

tax rate. 3). When the import Is taxed at a rate higher than the

domestic product, that represents additional protection to domestic producers,

and should be Included In the estimate of protection. 4). When a tax is

levied on the c.i.f. price of imports and on the ex—factory price of domestic

production, the total protection accorded the fIrm is the tariff rate divided

by one plus the tax rate.1


       'Let    d be the domestic price and Pf the foreign price, with t

the tariff rate, d the tax rate, and dd and df representing tax rates

on domestic products and imports when the two rates are different. Call T

the "true'1 ad valoretn rate of protection received by the firm.

       Case 1 is then: dd(l + d) =
                                       Pf(l +   d)(l + t), so              =   t.
       Case 2 is: Pf(1 + t) =
                                   d1 + d), so         =   (t   —   d)/l +     d.

       Yor case 3, let df >
                              dd
                                   and df =
                                              add)
                                                     a >   1.       So


                                                                a -
                                                t(l + dd(a —             1)]
     + dd) =
               P(l   + add)(l + t), so T3 =
                                                  1 + dd
       Case 4 is d1 + d)        Pf(]. ÷ d + t), so T4
                                                                    1 + d '
Computation of Factor Proportions
                                                       implications of alternative
        Focus in this project is on the employment

trade strategies. The theory that can     be   used to underlie the analysis, of

                                     ratios, rather than on employment per
course, is based on labor—capital
                                                   and other data will have numbers
unit of output. In general, however census
                                 of employees, and total value added, but not
on wages and salaries, number
                                         of capital stock. In such circum-
necessarily any independent estimates
                                                                      from those
stances, the only way to estimate capital requirements directly
                                         added not attributable to employment
data is to regard that part of value
                                               capital. In that instance no new
of labor as being part of the payment to
                                       capital" requirements, and it is recom-
 information is gained by computing
                                                                         unit
 mended that researchers use labor per unit of value added and wages per

 of value added. For a number of questions, it will be of great use to obtain
                                               if such are available. Even then,
 independent estimates of capital stock,

 of course, there are a host of problems associated with valuation, estimating

 the flow of services, and so forth.'

         For purposes of obtaining the basic estimates of labor requirements,

                                         that only data on employment be used.
 therefore, it is probably preferable
                                                    is to take the labor co-
 All   that   needs to be done, for that purpose

 efficients described above, and to compute the labor requirements per



          11n countries where inflation does not distort the figures too much,

                                               sometimes be used as a proxy f or
  depreciation plus interest payments can

  capital. In cases where the input—output table has capital requirements
                                      should be allocated to subsectorS in
  for a sector, those requirements

  accordance with the ratio of interest and depreciation in the subsectoral
  average. See Project Working Paper No. 2 for more detail.
                                         —41—



standardized number of currency units of domestic value added in each
category. To do that will require multiplying the L's of equations (1)
through (5) by appropriate deflators from the trade regime data and        country

trade data to value—added terms. Conversion of labor per unit of DVA to
labor per unit of IVA requires knowledge of the ratio of the international
value   added to the domestic value added. Then, L's can be multiplied by

those ratios.1

        Table 1 is intended to provide a summary of some of the various

aggregates of employment per unit of value added that may be of interest.

Naturally, country authors will have examined the labor coefficients in the

individual industries and attempted to analyze any special systematic

patterns that emerge. In so doing, other         breakdowns of labor requirements
will be of interest, but the ones listed in Table 1 should be presented,
to the extent possible, for all countries.2

       n important summary statistic will be the net factor content of
trade, assuming a shift so that trade is reduced (or increased) at the
margin while leaving the trade balance unchanged. IVA, rather than value
of exports and       imports,   must be used to measure this, as otherwise one might
have a reexport industry, with very little value added per dollar of exports,


          1Authors    are asked to check   for absolutely inefficient processes
at   each stage. It is possible that some import—competing production

requires both more labor and more capital than export production per wilt

of IVA.     In   that case, labor required per DVA in import substitution could

be smaller than       in exports, while labor per IVA might be larger.
          2See Appendix 1 for the suggested ordering of data tables.
                                      -t '- —




and a million—dollar cut in exports might itself imply a iO,OOO cut in
                                                                                    .
imports, while a million—dollar cut in imports would, usually, represent a

million dollar increase in value added. Thus,) reducing exports and imports

by one million dollars each would improve the trade balance by $900,000

all else equal. In effect, the net factor content of trade is the statistic

that is really implied by the -IOS model: it predicts that a labor—abundant

country will be a net exporter of labor and a net importer of capital. One

simple transformation of that prediction is that the country will, on net,

export labor.

       For domestic value adde& there are three important estimates of

labor per unit of DVA; that employed in exports, that employed in domestic

import—competing production, and     that       that would be employed if imports

without domestic competitors had to be produced domestically.1 Data for

labor requirements and other variables for exports and import—competing goods

have already been discussed. For non—competing imports, authors will

probably have to use data from other countriest input—output tables. Thus,

 if e.g. tractors are imported and not domestically produced, one would

 have to estimate labor requirements (and other inputs) from another

 countryts input—output table (or Census of :anufactures). Then, one would

 have to ask how   domestic   factor proportions might vary from those in the

 other country. Several means of estimation are possible, and authors will

 undoubtedly find means most suitable to the circumstances of their country.

 One possible method would be to take the ratio of the labor input, l



        1See above, under trade data, for suggested criteria for classifica-

 tion of commodities into the desired aggregates.
                                     —43—


in the jth industry in country k ,          relative   to the labor input in i

where i is also produced in country h .          One could then compute:



                                                                           (7)




This is tantamount to assuming that the i and j industries have the same
elasticities of substitution, so that the proportionate change in factor
proportions   between the two industries is the same in     the two countries.
        Various   subcategories of goods within each traded     good classification
will   be of interest. Within HOS goods, country authors      may wish     to distin-

guish between manufactures where the availability of an intermediate input

(such as   jute in India) is   of great significance, and HOS goods that are
footloose.' It will be important, somewhere in the write—up, to explain
the basis for this classification, since, as pointed out above, the same
industry may be 'footloose in one country and materials—based in another.
It will depend upon the direction of trade whether decomposition of labor
requirements into those with higher labor—capital endowments (LDC's for
short in Table 1) and those with relatively greater capital stocks is
worthwhile. In some countries, it may be desirable to provide such a
breakdown for HOS exports and not for NRB exports, and so on (regional
trading arrangements may prove important here).
         Finally, within import—competing goods, it may prove useful to
 distinguish, particularly among lOS goods, those commodities which are
 import—competing only because they are accorded protection. As already
 indicated,   country authors will have to use   their judgment to decide
whether    such a dichotomization is warranted and     can be meaningfully made.
                                         —44—



        TABLE 1.   DESIRABLE AGGREGATES OF E?LOYINT PER MILLION UNITS


1. Net Factor Content of Balanced IVA = labor per million units of IVA of
    exports less labor per million units of IVA of imports.

2. Labor per million of DVA in:

                                         orts
                   lOS goods                                     NRB goods

         primary
         commodity
         based            to
                            other
                                  \to
                                                   agriculture               other

                          DCs     LDCs
  to DCs        to LDCs




                    HOS goods                                        goods



                           prot   cted   competitive




                     lOS goods                                   NiB.goods

         from                    from                     from               from
         DCs                    LDCs                      DCs                LDCs




Note:     It is anticipated that each aggregate will be computed for direct

          labor requirements (Equation 4) and for direct labor requirements in

          value added in the tradable plus indirect labor requirements in the

                       of home goods (Equation 6).


                                                                                     .
          production
                                          —45—


Preliminary    Analysis of Findings
        The major task in all country studies will be to analyze the findings
that   emerge from calculating labor requirements per unit of value added in

different groups of activities. Each researcher will have to judge, on the

basis of his    findings   and   of   knowledge of his country's   policies   and   circum-
stances, where to focus his effort. Possible lines of inquiry are the

subject of the next several sections. Here, it should only be pointed out

that several tests should probably be conducted for all            countries.    First,

it will be desirable to attempt to estimate statistically the relationship

between the height of effective protection and          the   labor requirements per

unit   of value added. The hypothesis underlying the factor proportions
model of trade, for a labor—abundant country, would of course be that
effective protection requirements to induce domestic production would be
smaller, the greater the labor requirement per unit of value added. One
qualification to this hypothesis would be the assumption that industries
are absolutely efficient, and do not use both more            capital and   more labor

per unit   of output)
         The   main task of analysis, however, will be        to interpret the findings

carefully, particularly with regard to appropriate categorizations of
industries, and to determine the amount of research effort to be allocated


         'Since this working paper was written, it has become apparent that
the hypothesis of a link between factor proportions and the height of ERP's
is meaningful only if it is posited that there are no monopoly profits result-
ing from protection. If tariffs confer monopoly powers in the domestic
market, then a much more complex hypothesis must          be   formulated.
                                     —46—


to each of the three possibilities: 1) factor market distortions signifi-

cantly affect the coefficients; 2) the trade regime itself significantly

alters the commodity composition of trade, and 3) domestic markets are

so imperfect that simulation methods must be used to investigate what

would happen in an efficient allocation of resources.


Summary of Basic Data to be Presented

        Insofar as possible, each    country   study will contain: 1) a descrip-

tion of the evolution of the trade and payments regime, with estimates of the

effective protection accorded to the various industries at the same level

of disaggregation as the Input—output table;        2) a categorization of com-

modities,   disaggregated from the input—output table along the         lines indicated

in Section VI, into the relevant categories of NRB tradable, HOS tradable,
and home goods, with appropriate further breakdowns, 3) an estimate of labor
requirements,    standardized insofar as possible    with respect to skills and
hours   of work, per dollar of domestic and international value added, for

each commodity category; and      4) estimates of the labor requirements per

million units    of domestic   and international   value   added in   the various
 aggregate categories of tradables.1
         These   data will enable some preliminary analysis of the link between

 alternative trade strategies and employment, and they will also provide the

 basis on which allocation of effort among alternative lines of Investigation

 can be made. In addition, of course, they will yield a set of data common

 across the countries, in spite of their diverse circumstances. There are

 many ways, even at this preliminary stage of basic data, in which authors

 ____________                                                                             S
         1See the appendix below for a suggested order of data presentation.
                                          —47—



will   find it possible to enrich their findings examination of time series

patterns, use of independent capital. stock data, alternative categorization

of commodities, and so on. What has          been   presented here should be regarded

as a minimum,        about   which each researcher can use his own judgment   as to
how   best   to proceed to analyze the reasons for his findings.



                IV.     ANALYSIS OF THE TRADE REGINE AND ITS EFFECTS


         There are two important ways in which the trade regime can influence
the empirical findings. First, in a variety of ways, the regime can
directly influence the composition of the various subcategories of tradable
goods. Secondly, the regime can affect the prices of factors of production,
and thus alter the profitability of alternative activities and the factor
proportions used in them. Genera]. equilibrium considerations tell us that
these two     avenues     are bound to interact, but for research purposes it will.
be    necessary    to treat them separately empirically.

          It should be noted that each       trade regime interacts   with domestic

variables     in   a   variety of important ways, and the same trade policy can have
totally      different effects depending on      the domestic context. Moreover,
the    variety and      combination of possible policies and effects is     virtually

infinite,      and   all that can be done here is    to   raise some considerations
of the    sort that will have to be analyzed in the country studies. Questions
that will      have to be considered, to greater or lesser degree, in each study,

 includethe following: 1) To what extent could alterations be made within
 the same trade strategy that would further the employment goal? 2) To
what extent does the trade strategy itself affect the factor intensity of
exports and import substitutes? 3) To what extent would alteration of the
                                 —43—


trade strategy significantly affect employment (other than via its effect

on the overall growth rate)? Naturally, in countries where It is found that

exports of HOS goods are capital—intensive (as DIaz suggests, in his NBER

study, is the case for Colombia), analysis will have to be addressed to

the question of why that is so. In cases where the e.nployment implications

of alternative trade strategies appear to be approximately equal, attention

will focus on those aspects of the trade regime and factor markets that

could affect employment in exports and in Import—substitution.   Finally,

in those instances where exports appear to be significantly more labor—using

than import substitutes, the question as to whether future expansion will

continue that trend, and the scope for increasing further yet the (economic)

use of labor will be the focal point of examination.


Effective Rates of Protection

       As mentioned in Section III, it will be necessary to obtain estimates

of effective rates of protection (including the value of non—tariff barriers)

for the same crnnmodity classification as is used for the labor coefficients.

In the event such data do not already exist, authors will have to devote

 a considerable portion of their attention to obtaining them.

        The basic data required are domestic and international prices.    In

 instances where tariffs (and other charges translatable into tariff

 equivalents) are the only form of protection) it is relatively simple to

 compute the statistic:
                                  t.—Ea.i t.
                                           1
                           ERP. —l—Ea.
                                            1
                                        1

                                                                                .
                                         —49...



where   all international prices are normalized at unity. In most instances,

it will be most convenient to keep input—output tables at domestic prices,

and   simply   provide estimates of effective protective rates.

        When data on tariffs are available (and if they are the only barrier

to   trade) the only task will be to compute the ERP's .and     then   to transform
them from commodity estimates to sectoral estimates in conjunction with
the input—output table.       In the individual studies, ERP's   should be reported
at the same level of disaggregation as the employment statistics, since it
is those figures which will be used to test the hypothesis that higher EBPs
are associated with more capital-intensive industries in labor abundant
countries.      For purposes of aggregation, it will probably be best to use

the international value of domestic consumption as weights.

         En   most   countries, however, tariffs do not constitute the only form

of protection, and a major challenge is to determine the tariff—equivalent

of quotas and other protective devices. Obtaining direct price comparisons

is the most satisfactory means of surmounting that difficulty, but it is

extremely time consuming if a prior study is not available. In cases where

prior studies are not available, authors may have to supplement tariff data

with some crude categorization of commodities. For example, it might be

that there was a group       of   goods whose importation was freely permitted,

another group where QR's led to moderate premiums         and another group of
commodities whose importation was prohibited and whose domestic prices
were greatly in excess of world prices. In such a case, the tariff rates

could be used for the first group of commodities, the tariff rates plus

x percent could be used for the second group, and an even higher rate, y ,

could   be used for the third group. If available, additional information
(such   as the rate of increase of price domestically after import prohibition
                                        —53—


relative   to the rate of inflation of the world price) could be used for
finer subdivisions.       On occasion, researchers will be forced to omit some

aspects of the protective structure.           In such cases, it   will be important in

the   text to make clear what aspects of the trade regime have been captured

in the ERP   estimates    and what have been omitted.


Impact of the Trade Regime on the Commodity Composition of Trade

         As shown   in   the   Growth, Distortions, and Patterns of Trade Among
                                                                      influence   the
Many Countries paper, across—the—board trade policies can
                                                                             even
amount of trade, and they can render it profitable to produce and

export a commodity that would otherwise be entirely imported (an import

substitute). However, as long as trade interventions are uniform, it
                                                                                    could

not be the case that some commodities that were exported lay further away
 from the commodities with comparative advantage than others that were not.
 If, for example, country A extended a uniform export subsidy of 50 percent
 to   all commodities, and that 50 percent translated into the same effective

 protective rate for all commodities, it could happen that country A began
                                                           exported owever, in this
 exporting commodities x, y and z, not previously

 case one could infer that x, y and z were next in line in comparative

 advantage —   i.e.,     that there were no other commodities closer to comparative

                                            in the context of examining the employ-
 advantage. Of particular relevance

 ment implications of alternative trade strategies, if the factor proportions

 explanation of trade were correct and country A was very labor—abundant,

 then there would be no more labor intensive commodities than x, y, z and
                                                        found such commodities (and
  the commodities previously exported. If one
                                                          explanations for them), it
  could reject transport costs, or other obvious

  would constitute a fairly convincing refutation of the applicability of
                                      —51—



the   factor proportions explanation of trade. Thus, across—the--board pro-

tection of import—substitution industries or encouragement to exports

should not significantly affect the factor proportions found when examining

the labor requirements of various categories of tradables.

         If, however, Incentives are not uniform, it   is   quite possible that

the   nature of the incentives provided by the trade regime can significantly
alter the employment implications of exports and     import—substitutes) If,

for example, export subsidies are accorded only to modern," or "import—

substitution firms, it might      well be that the only activities eligible
for the   subsidy were far away from the country's true comparative advantage.

         Country analysts will have to examine their country's trade regime

with respect   to the hypothesis that the regime itself influences the commodity
composition    of   trade. In cases where there is reason to believe that it

does   so, the natural procedure will   be to compute the 'average effective

exchange rate for exports, and to compute the labor requirements per million

dollars (or other unit) of exports of commodities which       receive   the average

rate, and to calculate separately the labor requirements for those exports

receiving above—average protection (subsidization). The same sort of pro-

cedure can be followed on the import side; when it Is believed that 'natural'

import—substitutes would compete under an efficient allocation: one can

compute the average effective protective rate, and then compute the labor

requirements for all industries subject to that rate (or less) and then



          1Note that we are here assuming that the labor—capital utilization

in each activity is given; later, substitution possibilities, especially

as influenced by the trade regime, are considered.
                                      —52—




compare   that figure with those industries receiving above—average
effective protection.
          Along   this line, it is important to distinguish between exports that
are   essentially temporary
                               in nature and those that are of longer duration.
                                               subsidy schemes to export out of
For   example, it may pay firms at existing
                                                                      of
excess capacity but not to invest in additional capacity for purposes
                                         these instances, the exchange rate is
expanding their export markets. In
                                     and there are expectations of further over—
usually sufficiently overvalued

valuation, so that it does not pay to base one's plans on the export market;

an alternative version is that incentives to undertake additional import

substitution ventures are sufficiently strong so that all investible resources
                                  will be available. This "excess capacity' type
go to lines where protection
                                             countries with overvalued exchange
 of exporting is particularly common in
                                         subsidies to new industries. In those
 rates and 'made—to—tneasur&' export
                                                                     time In
 cases, one sort of test that can be made is to examine changes over
                                                    in general, one does not
 the commodity cpmpositiofl of modern exports:

 observe sustained growth of most commodity exports. Rather, the phenomenon

 is that an item enters the export list for several years, perhaps even

 Increasing in volume for a year or two, but then diminishes again. The
                                                   of exports, as well as their
 small volumes and dispersions of these types

 erratic performance, are both hallmarks of the "excess capacity type of

 exports. In most instances, some of the 'export" industries are really
                                                                      domestic
  import—substitution endeavors, and often ones where the size of the

  market was overestimated.
                                                         is not the sort of
            Since the "excess capacity type of export

  commodity that would develop Into successfully growing exports under an
                                                                    analysts
  export promotion strategy it is especially important that country
                                    —53—


examine   the determinants of manufactured exports very carefully in countries
where import substitution has been the dominant strategy.    In those cases,

the hypothesis that the sorts of commodities exported are really import

substitutes, and not the sort of exports that would develop under an alterna-

tive strategy, may well be of importance.

          There are, of course, even more ad hoc interventions which can affect

the commodity composition of trade, and analysts should be on the alert for

them. For example, there are countries which prohibit imports of commodities

once domestic production has started, but which also license investment. In

some instances, such as in India, firms have had to agree to export some of

their output as a precondition for receiving an investment (or a capital goods

importation) license. In those cases, exports are genuinely the (not

necessarily profitable) cost of entering the highly profitable sheltered

domestic market. To conclude that those commodities represent the sorts of

goods that would be exported under an alternative trade strategy would be

highly misleading.

          In cases where the trade regime has rendered import substitution

 highly profitable relative to exporting, it may well be that the analyst

 concludes that prevailing   export lists, especially of manufactured com-
 modities, provide little or no    clue as to what would happen under an export

 strategy. In such instances, analysts will surely wish to concentrate some

 of their energies on obtaining data for simulation of optimal patterns of

 resource allocation, along the lines suggested in Section VI below.


 Impact of the Trade Regime on Factor Proportion

           Regardless of whether export promotion or import substitution is

 emphasized, many of the instruments used to foster that strategy have
                                   —54—




implications   for the relative profitability of alternative production

techniques. It is easiest to consider the sorts of influences of the two

regimes separately, as they are somewhat different.

        Export Promotion. The techniques used to encourage exports not only

influence which commodities are exported but also may affect the factor prices

at which potential exporting firms can obtain inputs. There are numerous

schemes which enable exporters to obtain intermediate goods at world market

prices. These schemes can potentially affect the choice of technique, and

hence the employment impact, by making materials—saving more or less

profitable.1 In most instances, however, it  is doubtful whether this
effect Is significant, and it will probably be best in most studies to note

any such schemes chiefly with a view to examining their value as an incentive
to   exports7 rather than for any influence they have on techniques chosen.

         Some sorts of incentives for exports — cash subsidies, special

exchange rate categories, and so on — can affect the commodity composition

of exports as noted above, but need not have any effect on the techniques

chosen within commodity categories. There are, however, other sorts of



         1The fact that a firm obtains materials at international prices does

not prove they are cheap if those materials can be resold on the domestic

market at higher prices. In some instances, as with the Korean wastage allow-

ance which enables firms to import about 25 percent more than the inputs

needed for export, it is precisely the excess of domestic over international

value of the materials that provides the export incentive. The value of such

schemes must, of course, be regarded as part of the incentive (and effective

exchange rate) provided to exporters.
                                        —55—


schemes, especially those concerned with provision of credit or exemption from

duties for importation of capital goods, tihich can influence the techniques

chosen.    If,    for example, exports are encouraged via the provision of

credit    at subsidized interest rates for acquisition of capital goods, that
provision will have the most significant effect on firms which employ capital—
intensive techniques and on firms which can choose capital—intensive
techniques     of production.1 It    is thus in the sorts of export incentives
which    aim at   altering the price of capital goods or services relative to
labor that analysts should look for the impact of the export incentive
measures on choice of technique.
          Import   Substitution. In the case of import—substitution strategies,

a number of systematic tendencies have been observed which tend to render

capital    cheaper to import substitution firms     relative   to what it would   cost

under an optimal resource allocation strategy. When            capital   is cheaper, of
course, there must be some form of capital rationing across firms, and it is
important to distinguish between the nominal price and the effective price
to those receiving the credit. If, for example, each firm receives a lump—
sum allocation of subsidized credit, but borrows additional funds at the
prevailing (market) interest rate, it is not necessarily so that the choice
of techniques will be affected. If, however, firms subject to the capital
incentives are able to obtain all the capital they wish at those prices, while
 other sectors are confronted with higher prices, the incentive effects can



           Likewise,    if exporters are granted the right to import capital

 goods    at   preferential rates, the same analysis would hold. In general,

 such    is not the case,   although   potential exporters might be ailotted a
 higher fraction of their import license applications.
                                     —56—


be highly significant. It is important, therefore, for analysts to distin-

guish whether schemes that subsidize the use of capital enable some firms

to satisfy their demands at the prevailing subsidized prices.'

       A large number of separate factors have been identified in import—

substitution regimes that can implicitly subsidize th use of capital

relative to labor for firms fortunate enough to receive licenses. First,

the exchange rate itself can frequently be overvalued. In such circumstances,

the authorities are often reluctant to impose tariffs and surcharges on

Imports of capital goods, and those coodIties are imported at effective

exchange rates well below those used for other commodities. Thus, those

firms which do receive import licenses for capital goods are Implicitly

subsidized by the amount of the overvaluatlon of the exchange rate per

dollar of license received. In some cases, duties and surcharges simply

are not applied to those categories of transactions; in other cases, duties

and surcharges are rebated for firms investing in industries to be encouraged

by the trade and development strategy. In all studies, analysts will wish

to examine the nature of the import regime for capital goods, and the

criteria by which scarce foreign exchange for imported capital goods is

allocated. In most Instances, it will be desirable to estimate the per-

 centage implicit subsidy on use of capital goods.2


       11f, for example, a would—be entrepreneur knows that he will either be
 able to get the necessary licenses and credit (at subsidized rates) to build
 a factory, or he will   be   rejected completely, then he is, in effect, con-

 fronted with a subsidized price of capital goods and it will pay him to
 propose more capital—using techniques than if he had different expectations.
        2here this   appears important,     authors may wish to go even further in

 the analysis. Two interesting studies,      which may suggest useful lines of
 research,   are those by NcCabe and Michalopoulos and by Ongut, cited above.
                                      —57—



         In   addition to implicit subsidization through failure to impose or

levy   duties   and surcharges, there are often schezes for financing capital

goods imports of the desired kinds through subsidized interest rates.         In

such cases, the value and impact of those incentives should be computed in

much the same way as in the case of export promotion regimes.

         Authors   will need to examine the particulars of their trade regimes
with an eye to identifying and quantifying those aspects of the regime that
influence the choice of     technique in particular   production lines. In cases
where   there is no basis   for believing that there are domestic factor market
distortions, it will     be possible3 after estimating the impact of the trade

regime on factor prices, to move straight to examining the impact of those

factor   prices on employment. In most instances, however, authors will wish

to consider the effect of domestic factor markets on choice of technique

and commodity composition of trade. That is the subject of Section V.



              V. ANALYSIS OF FACTOR MARKETS AND SKILL REQUIRELMENTS


         There   is no such thing as a perfectly functioning market. However,

in many instances markets function sufficiently well. 60 that one can

reasonably conclude that prices reflect private opportunity cost: empirical

criteria include the absence of significant excess demand or supply at

prevailing prices, the reflection of shifts in excess demand in price

movemants of the appropriate sign, and so on. Of course, these tests are

 not perfect, and must be made with care: a rational employer can pay above—

 average wages in order to try to obtain better qualified, or more eager,

 workers. Likewise, individuals may apply for jobs for which they       are   not

 qualified. Different wages may reflect different skills, or, for that
matter,
                                     —58—



          different costs of alternative types of employment. For example,
                                                                                .
some have argued that   the   frequently—obseed differential between rural

and urban wages reflects an imperfectly—functioning market, and a "distor—

tion,' while others have argued that higher urban wages simply reflect the

greater costs associated with urban living in the form of roads, sewers,

housing, and other infrastructure types of investments.1

          In many developing countries, however, there is ample reason to

believe that significant factor market distortions exist, and may well in-

fluence the coimnodity composition of trade, as well as employment per unit

of output in different activities. In all country studies, authors will

wish to report on factor market conditions, and also to examine, at least

briefly, the skill requirements per unit of exports, of import substitutes,

and also perhaps of non—competing imports.

          There are really different hypotheses underlying the interest in

factor markets and in skills, but examination of either will require atten-

tion to various labor market phenomena, and therefore will cover some of the

same data. In this section, the sort of approach that can be used to examine

each of these issues is outlined in turn. As with other topics, the amount

of attention given to factor markets will depend on the author's judgment of

its importance in his country. As already indicated above, in all countries

it will be desirable to obtain at least a crude indicator of skill require-

ments for alternative activities. In addition, it will be useful to provide

a time series on the real wage rate prevailing within manufacturing, computed



          1See inartya Sen, Employment, Technology and Development, Clarendon

Press, Oxford, 1975, for a discussion of these and related issues.
a
                                           —59—


    both in domestic currency units and in U.S. dollars, and also the real

    price of imported and domestic capital goods, for each country.            The extent

    to which authors go beyond that will, however, depend on their interpretation

    of the data.


    Factor Market Distortions

             As shown in 'Growth, Distortions, and Patterns of Trade Among Many

    Countries,      the existence of inappropriate factor prices can have important

    consequences for the commodity composition of trade and the factor propor-

    tions used in particular industries.

             The fact that currency overvaluation, failure to impose         duties   and

    surcharges on imported capital goods, and interest subsidies can lead to

    relatively low prices of capital goods was already mentioned in Section IV.

    In addition, there are numerous cases in which there is reason to believe

    that domestic phenomena, including government legislation as well as trade

    union    agreements,     can influence the real    wage.   Both of these phenomena tend

     to result in a    higher wage—rental ratio than would exist at shadow prices
     and in theory, it       is possible that they can result in the wrong commodities
     being   exported, as well as in the use      of   more capital—intensive techniques
     of production than would be opt1iil.
              The trade regime data contained in the country studies will enable
     estimates of the real price of imported capital equipment. In addition, it
     will be desirable to estimate the fraction of capital goods that are domes-
     tically produced, and to construct separate real price series for construction
     and   for   machinery   and equipment.1



      /       1For   an example of such a series, see Anne 0. Krueger, Foreign Trade
     Regimes and Economic Development: Turkey, NBER, 1974, pp. 234 ff.
                                                                                 S



                                  —60—



      Some analysis of labor markets should also be undertaken. In particular,
                                                                                     .
authors should examine the extent to which there is reason to believe that

the real wage is above its equilibrium level, and the determinants of any

distortion in the labor market. Insofar as possible, this should be done

by relying on studies already undertaken of labor market behavior.

       Several questions are of importance; 1) what is the phenomenon that

gives rise to the distortion 2) what sector or sectors of the economy are

affected by it and 3) how significant is it? The questions are interrelated,

of course, but it is useful to consider each in turn.

       Analysis of the phenomenon that gives rise to the distortion will

require care. If legislation is the source of the discrepancy, an important

question is the degree to which that legislation is enforced and the sectors

to which it is applicable. ifl many countries for example, legislation con-

fers seniority rights and sizable fringe benefits upon workers after they

have been employed for a specified period of time.1 Insofar as firms' labor

requirements are really for unskilled workers, labor turnover can be used as

a means for avoiding much of the impact of the legislation when, however,

skilled workers are required, such legislation will make firms reluctant

to expand employment for fear that falling sales will result in bankruptcy.

       Another form of labor—market distortionH arises when the conditions

of employment differ vastly between the large, organized manufacturing Sector,

and the informa1" or small—scale sector. There are a large number of

important questions about the reasons for differences observed between the



       1In this regard, it is extremely important that end—of—year, and other,

bonuses, as well as fringe benefits be included in wage rate calculations.
                                      —61—


two. Hypotheses abound: 1) wage differentials between the two sectors

represent different skill attributes on the part of workers in the two

sectors; 2) the wage in the large—scale sector is union— or government—

determined,   while wages in the   small—scale   sector reflect opportunity cost
of workers; 3) workers gain experience in        the informal sector and then

become   eligible, and search, for jobs in      the large—scale sector; and 4) jobs

in the two sectors draw upon non—competing groups in the labor force. In
attempting to draw inferences about factor market distortions, and         especially

about    conditions in the large market, it will be necessary to deal with the
large—scale,   small—scale phenomenon with some care. In        general, it   may

prove useful to partition data into the two sectors as much as possible,

making inferences about the comparability of labor between sectors only

when    unavoidable   or on the basis of past   research   into labor market conditions.1

         The second question, identification of the sector or sectors that

are affected by a wage distortion, is of equal importance.           To constitute

 a distortion, a wage difference must not be based upon cost differences or

 diffexgent productivity- of workers (due to education, experience, or other

 factors). If a distortion arises between industry as a whole and agri-

 culture, the choice of technique within each manufacturing industry will

 be  affected, but it is not possible that a 'reversal" of industries will
 occur. If, however, the distortion is between manufacturing industries,
 it is possible that reversals" in factor intensities, along the lines

          1See Stephen E. Guisinger and Moha=ad Irtan, "Inter—Industry
 Differentials in Wages and     Earnings   in Pakistan's Manufacturing Sector,"
 Pakistan   Development Review, for an     interesting attempt to analyze sources
 of   wage differentials.
                                      —62—


described in Growth9 Distortions, and Patterns of Trade among Many Countries

will occur. Authors are referred to that document for analysis of cases,

and should examine their countries labor markets with care to ascertain the

precise nature of the distortion, and thus to define and limit the sorts of

effects that can arise.

       In this regard, it is expected that a researcher undertaking one of

the special studies in the project will use the labor and capital coeffi-

cients, and wage—rental data, to provide estimates of production functions

for various industries. Authors will then be able to use those estimates

to provide a quantitative indication of the extent to which factor propor-

tions might differ with differing wage—rental ratios.1 Details of that

procedure will depend in large measure on the preliminary results obtained

in the country studies and in the production function estimation. Regardless

of the extent to which such methods prove fruitful, however, analysis of

the sources and nature of the distortion will be of great importance.

       answers to the first two questions —    the   source of the distortion and

the sectors affected by it —   will   already provide some indications of the

significance of the distortion. In some countries, authors may conclude

that, for example, minimum wage legislation was insufficiently enforced or

had enough loopholes so that the effect on real wages, and thus on the

profitability of labor—intensive techniques, was relatively minor,       in other




        'See Section VI below. It is anticipated that the optimizing special

 study will provide estimates of shadow prices of factors which may be

 useful for estimating the employment losses associated with subsidization

 of capital and with raising the real wage.
                                           — 3—



cases however, authors may wish to examine the hypothesis that the combined
effects   of above—opportunity—cost wages and         subsidized   capital significantly

affected   either the choice of technique or the commodity composition of out-

put and   trade.    It is impossible to anticipate all of the possible avenues

of research that might       be   explored when this hypothesis appears plausible.

In some   countries, it     may be possible to provide estimates of the urban—

rural wage differential and        of   urban unemployment rates. In many cases, the

real   wage and    rental prevailing for manufacturing industries can be contrasted
with estimates of shadow prices that           are computed out of the optimizing

models    described in Section VI. However, individual researchers wiU have
to use their judgment both in           deciding on the relative importance attached

to   analysis of factor market distortions and their influence on            the com-

modity composition of trade and factor proportions employed and on the means
to be used to estimate the quantitative magnitudes of the distortions and
their effects.

Human Capital1
          If one is   to   attempt to estimate the employment impact of alternative
trade strategies, it       is   not enough to count   the "nuinber   of workers. It is
widely recognized that human beings do not constitute a homogeneous mass of
employable    laborers     and that skills and training are important inputs in
the production process.


          'Paul Schultz has agreed to do a special study on labor—market condi-
tions and the human—capital questions involved. His work may provide addi-
tional insights of use to country authors at           later   stages of   the research.
                                    —64—


      There are many important and    uranswered   theoretical and empirical

questions about the role of skills in determining comparative advantage. Of

great importance is whether skilled workers are complementary to machines or

whether skilled and unskilled workers are close substitutes antithetical to

either of these hypotheses is the notion that human capital (or skills) is a

separate factor of production, and the skill requirements per unit of output

are uncorrelated with either capital or labor requirements. If either of

the former hypotheses is correct, the factor proportions explanation of

trade would not be seriously impaired, as one might safely infer that

countries with relatively poor endowments of capital also had relatively

poor endowments of human capital.     If, however, the skill, capital, and

labor requirements were uncorrelated, any explicit statement of a factor

proportions explanation of trade becomes extremely difficult.

       One partial means of getting at this question will be to attempt to
                                              industries. As indicated in
 estimate the skill requirements in various
                                              estimate, and attempt to interpret
 Section III, a simple technique will be to

 in light of conditions within the country, the average wage per employee in
                                                      for size—of—firm and other
 different lines of endeavor once standardization
                                              countries, however, authors will be
 variables has been accomplished. In many
                                                        previous research, or
 able to find manpower studies, census tabulations,

 other material that will enable them to provide better data. In particular,

 it will be useful to ascertain the fraction of workers with eight or more

 years of schooling in each industry, as well as finer education breakdowns




                                                                                    .
                                         —65—


if these are available. while occupational category breakdowns can some—

times be of help, they should be examined with great care.1

         By and large, the extent to which authors examine the skill implica-

tions of alternative trade strategies will depend on the availability of past

studies of trade regimes, and of other data necessary for the basic estimates,

as well as on their access to reliable data on skill requirements and the

human capita]. composition of the labor force.

         In addition to examining the basic skill composition and requirements

of various industries, authors should examine the hypothesis that firms are

employing overly skilled and trained workers in various occupations.                   This

hypothesis has been put forth several times. There are two variants, and

country authors will wish to consider each in light of their findings with

regard to general conditions in the labor market. The first variant is

simply   the straightforward hypothesis that, when minimum wage legislation
is in force, it     will always   pay employers to shift their employee composition
to    a higher level of skill attainment than would prevail in the absence of

the minimum wage. This hypothesis in effect asserts that more highly

trained workers are always more productive than less highly trained workers

 so   that, as the minimum wage    rises, it     pays   to hire more   skilled workers.

 The   second   variant   of the hypothesis is that government education policies
 result in,an oversupply of college graduates and other highly educated
 individuals. These individuals, so            the   argument goes, compete with


          'There are handbooks of "manpower           requirements"   in   different

 industries. Authors should be on          the   alert to avoid estimates of skill
 content of     occupations   that in   fact   have been derived from international
 estimates.
individuals
                                     —66—



              of lesser training for available jobs, and so on down the line.

In those cases, firms end up hiring individuals of above—requisite training
                                                                                  .
for virtually all positions.

        The empirical implications of the two alternatives are quite different.

In the first variant, one would find unemployment concentrated in the

unskilled occupations (or find a significant wage differential between

unskilled   urban and unskilled rural workers). In the second, one would find
a low rate of return to higher education, and perhaps unemployment among the
more highly educated. Even if sufficient resources are not available to

distinguish between the two hypotheses, it will be important for country

authors to provide their judgment as to whether skill coefficients of the

various industries reported in their studies are significantly affected by

labor market imperfections or not.



    VI. THE DETERMINATION OF EFFICIENT PRODUCTION AND TRADE PATTERNS


        The potential employment effects of alternative trade strategies could

be investigated most fully were it possible to determine where comparative

advantage would lie under conditions of free trade. The determination of

such efficient production and trade patterns is the     subject of a special
study   that will be performed by James N. Henderson of the University of

Ninnesota. His analysis will    be   within a programming framework (with some

nonlinear relations) with a basic model that is both relatively simple, so

that it can be implemented with the individual country data, and flexible,

so that it can be modified to meet the needs of individual country authors.

         This research will involve close cooperation between Professor

Henderson and the country authors. A country author may, if he deems it           S
                                     —67—


appropriate,   obtain the requisite data for his country and convey it to
Henderson.     Henderson will obtain programming solutions with a specially

designed computer program, and return the output to the author. The author

can then evaluate the solutions in terms of their realism and relevance for

his country. If he deems modifications necessary (and first results are

almost always only partially satisfactory), the model will be altered

accordingly and the process repeated. In the final step, the country author

will be able to use the information provided by the solution to the model

in interpreting the divergence, if any, between actual and optimal trade

patterns for his country.

        This section contains a brief description of the model, and the data

that will be needed for it. Project Working Papers No. 2 and 3 provide more

detailed descriptions.

        The basic progrrnnmlng model is rather simple, though it can be extended

as far as circumstances warrant. Gross Domestic Product, in international

prices, is the primary objective function to be maximized. In this context

home goods will be treated so as to reflect the international values of

their inputs. A number of constraints will limit the levels of income and

production. Limited quantities of labor and capital are obvious constraints.

Constraints upon the outputs of individual sectors will reflect capacity

limitations    upon the intersectoral transfer of resources. Production will
obey the fixed—coefficient input—output assumptions.
        It is hoped that, at a later date, the fixed—coefficient assumptions
can be relaxed for labor and capital in another special study that would
provide production function estimates to simulate substitution in response
to   potential factor price changes. This step, hiever, must await preltminary

results.
                                        —68—



         A solution for the programming model will provide the output and        trade
levels for each sector that would be realized under free trade if the techno-

logical and   other      assumptions of the model are fulfilled. The great value

of such solutions normally lies in       the   indication they provide as to where

comparative    advantage lies rather than in their particular numerical estimates.
          The programming solutions also provide shadow, sometimes called effi-
ciency,    prices for labor and     capital. In addition, rents for output capacity
limits    are generated. These are the amounts by which maximal income would
be increased if capacities were increased. From a practical viewpoint the
capacity rents provide information of particular value with regard to the
benefits of potential investment and expansion. The shadow prices for labor
and capital    should be useful for country authors.
          A great number of extensions and variations of the basic model are
available    to   modify and extend the programming analysis. It will be possible
to compute time paths of output and trade with capital accumulation if suffi-
cient data are available. Some nonlinearities can be          introduced if   appro-

priate.     Constraints to represent ad hoc interventions in factor markets

can be introduced. The effects of foreign aid can be determined.

          The data described in Section III will in many cases be useable for

the programming model. In fact, all of the data used for the programming

also will have other uses. One or more input—output tables will provide the

focal data.       If a   country has no input—output   table, or has a highly aggre-
gated one,    the programming analysis may not be possible. Unfortunately,

there are a great many differences between the input—output tables of

different    countries, and the data adjustments for each country will be
dependent upon how its table was constructed. Adjustments for a variety of
                                       —69—



features of input—output tables are described in Project Working Papers
Io. 2 and 3. A few general observations are given here.
         Input—output   tables are constructed in both purchasers' values   (in-
cluding   trade margins and transportation) and producers' values (f .0.b.

plant). Purchasers' values are preferable for trade analysis. However,

most tables are in producers' values. It is normally not desirable to

convert to purchasers' values. The producers' value tables show large

exports for the home goods trade and transportation even though trade and

transportation themselves are not exported. Interpretations of these tables

must take account of these constructions.

          Input—output tables are given in terms of domestic values for a

selected   base year. In effect, this procedure defines all domestic prices

as equal to one, i.e., the quantity of a sector's goods that could have been

purchased for one unit (or one million units) of domestic currency during

the base year. The Project research program requires international prices

on a comparable basis. In trade analysis it is customary to let international

prices    equal one and   then define comparable domestic prices as being greater

than one. For present purposes, it will prove convenient to reverse the

procedure by letting domestic prices equal. one, and defining comparable

international prices as being less than one. This eliminates the necessity

to adjust the input—output table values.

          The employment coefficients described in Section III can be used with

the input—output data which describe factors in terms of value added. Imports

are handled in a variety of ways in input-output tables. In most cases it

will be necessary to disaggregate import aggregates. Secondary products

and other items will, require special treatment for some input—output tables.
                                        —70—


         The number   of   sectors into which   the   input—output tables are aggregated

varies widely from country—to—country. Some tables have as few              as    three

sectors; others have hundreds. A two—digit breakdown            for   manufacturing and

a   one—digit breakdown for other sectors or something close to it,              provides

a common sectora]. classification. There is no classification that is correct
for all countries. First, the classification to be used for a country will

depend upon how its input—output table was constructed. Second, every

country author will desire to disaggregate some sectors of particular

significance for his country along       the   lines suggested in Section III and

PWP 2.

         In micro analyses one can concentrate upon individual commodities. In

general, studies of the type described here, the sector is the unit of

analysis. Therefore, it is desirable to have sectors that contain similar

(for   the purpose at hand) commodities. The following general considerations
may be helpful in determining when disaggregation is desirable:
         (1) An important industry has been combined with unlike sectors.
Disaggregation using Census and       other    data will, be desirable. In some cases,
cooperation     among country   authors can allow the use of data ratios from one
country   to help provide     missing figures.
          (2)   A case in which import and export goods are aggregated in the

same sector. Criteria for this case were given in Section III. Important

information is lost by a consideration of such sector's net trade, and

again, disaggregation is desirable.

          (3) Two or more industries with substantially different labor—capital

 input ratios are aggregated. This can usually be ascertained from the Census

 data. Disaggregation will allow a more accurate determination of the effects

 of trade on factor markets.
                                            —71—



         (4)   Two   or   more industries with substantially different ratios of

international to domestic prices are aggregated. Efficient trade may well

dictate that the segments with the higher ratios be exports and             those   with

lower ratios be imports.

         Country authors wili. find other reasons to disaggregate manufacturing

sectors. In general, given the goals of the research, the return from a

disaggregation of home goods sectors is not high. Detailed comments on

techniques for using Census of Manufacturing data to disaggregate sectors

are contained in Project Working Paper No. 2.



                            VII.   ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS


         It has been repeatedly stressed that        individual   authors will have to

shape their research in light of their knowledge of their country's special

circumstances and         availability   of other studies, as wefl as data availability.

The preceding three sections have indicated the main avenues of inquiry

that   will probably be the focal point for in—depth analyses of the basic
findings   described in      Section III.
         There   are several possible additional avenues of research that may

yield extremely interesting results, although data shortcomings as well as

limitations on researchers' own time          will probably   preclude anything more

than   brief   consideration, or reporting others' research results, In most

cases. It seems worthwhile, nonetheless, to mention them briefly, in the

hope that researchers        will be on    the alert for pieces of evidence   pertaining
to them.
         The topics do not have y con theme, so               each   is discussed in turn
below.     They are: 1) employment potential of alternative trade strategies
                                      —72—


in primary production; 2) regional implications of alternative strategies;

3) the impact of multinationals on employment in alternative lines; and

4) the impact of uncertainty on identification of comparative advantage and
the related question of the link between static and dynamic comparative

advantages. Of these, the first is unquestionably the most important, but

it may prove the most intractible.

Primary Production

         In most countries, agriculture is the major primary activity, and

attention will focus on it here, as it is anticipated that extractive activities

will not present special problems, and can be treated in much the same way as

manufacturing industries.

         There are several important possibilities that should be examined in

each country study: 1) it may be that some crops are much more labor

intensive than others and output is affected by the trade regime; 2) if the

trade regime has discriminated against export crops, there may be significant

employment effects that should be examined both because agricultural output

might   have   expanded more rapidly with attendant employment implications and

because export crops might have different employment requirements than

food    crops for the domestic market; 3) the trade regime may affect the degree

of mechniaation In agriculture via protecting or implicitly subsidizing

agricultural machinery; and 4) pricing of Inputs, especially fertilizer, can

have a significant impact on the commodity composition of agricultural

output and consequently on employment.

          The difficulties with research on agriculture are likely to be

 severalfold: 1) it is extremely difficult to get disaggregated data, and

 those that are available are often highly questionable; 2) major questions
                                     —73—


arise with regard to the nature of employment within agriculture, and

especially of the marginal product of labor in small units; 3) even when data

do exist, they often consist of averages of data from large units and        small
units. As it is not feasible, and not the intent of this project, to do any

original research on the nature of agricultural labor markets, these diffi-

culties will often be overwhelming.

      Usually, these important questions must be dealt with extremely

carefully, and aggregate data obscure more than they reveal. In some cases,

authors may be able to find research already undertaken on the agricultural

sector within their country   that   may   enable   them to pursue these lines of

inquiry.1 In other instances, authors may be able to obtain data with which

to disaggregate the agricultural sector in the input—output table, at least

to some extent, and to get some estimates of the effects of changing commodity

composition of agricultural output on employment.2 Additional research,

however, will almost inevitably entail examination of the substitution
possibilities of capital for labor, requiring a reliable body of data and



       :LSee for example, Bent Hansen, "t4arginal Productivity Wage Theory
and Subsistence Wage Theory in Egyptian Agriculture,tt Journal of Development
Studies, July 1966; and also his chapter on Egyptian agriculture in Hansen
and Nashashibi, Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development: Egypt,
NBER, 1975.

       2There  are often significant differences in employment between agri-
cultural activities and, in some countries, those differences may be more
Important than the differences   in employment between manufacturing and agri—
culture. In those cases, the impact of the trade regime on the composition
of agricultural production can be very important. See, for example, A. Berry,
"Land Distribution, Income Distribution and the Productive Efficiency of
Colombian Agriculture," Food Research Institute Studies, 1973.
                                  —74—


careful econometric estimation.

      By and large, it is likely that the promising direction for research

will lie in relying upon already—existing studies for estimates of labor

market conditions within agriculture and of substitution possibilities within

that sector. When those estimates are available it may be possible to

simulate the effect of alternative trade regimes on employment by taking the

estimated elasticity of substitution of capital for labor, and applying it

to the estimated shadow price of imported capital goods relative to the

shadow price of labor. Such a procedure would be rough and ready, but would

also offer one means of obtaining some insights on the impact of the trade

regime on factor proportions without requiring special studies. Authors

can then concentrate their own research efforts on disaggregation of agri-

cultural data for use in the optimization models, and on lines of inquiry

suggested in Sections IV and V.


Regional Implications

       In addition to concern with employment aggregates, most developing

countries have become Increasingly aware of the problems associated with the

concentration of population and employment In their already overcrowded

cities. An important question is whether there are different locational

implications of export and import—substitution strategies, aside from any

differences In the agriculture—industry emphasis of the two strategies.

       Hypotheses abound, although none have any very solid analytical under-

pinning. One could, for example, conjecture that labor—intensive industries,

 in which developing countries have a comparative advantage, must in any

 event be relatively location—untied, simply in order to be viable export

 activities. If that were so, it might then follow that there would be
                                 —75—


relatively more latitude as to choice of location of those industries

within countries, contrasted with import—substitution industries. There

are several weaknesses in the hypothesis: being relatively non—tied to a

location does not imply that transport costs do not matter, especially in

countries where inland transport costs are already very high, either at

market or at shadow prices; an industry could require a city of large size

simply in order to attract the labor force, subcontractors, and other needed

inputs, without being tied to a specific location; and so on.

       Not only are alternative hypotheses relatively weakly based analytically,

but it is doubtful whether data availability and authors' judgments   as   to the

payoffs from pursuing various lines of research will permit any systematic

examination of the implications of alternative strategies for the location of

employment. Nonetheless, authors might be on the alert for any pieces of

evidence that do suggest any significant differences (or the absence of any

differences) in the locational implications of the two strategies.


Multinational Corporations

       Robert Lipsey of the NBER staff in New York will attempt to use a

 special run of data available at the Bureau with a view to investigating

 the degree to which multinational corporations alter their factor proportions

 in response to changes in factor prices. Results of that study will become

 available to country authors as the research progresses, for whatever light

 they shed on conditions within individual countries.

        In addition to the light that multinational corporations' behavior

 can possibly shed on substitution possibilities, a number of other questions

 have been raised in the literature, and it may be the case that in some

 countries, authors judge those questions to be sufficiently important to
                                    —76—


warrant further investigation. In most instances, it will probably be

desirable to rely on existing studies, and to interpret data, rather than

to attempt fresh data analysis.

         First, there is the frequently—heard assertion that multinationals

often invest in particular countries in ways that preclude exports from

their affiliate firms. In some instances, the NNC's undertake the investment

in import—substitution industries only in response to increases in protection.

In those cases there does not seem to be any legitimate question, as the

commodity would not in any event be exported. In other cases, however, it

may be that the optimizing model described in Section VI, or other pieces of

evidence, suggest that NC's have invested in industries that would otherwise

have been export industries and thus have influenced the commodity composition

of trade. Where this hypothesis seems important, authors may wish to pursue

it    although care should be taken to be sure that their lines of research
will   yield results: unless reasonable tests of hypotheses can   be formulated,
in   such a manner that research will yield results, it will not necessarily

pay   to allocate a great deal of effort to the question.'

         Secondly, there is the question as to whether multinationals adopt

the technology of the parent company, presumably capital—intensive, when

another technology, that might employ more labor, is available. In some



             basic problem is why a multinational corporation would prevent

exports   if the country had a natural comparative advantage and was   a low—

cost producer of the commodity in question. Of equal importance is the
consideration that other firms would be able profitably to produce the
commodity.
                                                                                   .
                                       —77.-.



instances, studies may exist comparing the behavior            of multinational and

domestic firms,1 and their results may prove useful. Lipsey's research may

also throw light on this question. Authors may wish to undertake some

research in this direction themselves, if in their judgment, multinational

firm   behavior   is a sufficiently important part of the explanation of the

trade strategy—employment relationship.


The Impact of Uncertainty and Dynamic           Comparative   Advantage

         As is the case in most empirical research, there are some important

considerations that are difficult to handle. For analysis of the trade—

employment relationship, two such questions are the impact of uncertainty

upon the optimal composition of trade, and the relationship of dynamic to

static comparative advantage.

         Obviously, the "optimal" production pattern would differ in a world

of   uncertainty from that which would occur if         all future   prices were known.
Little can   be done with regard to that consideration, except to use past

history   as something   of a guide. In particular, it may prove desirable to

take means   and variance of prices of major traded commodities, in estimating

ERPs and related     variables, rather than using observations from a           single

time   period. Of course, it may      not   prove possible to do this for all       com-

modities, but such a procedure will be warranted when price fluctuations are
believed to have been large. Beyond taking means of price variables,
however, little can      be   done about uncertainty inherent      in changing   world

market conditions.

          1See   Benjpmin Cohen,   "Comparative Behavior of Foreign and        Domestic

 Export Firms in     a Developing Economy," Review of         Economics and   Statistics,

May 1973.
                                       —78—


         The question of optimal dynamic comparative advantage is equally

important and even more intractable. There is a question as to the extent

to which countries should now produce commodities in which they will have a

future comparative advantage: as seen in Growth, Distortions, and Patterns

of Trade Among Many Countries one would normally expect comparative advantage

to shift   over time, but that in itself      does not indicate that commodities

should   be   produced today simply because they will be exported tomorrow. It

is also important to note that comparative advantage generally would be

expected to shift smoothly if the factor proportions model is correct: one

would not forecast that highly capital—intensive commodities would enter

into a country's optimal production structure until production of less

capital—intensive      commodities not currently produced had been inaugurated.
Country    authors   should bear these considerations in mind   in   evaluating the
trade—employment relationship for their countries,        and should   communicate

any suggestions for ways of dealing with these issues to other project
participants. By and large, however, considerations of uncertainty and

dynamic comparative advantage are factors that will have to be borne in mind

when interpreting the results of the research, and are not themselves likely

to call for additional empirical data.


Additional Topics

          In any research project of this nature, there are bound to be addi—

tional hypotheses that emerge in the course of the research. Individual

researchers are requested to be on the alert        for such hypotheses, and to
communicate them to other country study authors when they arise. In the
Bhagwati—Krueger project, interaction of this kind was one of the very fruit—
ful   outcomes   of the project, and   it was frequently the case that a pattern,
                                   —79—


not initially mentioned, was thought to be unique to one country,   but,   when

discussed, turned out to be common to several of them. For this reason, it

is hoped that, by the time of the next working party of country authors,

authors will have given thought to the way in which the lines of research

suggested   here are appropriate or inappropriate for their countries, and
also   to additional avenues of endeavor.
         APPENDIX. UNIFORM TABLE NiThIBERING SCHEI1ES FOR COUNTRY STUDIES


          One of the major problems with the results of the Bhagwati—Krueger

project has been that attempting to locate the same data for several countries

has proved extremely difficult and involved a search through all the text

tables. Our studies will       prove   more useful to all (including each other) if

we adopt a common numbering system for data tables. This will enable country

authors    to contrast their data with similar data for other countries, without

long searches through manuscripts.

          It will be recalled that, at the first working party, a suggested

covering format was suggested for each distribution of material from country

authors. It seems simple enough to expand that format to include data tables,

so that country authors can distribute materials, labelled by Table Number,

as data become available, and the appendix tables can be a standard part of

each cover format.

          I propose that the numbering system presented below be used for each

country study. For example, an input—output flow table will carry the number

IA for each country study; a table covering trade with developing countries

will be IIIC in all cases, and so on) Obviously, not all country studies

will contain all data, but that fact can be noted on the cover sheet

accompanying distributions, and thereby save long searches for non—existent

 data.

           In   addition to the six categories with which basic data can be numbered,



           1Note that an "X' category under each number has been reserved for a

 statement as to the ways in which data were "massaged in order to meet the

 needs of this project.
                                     —81--



it will prove extremely useful to have a master table by commodities, showing
the key items, and the way in which aggregates were derived. The table

categories listed below can be a standard, and presented in an Appendix I in

each country study. The master table, which is described afterward, can

then become Appendix II of each study.


Contents of Appendix I in Country Studies

         The precise content of each table will naturally vary with data

availability, so all that Is proposed here is a numbering sequence. Suggestions

for extensions and/or modifications of this scheme are welcome. The table

numbering system proposed is as follows:

I. INPUT—OUTPUT DATA [If data are available for more than one year, the
    table sequence is repeated for each year. For example, if data are
    available for both 1970 and 1971, the corresponding flow tables are
    designated 1A1970 and IA 1971].

    A. FLOW TABLE(S). (These are the basic 1—0 tables which contain the
        adjusted interindustry flows for a particular base year.)
    B. DIRECT REQUIREMENTS. (These are the a4 coefficients that correspond
          to Tables(s) IA.)
    C.    DIRECT AND INDIRECT REQUIRE1ENTS. (These may represent a full (I—A)
          or may be limited to a calculation of indirect requirements for home
          goods. Tables(s) IC are computed from data in Table(s) lB and do not
          represent new data.)
    D, E, F, etc... SUPPLEMENTARY 1—0 INFORM&TION. (These tables will vary
        from country to country depending upon individual circumstances.)
    K. SECTORAL CLASSIFICATION. (Each 1—0 sector is here described in terms
        of its SITC equivalents. Also, each sector is designated as resource—
        based tradable, other tradable, or home good as described in P%P1.)
    X. RECTIFICATION AND ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES. (The ways in which primary
        data were adjusted to meet the requirements in the present analysis
        are described in this table.)


II. SUPPLEMENTARY PRODUCTION AND VALUE ADDED DATA. (Sectoral data beyond
     those given in the 1—0 tables are presented in these tables. Some of
     these data are derived from primary sources such as Manufacturing censuses.
     Other data, such as international value added, are constructed from data
     given in other tables.]
                                         —82—



       A. DOSTIC VALUE ADDED BY SECTOR.
       B. INTERNATIONAL VALUE ADDED BY SECTOR.
       C, D, E. OTHER PRODUCTION DATA. (These tables might include such
           things as output levels by firm size or geographic region. Corres-
           pondingly, breakdowns may be given in the labor data described below.)
       K. SECTORAL CLASSIFICATION. (Necessary only insofar as It differs
           from classification given in Table 1K.)
       X. RECTIFICATION AND ADJUSTNT PROCEDURES.


III. TRADE DATA. (These tables give actual international trade flows for
      year(s) and sector classification(s) which correspond to the 1—0 data.]

       A. TOTAL TRADE FLOWS.
       B. TRADE PLOWS WITH DEVELOPED COUNTRIES.
       C. TRADE FLOWS WITH DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
       D, E, F. OTHER APPROPRIATE TRADE BREAKDONS.
       K.   SECTORAL CLASSIFICATION. (The trade data may   have a more detailed
            breakdown than the 1—0 data.)
       X.   RECTIFICATION AND ADJUSTINT PROCEDURES.


 IV. INTERNATIONAL PRICES, TARIFF RATES AND EFFECTIVE PROTECTION RATES.

       A. INTERNATIONAL PRICES BY SECTOR. (These are international prices
            that   correspond to the unit domestic prices used for the 1—0 data.)

       B. TARIFF RATES BY SECTOR.
       C. EFFECTIVE PROTECTION RATES BY SECTOR.
       D, E, F. OTHER DATA.
       K. SECTORAL CLASSIFICATION. (It is possible a sector may have several
           different prices for its various components.)
       X. RECTIFICATION AND ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES. (Descriptions of how
           international prices were computed are given here.)


  V.   LABOR DATA.  (Under ideal conditions, each of the following tables will
       have a part 1 which gives labor force and/or employment data, and a
       part 2 which gives corresponding wage and salary information.)

       A. LABOR FORCE (OR ENPLOYNENT) BY SKILL, EDUCATION, AGE, SEX AND
           SECTOR. (It is unlikely that sector data can be broken down by all
           four factors in any one country. Table VA will contain a feasible
           breakdown for each country.)
                                       —u




     B.   PRINCIPAL LABOR DICHOTOMIES BY SECTOR. (Possible breakdowns include
          production vs. nonproduction workers, daily vs. salary workers, large
          firms vs. small.) (It is important to have at least one major
          dichotomy by sector with corresponding wage and salary data.)
     C,   D, E. OTHER LABOR ATTRIBUTES.
     K. ATTRIBUTE CLASSIFICATIONS. (This table contains descriptions of the
         special breakdowns used in Tables VA through yE.)
    X. RECTIFICATION AND ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES.


VI. CAPITAL AND FACTOR PROPORTIONS DATA.

    A. CAPITAL STOCKS BY SECTOR.
     B.   CAPACITY UTILIZATION RATES BY SECTOR.
     C. COST OF CAPITAL SERVICES BY SECTOR.
    D, E. OTHER CAPITAL DATA.
     F. CAPITAL—LABOR RATIOS BY SECTOR. (These critical ratios are constructed
         from the labor data in Tables V and capital data given here.)
     X. RECTIFICATION AND ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES.



 Contents of Appendix II.
          To get the aggregate employment per unit estimates   outlined in Table 1,
 there will be a lot of data used. It may be of great interest for the

 synthesis of results, and for purposes of later research, to learn about the

 comparability of sectors across countries.

          To that end, it seems desirable that there be a table which brings

 together the data, and the means used for aggregation. The seventeen column

 headings would be:

          1. Type of good (i.e., natural—resource based tradable, HOS tradable,
              home good).
          2. Percent of 2—digit total covered by this SIC category.
          3. International value of exports.
          4.   International value of imports.
          5. Value of domestic production.
          6. Value of domestic consumption.
          7.   Effective protection rate.
      8.   Specialization index.
                                                                                        t
      9, Domestic value added.
     10. International value added.
     11. Direct labor per unit of valuc added.
     12. Indirect labor (in home goods) per unit of value added.
     13. Direct and indirect labor per unit of output (sum of 11 and 12).
     14. Direct capital per unit of output.
     15. indirect capital (in home goods) per unit of output.
     16. Direct and indirect capital per unit of output (sum of 14 and 15).
     17. Capital labor ratio (16 divided by 14).


     An example of what this might look like is provided below. The

numbers are   hypothetical,   but illustrate the sorts of aggregation involved.

It should be noted that the first two rows represent the totals for the expor—

tables and import—competing coodities in a hypothetical two—digit textile
                                                                                  -


sector. In the example given, all data are available for subsectors so that

the totals are simply derived from the data given below them. However, it may
be in many instances that some items are available only at the sectoral. level,

while others are available for subsectors. For example, it may      be   that authors

have to use   the   same ratio of domestic value added to domestic value of output

for each subcategory in an industry but can derive separate labor and capital

coefficients for that value added. Phenomena like that can be noted in the

tables, thereby indicating the extent to which data for subsectors are

independent observations.

      Authors may wish to examine the means used for aggregation in the hypo-

 thetical data in the master table, and suggestions are welcome. However,

 regardless of which means is used, there are bound to be instances when an

 alternative method is preferable. In such cases, the Notes to the table can

 indicate the ways in which techniques of aggregation differ from those in

 the standard table we agree upon.
                                             SAMPLE MASTER TABLE - Page    1
                    Type of         % of                                                           Specialiat1on
                     Good                                                                    EPR      Index
          SIC
                       (1)
                                   2—digit
                                       (2)
                                             Exports
                                                (3)
                                                        Imports
                                                          (4)
                                                                  Output
                                                                   (5)
                                                                               Consumption
                                                                                   (6)       jfl       (8)
          22    Textile mill           30      230         10      300              80        —6      -2.75
                product
                éxportables*
          22    Import competing       70       50        440      700            1091        6?        .36
         222    Broad woven            20       20        300      200             480       150        .58
                man—made fibers
cO       223    Wool                   10       ——         1       100             101        20        .01
                                                           ——
         224    Narrow fabrics         10       80                 100              20       —20      —4.00
         225    Knitting mills
     2251       Womens' hosery         20      150        10       200              60         0      —2.33
                Other 225               5       ——         50       50             100       200        .50
         228    Yarn and               20                 50       200             250        50        .20
                thread
                Other 22               15       30        40       150             160        50        .06
     *Exportables are all with     a
                                       T<0
     aEPR is weighted by value added.
     4
     4                                                                                                           .
                                            SAMPLE ?1ASTER TABLE — Page 2
                            International              Labor                         Capital
                 Domestic
                                              Direct   Indirect   TOTAL     Direct    Indirect   TOTAL   K/L
                   V.A.         V.A.
                                                                             (141_                O6i    (17)
         SITC      (9)          (10)          l1)         (12)      (13)                (15)
                                               103         12       115       39          6        45     .39
             x     160           175
         2                                                          181      188         28       216    1.19
                                 237           159         22
          2in—comp. 392
                                                                     35       60          5        65    1.86
         222       100            40            30          5
                                                                              28          2        30     .67
                                  58.3          40          5        45
         223        70
                                                                               9          1        10     .20
                                  75            48          2        50
         224        60
         225
                                                                     65       30          5        35     .53
         2251       100          100            55         10                                                —
co
         Other                                                        6       20          1        21    3.50
                     27            9             4          2
                                                                     60       50         10        60    1.00
                    120           80            55          5
         228
         Other                                              5        35       30         10        40    1.14
                                  50             30
