NBER 1orkinC Paper Series

INDUSTRIAL DEMAND FOR ENERGY

Robert

Halvorsen

Working Paper No.

166

National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305

March1977

Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for conents only.
They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.
This study has been supported by a grant to the National Bureau
of Economic Research from the National Science Foundation—RANN
(No. S1A75—16927).

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION AND SUNMARY

In

this study we examine the characteristics of industrial demand for

energy, which accounts for more than one—fourth of annual energy consumption in

the United States. Our research has been focused on four topics:
1. interfuel substitution in two—digit industries;

2. substitution among energy, capital and labor;

3. technical change in energy use; and
4. dynamic structure of energy demand.
Chapter 2 reports the results on interfuel substitution in two—digit

industries. Cost share equations derived from transcendental 1ogarithmc
(translog) unit cost functions are estimated with cross—section state data for

1971, 1962, and 1958. Pesults include estimates for each Industry of own and
cross price elasticities of demand for electric energy, fuel oil, natural gas,
and coal.

The model performs well for Industries accounting for most of the total

consumption of energy in manufacturing in each year. The results indicate
considerable variation in energy substitution boih across industries and across

types of energy. Aggregate manufacturing demand for energy appears to be hIghly

price responsIve. Estimated own price elasticIties for all types of energy
except electric energy are generally substantially greater than unity.
The use of a unit cost function for energy assumes that energy inputs are

separable from capital, labor, and other inputs. The separability of energy
inputs from capital and labor can be tested with data for 1958. The tests

were performed by Jay Ford as part of his dissertation research. As reported
in Chapter 3, separability is rejected. for four of the eight industries for

which it could be tested. The industries for which separability is accepted

—2—

account for some two—thirds of energy consumption by the group of eight

industries. Nevertheless, the rejection of separabIlity for some industries
indicates that the interfuel substitution results have to be interpreted with
caution.

Estimation with 1958 data of a cost function including capital and labor
also makes It possible to calculate estimated cross elasticities of demand

between energy Inputs and cat'ital and labor. The preliminary results reported
in Chapter 3 indicate considerable variation in substitution between different
types of energy and non—energy inputs.

The estimated price elasticities of demand reported in Chapters 2 and 3

can be interpreted as long—run elasticities. Short—run elasticities of demand,
and the time path of response of demand to price changes, are equally important

but have been largely ignored in previous studies. In this study, the model

of demand for factors of production developed by Nadiri and Rosn (1969, 173]
is adapted to estimate dynamic demand equations for energy and other inputs
for total U.S. manufacturing.

The results are reported in Chapter 4. All estimated short—run
elasticities of demand for energy are statistically significant. Estimated

long—run elasticities are similar to estimates In other studies. Th onse
to price changes

found to be quite rapid. The response of demand for each

input to excess demands for other inputs is also reported. The results indicate
that excess demand for energy increases labor stock and capacity utilization
and decreases capital stock.

Energy price elasticities measure the response of demand for energy to

price changes holding technology constant. In the long—run energy consumption
may also be affected by changes in technology, which may in part be induced by
changes in prices.

—3—

Technical change in energy use In the prinary metai.s.industrjes was

examined by John Wills in his Ph.D. dissertation. As discussed in Chapter 5,
the results indicate that technical change has occurred through factor augmen-

tation at unequal rates. Statistically significant labor—using and material—
E.aving biases are found. There also appears to have been a small energy—
saving bias, but it is not statistically significant.

CHAPTER 2

INTERFUEL SU3STITUTION IN TWO—DI(1T lNDtJSTRI±S

I. Introduction

Considerable shifts have occurred in the composition of the manufacturing

sectorts energy consumption in recent years. In 1971 electric energy comprised
15.3% of total purchases of the four major types of energy, fuel oil 14.0%,

natural gas 58.2, and coal 12.5%. The shares in 1958 were electric energy 11.9%,
fuel oil 13.5%, natural gas 44.8%, and coal 29.8%. This chapter examines the
extent to which shifts in the composition of energy consumption in manufacturing
can be explained by changes in relative energy prices.
The characteristics of energy demand can be expected to vary across individu-

al industries. Table 1 provides data on energy consumption by each two—digit

manufacturing industry in 1971. Industry shares in total manufacturing energy
consumption range from 21.2% for industry 28, chemicals and allied products, to

0.1% for industry 21, tobacco manufacturers. Differences in energy consumption
across industries are due both to differences in total output and to differences

in the energy intensiveness of production. Energy cost as a percent of value
added is also shown in Table 1. By this measure, energy intensiveness varied
from 11.3% for industry 29, petroleum and coal products, to 0.8% for industry 21.

The apparent differences in energy consumption across industries indicate
that the inter—relationships between the demands for each type of energy should

be examined on an industry—by—industry basis. Previous studies of industrial
energy demand have generally considered the demand for only one type of energy,
usually electric energy,1 or have provided results only for total manufacturing

rather than for individual industries.2 In this chapter, complete systems of
energy demand equations are estimated for each two—digit industry. Duality
theory is used to derive the systems of demand equations from flexible cost func—

dons which impose minimal a priori restrictions on the estimated elasticities
of demand.

-2—

Estimates of all own

and

cross price elasticities of demand are presented for

each two—digit industry. The results show wide variatlun across industries in the
characteristics of energy demand. Aggregate elasticities of demand are also calculated and indicate that total manufacturing demand for energy is highly price
responsive.

II. The Model
A twice differentiable aggregate production function is assumed to exist at
the state level for each two—digit industry,

Y = F(E, 0, G, C, X)

(1)

where Y is total output, E is electric energy, 0 is fuel oil, C is natural gas,

C is coal, and X is a vector of all other inputs. Assuming that the production
function is homothetically weakly separable in the energy inputs, it can be
written,

Y = C[H(E, 0, G, C), Xl
where H is an energy input function.

Dual to the energy input function is an energy cost function,
=

J(Z, E'

C' 'C

where W is total cost of energy, Z is aggregate energy input, and P, P0
and

are the prices of electric energy, fuel oil, natural gas and coal

respectively. If the energy input function is a positive, nondecreasing,
positively linear homogeneous, concave function, then the energy cost function
can be written
U =

ZV(P,

G'

where V is a unit cost function satisfying the same regularity conditions,
Diewert [1973].

(2)

—3—

Demand functions can be obtained from the unit cost function using Shepard's
lemma,

X. = Z

i =

E,

0, C, C,

i

where X is the cost minimizing quantity of energy input i, Dlewert [1973]. Thus
the characteristics of industrial demand for energy can be examined by specifying
an appropriate functional form for the unit cost function and differentiating it
to obtain demand functions.

A convenient functional form for the cost function is the transcendental
logarithmic (translog)

+

mV =

+ a0lnP0 + Gh1PG + clnP + 1/2YEE(1nPE)2

+ E0 E''0 +

+ EC1'E'C + 1/2y00(lnP0)2

+ 0C1"1'0'G + YocltlpOlnI,C + 1/21GG(1nPG)2 +

YGC1nPG1nPC

+ 1/2ycc(lnPc)2.

(3)

The translog form provides a second order approximation to an arbitrary twice

continuously differentiable unit Cost function. The translog unit cost function
does not satisfy the regularity conditions globally unless all

=

0,

i.e. unless

it collapses into a Cobb—Douglas form. However, the estimated cost function can
be tested to determine if the regularity conditions are satisfied in the relevant
region.

Demand functions are obtained by logarithmic differentiation of the unit
cost function,

=

=

+

lnP.

i,j = E. 0, C, C.

(4)

—4—

By Shepard's lemma,
in prices, W =

=

3V/aP

X/Z.

Since the cost function Is linear homogeneous

ZP1X by Euler's theorem. Therefore, V

EPX1/Z.

Substituting in (4),

P
—
— 1

•alnV

ainpi

ii

Px

X./Z
i.

—

EPx1fz

—
—

•EPX1

i

I = E,

0,

C, C,

where M is the cost share for input 1. Thus demand functions
for energy inputs
can be estimated even though aggregate energy input, Z, is not observed.
The system of cost share equations is,

+ EE1E + EOO + EGG + c'c + UE
=

N0

G + EG1E +

MG

Mc =

cc ÷

+ E01E + y00lnP0 + OGG ÷

÷ EC1E +

YG1flPO + CG1G + ch1c +
YOC]-flPO + GC1'G +

UG

lnP +u

(5)

where the additive disturbance terms, u1, are included to reflect random errors in

cost minimizing behavior. Because the cost shares

sum

to

tion, the parameters must satisfy the following adding—up

+

+ G ÷

EE + 'E0

unity at each observa—
restrictions,

=

+ 1EG + TEC = 0

E0 + 'OO ÷ '0G +

= 0

+ 10G + GG +

= 0

E
0
C
EC + 10C + 'rGC +

= 0

1EG

(6)

—5—

Thus only fifteen of the twenty parameters are free and parameter estimates for
all four share equations can be derived from the parameter estimates for any
three.

Derivation of the share equations, from the cost function, (3), implies the

following cross—equation equality restrictions on the

a

E =
0
1E0
'EO'
E

G

E

C

o

G

o

c

b. 'EG1EG'

c. EC1EC'
d. 10G10G'

C

G

1GC =

(7)

GC

The cross—equation equality restrictions reduce the number of free parameters

to nine. Imposition of these restrictions requires that the equations be estimated
simultaneously. Since the cost shares necessarily sum to unity, the sum of the
disturbances across the four equations is zero at each observation and the dis-

turbance covariance matrix is singular. Therefore, one equation must be omitted
from the system.

The choice of the equation to be omitted is arbitrary. We drop the disturbance term from the equation for Mc and omit this equation from the system.

Because

and

do not appear in the remaining three equations, an

alternative set of cross—equation equality constraints is required for these

parameters. Substituting in (7.c), (7.e) and (7.f) from (6),

7:.c. CE = EE ÷

0
+
1E0

G

—6—

0 =

7.e.

G

Solving

E

G

EO + OO +

= EG + 10G0 ÷
•E

and

(7.c') (7.e.') and (7.f.') for 1EE'

and substituting

in (5), the system of equations to be estimated Is,

ME aE + EO'O —

Estimates

+ EG1''G —

=

+ 1EO(1'E - n"o) +

=

+

—

of 1EE' 00' 1GG and

+

'(OGWPO

1nPE)

+ YEc(lnPc -

+
tiE

n1'0) + bocn1Pc — lnPd) ÷ U0

1'G +

-

÷

UG•

are calculated from

The vector of disturbance terms,

[uc

u0 us], is assumed to be independently

and identically normally distributed with mean vector zero and nonsingular co—

variance matrix .

The system of three share equations is estimated with an

iterative Zelirter efficient procedure, which is equivalent to maximum likelihood

estimation.6 Thus the parameter estimates are invariant to the choice of
equation to be omitted from the system.

The equations are estimated with cross—section state data for 1971, 1962, and

1958. The system of cost share equations derived from the four input energy
cost function cannot be estimated for all two—digit industries because data on
coal consumption are not available for a sufficient number of states f or some

Industries. Restricting the iaodel to electricity, fuel oil and natural gas is
appropriate If the production function is weakly separable in these three inputs.
The separability of these inputs from coal is tested statistically for those
industries for which the four input model Is estimated.

—7—

Weak separability of the (homogeneous) energy input function In E, 0, and G

implies weak separability of the unit cost function in E' 0' and

However,

the translog approximation of a weakly separable cost function is not necessarily

weakly separable. The conditions on the translog unit cost function corresponding to weak separability of the true unit cost function in E' P0, and

from

are

1EC =
.Y.0C =

1GC =

OctE

Oct0
OctG

(8)

.

Explicit separability of the translog function itself requires the further

restrIction, 0 =

0,

in (8)..

As noted above, the unrestricted translog unit cost function does not satisfy

the regularity conditions globally. Imposition of the equality restrictions on
the

together with the adding—up restrictions ensures that the unit cost

function is linear homogeneous in the input prices. However, the fitted unit
cost function may or may not satisfy the conditIons that it be non—decreasing
and concave.

The fitted unit cost function is non—decreasing In the input prices if the
fitted shares are non—negative, since

P1

=E,O,G,C

i

and P and V are always positive. Concavity of the unit cost function requires
that the Hessian matrix be negative semidefinite for each observation. This
will be true if the first n — 1 ordered principal minors alternate in sign. The

th order principal minor will be zero due to the imposition of linear
homogeneity in input prices. Concavity is checked for each observation by

—8—

calculating the values of the

principal

minors. Since it is not determined if

the principal minors are statistically significant, this procedure does not
constitute a statistical test of concavity.

An appropriate measure of goodness of fit of the estimated equations is the
"pseudo—R2', which states the proportion of generalized variance in the system of

equations explained by variation in the right—hand variables.8 The pseudo—R2
is calculated as 1 —

where 1r1J is the determinant of the estimated

1r11/1r21

residual moment matrix and 1r21 is the determinant when the coefficients of all

right—hand variables are constrained to .equal zero. The value of the pseudo—R2
is invariant to the choice of equation to beomitted from the•system.
Estimates of the own and cross—price elasticities of demand are calculated

from the estimated cost share equations. The own—price elasticity of demand for
energy Input i is defined as

ax P
Applying Shepard's lemma to obtain expressions for

X and

in terms of

derivatives of the unit cost function, the own—price elasticity can be rewritten,
P1 .

E

7/aP2

=

M2 —

av/p.

N1
N

+
1 = E, 0, G, C.

(9)

Similarly, the cross—price elasticity of demand for Input i with
respect to
the price of input J is,

i

E

=

—i

—i-

=

P2v/p
av/ap1

-—

+
1ii

N

.

1,3 = E, 0, G, C. (10)

Because the elasticities of demand are functions of the cost shares,
they
will vary across the sample. Rather than report the estimated
elasticities for

—9—

each observation, the elasticities are evaluated at the means of the data and

only these values are reported here.9 The data are scaled so that the means of

the prices are equal to unity. Therefore the estimated

k = E, 0, G, C, are

equal to the fitted cost shares at the means and the formulas for the elasticities
at the means are given by (9) and (10) with Mk replaced by ak.
Since the elasticities at the means are functions only of the estimated
parameters, the calculation of their estimated standard errors is considerably

simplified. A first order Taylor series approximationto the variance of the
estimated elasticities can be computed as

SB V (B) SB

where S Is the column vector of first partial derivatives of the elasticities
with respect to the parameters ctk and

and V(B) is the estimated variance—

covariance matrix of the parameter estimates)0

III. Empirical Results
The systems of cost share equations are estimated with Census of Manufactures

data for 1971, 1962, and 1958. The Census provides data on the quantity consumed
and total cost for each type of energy.11 The price of each type of energy is
1,

calculated by dividing cost by quantity consumed.
The model including electric energy, fuel oil, natural gas and coal is

estimated for nine industries in 1971, eleven in 1962, and eight in 1958. The
industries for which the four input model could be estimated tended to be the

major energy users. For examp1e,th1 group of industries accounted for 67.7%
of consumption of total energy and 93.0 of coal consumption in manufacturing In
1971. The model excluding coal is estimated for ten industries in 1971, four in

)

1962, and four in 1958. There are too few observations to obtain results for the
remaining two—digit industries in each year.

—10—

Derivation of the cost share equations from the unit cost function implies

cross—equation equality restrictions on the y, see (7) above. In order to test
whether or not the loss of fit from imposing the equality restrictions is signif i—

cant, the equations are estimated with and without the restrictions imposed. The

results are compared by computing — 2 log A, where A is the ratio of the maximum
value of the likelihood function for the restricted equations to the maximum value

of the likelihood function for the unrestricted equations. Under the null hypothesis this test statistic is distributed asymptotically as chi—squared with degrees
of freedom equal to the number of restrictions being tested.

Test results are shown in Table 2. Because these restrictions are directly
implied by derivation of the cost share equations from the cost function, a very

small significance level, .001, is used for the tests. The cross—equation
equality restrictions are rejected for three industries in 1971, three in 1962,
and none in 1958.

Tests of the separability of electric energy, fuel oil, and natural gas from
coal --'crc performed for tose industries for which the four input nodel could be

astFiated. In every case, both separability and explicit separability were
accepted at the .01 level in all years.
•

Monotorticity of the unit cost function is checked by determining if the fitted

values of the Cost

shares

are positive. Jf the 942 fitted cost shares in 1971,

938 are positive. Similarly, 703 of 713 are positive in 1962 and 579 of 584 are

positive in 1958. ince i i not determined whether or not the negative fitted
Cost shares are significantly different from zero, this check does not provide a

statistical test. iowever, a statistical test is available at the ieans of the
data wuere the fitted cost shares are equal to the estimated ce.. TYith the
exception of
all

for industry 26 in 1958, which is positive but insignificant,

are significantly positive in all years. Therefore, monotonicity

—11

is accepted at the means of tie data.13
Concavity of the unit cost function is checked by examining the signs of the
principal minors at eacti observation. The number of observations with principal

minors of the incorrect sign are shown in Table 3. Although it is not determined
if the principal minors with incorrect signs are statistically significant, the
existence of incorrect signs for more than a few percent of the observations is
considered to cast doubt on the satisfaction of the concavity condition.
The performance of the model is questionable with respect to either the
regularity conditions or cross-equation equality restrictions for nine industries

in 1971, four in 1962, and two in 1958. however, the node1 performs very well
for the reraining industries in each year. The industries for which the model
performs well account for most of the industrial consumption of energy in each

year. For example, the group of industries for which the model performed well
accounted for 81.6% of total energy consumption in manufacturing in 1971.

The

share of this group in the consumption of each type of energy in 1971 was 76.1%

for electric energy, 78.0% for fuel oil, 85.7 for natural gas and 87.6% for
coal. For brevity, further results are given only for the industries for which
the model performs well.14

Parameter estimates and asymptotic standard errors are shown in Tables 4,5,
and 6, together with the value of the pseudo—R2 for each system of equations.
Results shown are for the initial regressions, there was no sequential estimation.
The estiriates of the

parameters are equal to the fitted cost shares at

the means of the data. Since the cost shares are equal to the elasticity of the

unit cost of energy with respect to the price of each type of energy, lnV/lnP
the estimates of ct. show the responsiveness of the price of aggregate energy to

the prices of each type of energy at the means of tLe data. As shown in Tables
4-6, cianges in the price of electric energy have the greatest effect on the price
of aggregate energy.

—12—

The estimates of the y. parameters can be interpreted as estimated share

elasticities. The cost siare of input i is equal to alnV/alnP1. The cross
partial derivative

2lnV

alnPalnP

—

Iii

can be defined as a constant share elasticity summarizing the response of cost

share M.
to a change in lnP. Alternatively the share elasticity can be defined
1
J

as

3lnP LI
In the latter case, the estimated share elasticities at the means of the data will
be equal to the estimates of
Estimates of the price elasticities of demand at the means of the data are

shown in Tables 7, 8 and 9 tgether with their approximate standard errors.
Because the elasticities are derived from unit cost functions for energy, they
show the price responsiveness of demand for individual types of energy holding
total energy input constant.
Estimates of the own price elasticities are shoczn in the first four rows of

the table. All

the

own

price

elasticities have the correct sign in. all years.

For 1971, 29 of the 37 estimates are significant at the five percent level using a

one—tailed test. For l962 36 of 40 are significant and for 1958 31 of 35 are
signifIcant. There is considerable variation across industries in the estimated
own price elasticities. For example, in 1971 the range is —.124 to —1.096 for
electric energy, —1.151 to —4.300 for fuel oil, —.425 to —2.134 for natural gas
and —.656 to —2.531 for coal.

The estimates of the cross price elasticities also show considerable variation

across industries. The relationship between different types of energy appears to

—13—

be predominantly that of substitutes rather than complements.

In 1971, only 18

of the 102 estimates are negative, and only two of the negative estimates are
statistically significant at the ten percent level, using a two—tailed test. In
1962, 16 of 108 cross elasticities are negative, of which two
In 1958, 6 of 90 estimated cross elasticities are negatives

are

significant.

and none of the

negative estimates are statistically significant.
As would be expected, the estimates of the cross price elasticities tend to
be smaller in absolute magnitude than the estimates of own price elasticities.15

However, the results do indicate significant cross price responsiveness of energy

demand. For example, of the 84 positive estimates of cross price elasticities
in 1971, 54 are significant at the ten percent level.

Aggregate price elasticities for the group of industries for which the model
performed well in each year are estimated by constructing weighted averages for

individual industries. The weights are each industry's share of total group
16
consuiption for the relevant type of energy.

Since the model performs well for

industries accounting for most of energy consumption in manufacturing in each
year, the group elasticities provide reasonable approximations to the aggregate
elasticities for total manufacturing.
The weighted average elasticities are shown in Table 10.

Uith the exception

of oil, the estimated own

price

elasticities are quite consistent in each of te

three years. The oil own

price

elasticity is much larger in absolute magnitude in

1971 than in the earlier years. The cross price elasticities of demand for oil
with respect to the prIces of other types of energy are also considerably larger
in 1971 than in earlier years.

Changes in estimated elasticities over time may be due either to changes
in the cost shares or changes in the estimated parameters of the unit cost

function due to technological change. To test for the consistency of the

—14—
parameters of the cost function over tine, the data for 1971 and 1962 were
pooled and F tests were perforried for hotiogeneity of the estImated paraineters)7

The test statistic is

(Rss — (RSS1 ÷ RSS2))/k
(RSS1 + RSS2)/n—2k
where
RSS

= The residual sum of squares of the joint regression,

RSS1 = The residual sum of squares of the 1962 regression when run
separately,

RSS The residual sum of squares of the 1971 regression when run
separately,
TI

= Total

k

= Number of parameters estimated.

number of observations in pooled set,

The test statistic is distributed as F with (k, n—2k) degrees of freedom.
It was possible to compute the test statistic for 13 of the

industries

for

which the model performed well in 1971 and 1962. Test results are shown in Table
12. The null hypothesis of no change in the estimated parameters between the two
years is rejected at the .01 level for 8 of the industries. Thus differences in
the estimated elasticities of demand appear to reflect changes over time in the
parameters of .the cost function as well as changes in the shares of each type

of energy. Chapter 4 presents further results on technical change in energy use
in manufacturing.

As noted above, price elasticities estimated with a unit cost function for
energy show the extent of price responsiveness holding aggregate energy input

constant. This is clearly not equal to the total price responsiveness since a
change in the price of a type of energy will affect the price of aggregate energy
and

thus

will affect total energy input. Treating aggregate energy input as

variable, the effect of a change in the price of energy input j on the quantity
of energy input i is

1

1..1=E.. +E.. E..
113
13

13

where

is the price elasticity holding aggregate energy, H, constant

is the elasticity o demand for energy input I with respect to aggregate energy,
and L.. is the elasticity of demand for aggregate energy with respect to the
price of energy input j.

Since the energy input function is assumed to be linear homogeneous,

is

equal to one. Also,

1nt

=

alnV

iij

amy =
amP.

E

1{V

j

Is the elasticity of demand for aggregate energy with respect to the

where

price of aggregate energy. Therefore
=

(11)

E1

Berndt and 7ood [1975] obtained estimates for

for each year for total

U.S. mactufacturing)8 Their estimates were substituted in (11) to obtain
estimates of the elasticities of demand for each type of energy allowing total

energy input to vary. The weighted average elasticities for the group of
industries are shown in Table
Allowing aggregate energy to vary increases the absolute magnitudes of the

own price elastIcities and decreases the cross price elasticities. Elasticities
involving the price of electric energy are affected the most, since the price
of electric energy has the greatest effect on the

price

of aggregate energy

input. The own price elasticity for electric energy in 1971 increases in absolute magiiitude to —0.92, which
20

studies.

is

comparable to estimates obtained in previous

16

Estimates of Allen partial elasticities of substitution can be calculated

from the estimated price elasticities and cost shares. The cross elasticity of
substitution is equal to
a

ij

21

----XE
ij

Thus the cross elasticities of substitution can be interpreted as normalized
price elasticities where the normalization Is chosen such that the elasticities

are invariant to the ordering of the factors. Accordingly,
in general, Eu

a Yj although,

Estimates of the cross elasticities of substitution for

1971 are shown in Table 13 for the Industries for which the model performed well.

IV. Concluding Comments
Estimation of demand functions derived from translog unit cost functions
provides estimates of elasticities of demand and substitution that are subject

to minimal apiori restrictions.22 Disaggregation of the analysis to the two—
digit industry level allows for variation across industries in the characteristics
of demand for each type of energy.

The model performs well for industries accounting for most of the total

consumption of energy in manufacturing in each year. The results indicate con—
slierable variation in energy substitution both across industries and across

types of energy. This variation should be taken into account in the formulation

of energy policies. Aggregate manufacturing demand for energy appears to be
highly price responsive. Estimated own price elasticities for all types of
energy except electric energy are generally substantially greater than unity.
Two points should be noted with respect to the interpretation of the
estimated elasticities for analysis of public policies toward energy. First, the
estimates reflect the long—run effects of prices on energy demand. Short—run

—17—

effects can be expected to be considerably smaller. Second, the elasticities
do not measure the net effects of price changes on consumption of fuel oil,

natural gas, and coal. Because these fuels are inputs in the production of
electric energy, the net effects of price changes will include changes in the

demand for fuels In electric power generation.23

CHAPTER 3

SUBSTITUTION EONG ENERGY, CAPITAL, AD LABOR

Jay Ford

I.

Introduction

As discussed in Chapter 2, elasticitIes of demand for individual types of
energy are estimated using a unit cost function for energy. The use of a unit
cost function for energy is based on the assumption that energy inputs are

separable from all Other inputs in thproduction function. The separability
of energy inputs from capital and labor can be tested for 1958 by estimating

an expanded cost.function inclcrding these inputs. Unavailability of adequae
data on capital prevnts the expanded cost function fr-am being estimated for

other yeat.
Estimation of the cost function including capital and labor also provide
estimates of the elasticities of demand for these inputs as well as their

cross elasticities with energy inputs. The cross elasticities have considerable interest for policy analysis. For example, the cross elasticities
of demand for energy inputs with respect to the price of capital will indicate

the effect of investment incentives on demand for each type of energy. Also,
since labor input is disagregated into production and non—production workers,
the estimated cross elasticities will Indicate whether changes in energy
prices have differential effects on employment of different types of labor)

Research on this portIon of the study is still in progress. Model
formulation and data collection are complete but estimation is not. Therefore
the results reported here are preliminary only. Final results will appear
in a University of Washington Ph.D. dissertatiort by Jay Ford.

—9-.

IT.. Tic •jdl
It is assumed that there exists by state and two—digit manufacturing

industry a positive, homogeneous of degree one, concave production function
y =

(K,B,W,E,O,G,X), where y is gross output, K represents capital services,

B and W are the services of production and non—production employees, E, 0, and
G are electric energy, fuel oil, and natural gas, and X is a vector of re—

malning inputs. If, in addition, capital, labor, and the energy inputs are
separable from X, then it is appropriate to express the production function
in the form y =

g(h(K,B,W,E,O,G),X), and h will have the same propertiesas f.

These properties guarantee the existence of a unique cost function G, dual to
h, for which is selected the transcendental logarithmic form,

mG

+ I

ii

+ E I

in

1
=

where

in

in P.,

i,j=K,B,W,E,0,G.

(1)

1j1

Restrictions on the translog function ensure that the cost function is

homogeneous of degree one and the associated demand functions are homgencous

of degree zero. These restrictions are:

(a) I c. = 1,

ii

(b)

Zy
ii

(c) I

0, and

0,

i,j=K,B,W,E,0,G.

i

Imposition of these restrictions together with the cross—equation equality
restrictions result in the following set of factor share equations:
=

—
1nPK) + 1KW
aK + 1KB (i B

+ KO1'O -

lnP1()

÷

— in?,,)

KGG - lnPK)

KE "E

1'K'

—3--

+

NB

—

+

+

—

y0(lnP0 - lnP)
+ y(lnPK -

+ EO1O
=

÷

lnPw)

—

- lnPw)

lnPw)

1nPB)

+ yT(lnPE - lnP)

lnPE) + y(lnP -

+ BE'B

1nPE)

E + EG1G

+ YKO(1UPK —
+
lnP0) YB0(1UPB

+ EO1E — lnP0)

+ oG(lnPG —

MG G + 'rKG(lnPK - mPG)

+ IEG(1UPE

—

lnPB)

+

+

÷ BE1E

—

+ BG'G -

+ BO1O =

lnPB)

—

lnPc)

—

lnP0)

lnP0)

lnP0)

+ BG'B

+ OG1O -

+ yo(lnPw —

+ G"W -

mPG).

ThPG)
(3)

Because the cost shares must sum to unity any one of the above equations will
be a linear combination of the others and may be dropped from the estimation

process. The system of five share equations Is estimated with an iterative
Zeliner efficient procedure, which is equivalent to maximum likelihood estima-

tion. Thus the parameter estimates are invariant to the choice of equation to
be omitted from the system.

It is natural to think of the conditions necessary for the separability
of functions in terms of marginal rates of substitution, however equivalent
restrictions can be stated via the equality of certain of the Allen partial

elasticities of substItution. In this case the energy inputs are weakly
separable from labor and capital If the following equalitIes hold
ESF., =

=
ESOK

ESGK

ESEB = ESOB = ESGB

ESEW Esow =

ES0t,y

(4)

Expressing ES in terms of the parameters of the share equations, the first of
the conditions in (4) is

—4—

EMK + 1EK O'O 4GK + GK
O"K

I4EMK

GMK

which is equivalent to yE( G.

Ok o

KIcG at

=

the means of the data.

Thus the substitution of OKcLI for each of these y's assures the equality of

the ESiK, i=E,O,G. In a similar fashion the full set of restrictions of the
y's necessary for the separability of electricity and fuels from labor and

capital can be worked out. These are:

EK = 01E

OK
v
'GK

=

EB

0KO

=Oc
K G

"

'GB

=

3WE

8BE

1EW

0B'O

1ow

WO

B C

'GW

=&cL
W G

=e

'

t5
'

The conditions in (5) are substituted into the factor share equations (3) in
order to incorporate the type of separability which is being investigated.
The statistical procedure for testing the hypothesis of separability of
energy inputs is based on the ratio of the values of the likelihood functions

of the restricted and unrestricted sets of equations. Minus twice the
logarithm of this ratio has asymptotically a chi—square distribution with
degrees of freedom equal to the reduction in the number of estimated parameters
in going from the unrestricted to the restricted set of factor share equations.
If the hypothesis of weak separability is not rejected, the restriction that
=

0, i=K,B,W, may be imposed in order to test for explicit separability of

the translog cost function.

III. Data Sources and the Construction of Variables
The Census of Manufactures, 1958 was

distinguished

by the publication of

various data relating to the cost of oming and maintaining capital equipment
and

structures.

This informatIon is reported at infrequent intervals and the

1958 census is the most recent, although much less detailed data collected in

—5—

1963 became available in 1971. These data, along with information from which
may be inferred the prices of production and non—production workers and energy
inputs, are sufficient to estimate the translog cost functions outlined in
the previous section.

With respect to the energy inputs the calculation of prices is a simple
matter of dividing the reported expenditures on electricity, oil, and gas by

the quantity at each observation. These prices are then transforzed into cents

per kilowatt—hour equivalent. The price of capital services cannot be
developed in this straight—forward manner, however, because the transaction

normally takes place within the firm. Hence we have adopted with some modification the procedure used by Christensen and Jorgenson [1969], inferring the
rental price of capital from the price of investment goods, the rate of return
on corporate pronerty, and the rates of taxation, depreciation, and capital
gains.

The rental price of capital to industry i in state j is calculated as
follows:

1 —

P =

uz1

[
1 -

I (q_1r

+

qw — (—_1)] +

Ujj

where q is the asset price of capital, u is the effective rate of combined
Federal and state corporate income taxes, Z is the present value of depreciation deductions for tax purposes on a one dollar investment in producers'

durables, w is the rate of depreciation, and d is the effective property tax
rate.

As is indicated by the absence of state and industry subscripts on q and
r, it is assumed that a single market exists for new investment goods and

capital so that then prices are equalized across states and industries. The
remaining elements of the rental price of capital are constructed in the
following manner:

—6—

the sum o

the cffocttv Federal

corporate profits tax by industry

and the state corporate profits tax

Z1 = L

(1 —

(T_)Lij],

by

state,

where r is the discount rate and L1

is an estimate of the lifetimes of depreciable assets used for tax
purposes,
=
Wjj

annual depreciation charges in 1957 divIded by the gross book value
of depreciable assets as of December 31, 19579 and

d11 =

property

taxes paid during 1957 divided by the gross book value of

depreciable assets as of December 31, 1957.

This procedure amounts to the calculation of the annual user cost of one
dollar's worth of capital equipment.

The available 1958 employment data by state and two—digit industry consist of total payroll and number of employees and for production workers, the

number of workers, man—hours, and total wages. The price of production workers
services is total wages divided by man—hours. The price for non—production
workers is based on the residual payroll and number of employees and the
assumption

that white—collar workers are employad for forty hours per week.

The wage rate for both production and non—production workers is augmented to

reflect

the reported cost of supplementary employee benefits.

These prices will be adjusted to account for interstate differentIals in

the quality of the labor force. The following labor quality indices, used in
Griliches [1967] have been provided by Zvi Griliches:

1. occupational mix of employees by state and industry,

2. median age of employed males,
3.

whIte as fraction of total employed males, and

4.

females as a fraction of all employees.

—7—

These quality—of—the—labor force variables are intended to serve as
proxies for education and training so that nominal wage differentials across

states and industries are converted into wage differentials in efficiency units

IV. Empirical Results
A sufficient number of observations Is available for the estirtation of

the system of cost share equations for eight of the twenty—two digit manufact
ing industries. Results available to date are for data that has twt been
adjusted to account for interstate differentials in the quality of the labor
force.

Results of the tests of separability of the energy inputs from capital anc

labor are shown in Table 1. The null hypothesis of weak separability of energy
inputs is not rejected for industries 20, 28, 33, and 34, food and kindred
products, chemicals and allied products, primary metal industries, and fabricated metal products, respectively. For these industries,.whlth account for sor
two—thirds of energy consumption by the group of eight industries, the use of

unit cost function for energy is appropriate. However, the rejection of
separability for the remaining four industries indicates that the inter fuel

substitution results obtained under the assumption of separability have to be
interpreted with caution.

Estimated own price elasticities for capital and the two types of labor
as well as the cross elasticities of these inputs with the energy inputs are

shown in Table 2. AU own price elasticities for capital are significant
at the five percent level using a one—tailed test. Five of the own price
elasticities for blue collar workers and two of the own elasticities for white
collar workers are signicant at this level.

—8—

The estimated cross price elasticities are generally not statistically

significant,2 but the pattern of results is suggestive. Previous studies
have Indicated that capital and aggregate energy are complements.3 However,
only nine of the twenty—four cross—elasticities between capital and individual

energy inputs are negative. Evidence of complentarity is somewhat greater
for non—production workers and energy inputs, with eleven negative cross—
elasticities, and is least for production workers, with only five negative
cross—elasticities.

TABLE 1
Separability Tests

Test Statistic
Industry

Observations

Energy Separabilit?

Explicit
b
Energy Separability

8.68

20

38

7.38

26

18

23.62c

28

22

11.35

32

20

2l.Olc

33

19

10.15

36.78c

34

20

10.22

12.56c

35

13

2333c

37

13

2078c

2l.8lc
————

6, Critical value =

16.81,

significance level =

.01

b. Degree of freedom = 3, Critical value =

11.34,

significance level =

.01

a. Degree of freedom

c. The null hypothesis is rejected.

TABLE 2

Estimates of Price Elasticities: 1958
Industry

Elasticity

20

BB

E

ERO

—.853

—.302

(.173)

(.141)

— .260

— .647

— .508

— .442

(.196)

(.144)

(.173)

(.123)

—.543

—.272
(.538)

3

E

BO

—1.452

.371

(.383)

(.265)

(.277)

.048

.029
(.056)

.083

(.017)

—.002

(.066)

(.031)

.032

.079

.003
(.019)

—.097
(.084)

(.015)

(.035)

—.013

.008
(.038)

.045
(.022)

.134
(.063)

.031
(.031)

.123
(.043)

(.030)

.073
(.043)

.025
(.031)

(.028)

.114

(.046)

(.021)

E

32

(.482)

—.652

E

28

(.103)

—.679

E

26

—.0004
(.016)

—.026
(.020)

.032

.010

E0

.019
(.024)

(.021)

.045
(.033)

E

.016
(.030)

.080
(.068)

.215
(.097)

.033
(.122)

.056
(.035)

.097
(.089)

—.078

— .151

(.045)

(.097)

—.030

.001
(.050)

—.030

E

Wc

.007
(.047)

(.073)

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

.043

(.178)

TABLE 2

(Continued)
Estimates of Price Elasticities: 1958

Elasticity

33

—1.025

E

BB

E

E

KE

EKG

EBE

EBO

EBG

1E
Ewo
E

WG

Industry
34
—1.085

35
—1.156

37

—2.060
(.566)

(.368)

(.584)

(.294)

—.996

—.419

—.358

(.162)

(.150)

(.329)

(.430)

.448
(.933)

—0.205

—.183

—.304

(.495)

(.182)

(.592)

.039
(.085)

—.021

—.010

(.018)

.022
(.019)

.007
(.034)

.029
(.029)

.005
(.003)

—.014

—.011

—.014
(.028)

.024
(.007)

—.012

(.022)

.078
(.046)

.029

.056

(.005)

(.030)

.001
(.008)

.019
(.014)

—.026

(.026)

—.002
(.024)

.025
(.008)

—.005
(.011)

.007
(.004)

.220
(.091)

—.018

—.073

—.045

(.016)

(.055)

(.051)

—.057

—.013

—.029

(.086)

(.022)

(.026)

.154
(.071)

—.034

.004

.008

(.019)

(.009)

—1.302

.050

(.023)

(.028)

(.019)

(.005)

.024
(.022)

(.014)

.083

(.032)

CHAPTER 4
DYNA'iIC STRUCTURE OF ENERGY DET'IAND

I.
Energy demand

in

Introduction

manufacturing should not be expected to respond instantan-

eously to changes in energy price. Due to adjustment costs for energy, and other
inputs, the full response of energy demand to a change in price may be spread

over a number of years. however, previous studies have largely ignored the
dynamic structure of energy demand.

In this cnapter the model of demand for factors of production developed by
Nadiri and Rosen [1969, 19731

is

adapted to estimate dynamic demand equations for

energy and other inputs. The results include estimates of short—run, long—run
and intermediate—run price elasticities of demand. The results also include
estimates of the response of demand for each Input to temporary excess demands for

other inputs. Pairs of inputs are defined as dynamic substitutes if the response
of each to excess demand for the other is positive and dynamic cotp1ements if
the response is negative.

All estimated short—run elasticities of demand for energy arc statistically

significant. Estimated long—run elasticities are similar to estimates in earlier
studies. The responses to price changes are found to be quite rapid, with the
full long—run responses being approximately realized,ithin three years after the
year in which a price change occurs.

The estimated long—run price elasticities indicate that capital and energy

are complements and labor and energy are substitutes in the long run. The
estimated responses of demand to excess demands for other inputs indicate that
capital and energy are also dynamic complements and labor and energy are dynamic
substitutes.

—2-

II. The Model

A Cobb—Douglas aggregate production function is assumed,

ZnQ

+

a9uE

+

KnKt +

+

LnL + nH

(1)

where
Q

= output,

E

energy input,

K capital stock,
U utilization rate of capital,
L =

labor

H =

utilization

stock,
rate of labor.

Stocks and utilization rates of capital and labor are entered separately

since they are separate objects of choice by the firm. Energy input is measured
as a flow. The firm may hold stocks of some types of energy, but most energy is
obtained directly from outside the firm. Therefore, it is not meaningful to
break down energy input into stock and utilization rate coriponents.

The firm is assumed to minimize costs subject to an output constraint. The
firm's costs are
C

where

=

PE + PKK + P(LH) +

is the price of

PLL

user cost of the capital stock, PH
is the user cost of the labor stock. The
Is the hourly wage rate, and
utilization rate of capital, U, does not appear explicitly in the cost equation
but

energy, K is the

appears implicitly through the effect of U on the depreciation rate and

hence on P, P =

dPK/dPU.

Solving the static cost minimization problem yields long—run equilibrium
demand equations2

—3—

2nE

kE

inK

kK

KU

P

aKU

p

ku + 0

mU

P

[inQ] +

+1

0

aKU

kL

}kH H

inH

0

jO

P

L1i

1

p

I

LuL

P

p

p

—l

0

inP

K

p

0

inP

a LH -1
0

+1
(2)

where p =

+c+

c. The long—run demand equations have several interesting

characteristics. First, the level of output has no effect on utilization rates in
the long—rui. Second, long—run utilization rates are independent of all cross—
price effects except with respect to the price of the corresponding stock

variable. Third, the prices of the utilization inputs, P and H' affect the
demand for energy

positively.

The long—run demand equations can be written In matrix notation as

X*=k+BQ+CR

(3)

where all variables are in logarithmic form, X* is a vector of optimal input
demands, k is a vector of intercept terms, B is a vector of scale effects, Q

is

output, C is a matrix of factor price effects, and R is a vector of factor prices.

Since the demand equations are log—linear, theelementsof matrix C are equal to
long—run price elasticities.

The firm will not be in long—run equilibrium at every point in time due to

costs in adjusting inputs to their desired levels. A log—linear adjustment
function is assumed
=

E

j

—

yjj(2nXj*

inXi) +
(4)

where X is the quantity of input X
i in period t, X. is the esred or target
it

—4—

level of input j in period t and is defined by (3), the

are fixed adjustment

are random variables with zero means and constant

coefficients, and the

variances. The specification of the adjustment function allois the adjustment
of each input to be affected by the level of "excess demand" for all inputs.
Writing (4) in matrix notation,
=

rx*

+ (I —

r)x_1 + c

where all variables are in logarithmic form, X is a vector of input quantities
in period t, r is a matrix of adjustment coefficients, X* is a vector of desired
input quantities in period t, I is an identity matrix, and

is a vector of error

terms. The equations to be estimated are derived by substituting for

in

(5) from (3),
=

rA + 1'BQ

+ rcR + (I —

r)X1 +

.

(6)

The diagonal elements of r are own adjustment coefficients and should satisfy
the restriction, 0

1, for all 1.. The more variable the factor, the close:

to unity will be the own adjustment coefficient. The off diagonal elements,

indicate the effect on input i of excess demand for input j. The

can be

either positive or negative. Assuming that the firm remains on its production
function at all times, not all elements in any row of r can be of the same sign.
Inputs must react positively to excess demand for some inputs and negatively to
excess demand for others.1

The cross—adjustment coefficients need not be symmetric. Pairs of inputs
with identically signed cross—adjustment coefficients can be identified as dynamic

substitutes or dynamic complements. If

is positive, excess demand for input

j increases the short—run demand for input i. Pairs of inputs for which cross—
adjustment coefficients are positive are defined to be dynamic substitutes. If

the cross—adjustment coefficients are negative, the inputs are dynamic complemen
Due to short—run adjustment costs, inputs may be dynamic complements even though
they are substitutes in the long run.

—5—

Because the input demand equations are log—linear, the elements of the matrix

product rc are equal to the short—run price elasticities of demand. From (3),

the long—run price elasticities are equal to the elements of matrix C. Given

estimates of (1 ) and rc, the estimated long—run price elasticities are computed
from [I -

(I

-

r))rc.

The estimated response path of input demand to prices can be computed from
Ti =

(I

_r)krc, see tadiri and Rosen (1973, P. 75]. Computation of

r + r ÷. . . .+ r
1
0

=

o,

i.

provides a matrix of estimated price elasticities showing the extent to which

demand responds during a length of time n+l periods long. Thus in addition to
short—run and long—run price elasticities, the results provide estimates of all
intermediate—run elasticities.

Dynamic stability of the system of demand equations requires that (I —

approaches zero as n gets large. Note that (I — T) = M'AM where

is a matrix

of characteristic vectors of (I — 1") and A is a diagonal matrix of characteristic
roots. Thus (I — T)t1 =

NAM,

which approaches zero if the absolute value of

each element of A is less than unity. Therefore dynamic stability can be checked
by determining if the absolute values of the characteristic roots of (I — T) are

less than unity. however, this procedure does not provide a statistical test of
stability because the sampling distributions of the characteristic roots are
unknown.

III. Empirical Results
The equations are estimated with annual data for total manufacturing for

1947—1971. Data availability requIres some modifications in the system of equations to be estimated. The prices of labor stock and of capital utilization are
omitted due to lack of data. Because data on the utilization rate of capital are

—6—

not

available, the utilization rate of capacity is used as a proxy for this

variable. The distinction is important, since the capacity utilization rate
reflects the utilization of all inputs, not just capital. Capacity utilization
data are from Wharton [1976].

The relevant output variable is the equilibrium level of output perceived

by the firm. As measures of this variable, shipments and shipments plus changes
in inventories are included in alternative specifications of the demand equations.

Data on shipments and inventories are from U.S. Bureau of the Census (1976]. The
output variables are deflated by the wholesale price index for manufactured goods
from U.S. Department of Labor [197Gb].

Data on capital stock, rental price of capital, energy input, and energy

price are from Berndt and wood [1975]. Data on labor stock and the utilization
rate of labor are from U.S. Department of Labor (1976a]. The stock of labor is
equal to the total number of employees in manufacturing. Average weekly hours
of production workers is used as the labor utilization variable. Data on the
price of labor utilization, defined as the quality adjusted wage rate, are from
Berndt and Wood [1975].

In order to impose homogeneity of degree zero in prices, the demand equations

are expressed in terms of price ratios. The equations estimated are then

LnX = ai + binQ +
+

ciiZn()

+ c21n() +

g31nU + g49nL 1 + 5nH1 +

g1nE

+

i =

1

E,K,U,L,FI.
(7)

The error terms,

,

are assumed to have zero means and constant variances. The

use of ordinary least squares (OLS) to estimate (7) will result in biased estimates

if the error terms are serially dependent. In order to test for first—order
serial correlation, the demand equations are estimated by both OLS and a Cochrane—
Orcutt [1949] procedure.

—7—

The OLS and Cochrane—Orcutt (CO)

results

ar compared using the F—statistic,

SSR
-SSR
F(1, n—k-i) SSRn—k—l

where n is the number of observations, k is the number of coefficients, SSR is the
ijm -F

qured res1du1

ni

the ubocripts indicate the estimation procedure. This

test is equivalent to a test of the null hypothesis that the first

order

serial

correlation coefficient is equal to zero. The null hypothesis Is rejected at the

.10 level for four of the five
using

the Cochrane—Orcutt

demand equations. Therefore, the results obtained

procedure are reported here.

estimated parameters in the equation using shipments plus changes In
inventories as the measure of output are very similar to those obtained using shipThe

ments. Since the estimated standard errors are somewhat smaller when shipments are
used, the results here are for this specification. Inclusion of a time variable
to allow for trends in equilbrIuiu output has little effect on the estimated para—

ieters but does cause problems of collinearity. Therefore, the results reported
here are for the equations excluding time.
Estimated parameters are shown in Table 1 together with their t—statistIcs.
The short—run elasticities with respect to output are significant at the five

percent level in all equations except the one for energy. The effect of output on
inpUt demand is largest for capacity utilization and next largest for labor stock.
The insignificant effect of output on energy demand indicates that short—run forecasts of energy demand do not depend critically on predicted output.
The relative price of capital is significant at the five percent level in

three equations and at the ten percent level in one more. However, the relative
price of energy is significant only in the energy equation. The coefficients of the
relative prices of capital and energy are equal to the estirated short—run
)

elasticities

with respect to these prices. The short—run elasticity with respect to

—8—

the wage rate is equal to the negative of the sum of the capital and energy price

elasticitie. The elasticity wIth

respect

to the wage rate is significant only iñ
.

the energy equation.

The estimated coefficients of the lagged endogenous variables are equal to
the estimated alements of the matrix (I —

r).

The elements of the matrix r are

shown in Table 2. All own—adjustment coefficients are positive as required. The
own—adjusttent coefficient for labor stock is greater than unity but not signifi—
2
cantly so.
The own—adjustment coefficient for labor stock is largest, followed by the

coefficients for average hours and energy. The magnitudes of these own—adjustment
coefficients indicate that the corresponding inputs are truly variable. The own—
adjustment coefficient for capital stock is considerably smaller, as would be

expected. The own—adjustment coefficient for utilization is smallest .of all; mi
apparently incongruous result may be due to the use of capacity utilization rather
than capital utilization for this variable.

Seven of the twenty cross—adjustment coefficients are significant at the five

percent level. The coefficients of capital stock and average hours worked are both
highly significant in.the energy equation, indicating that excess demand for these

inputs has a significant effect on energy demand. The coefficient of energy is
significant only in the capacity utilization equation.

The cross—adjustment coefficients need not be symmetric. Where the signs of
the cross—adjustment coefficients for a pair of inputs are identical, it is possible

to identIfy the inputs as dynamic substitutes or dynamic complements. The results
indicate that energy and capital stock are dynamic complements, while capacity
utilization and labor stock are dynamic substitutes for energy. Thus, excess demand
for energy Increases labor stock and capacity utilization and decreases capital

stock. These results provide tentative information on the important policy question
of the effect of temporary energy shortages on demand for other inDuts.

—9.-

All three short—run price elasticities for energy are sinificanc at the .025

level. The time path of the price elasticities is shown in Table 3. The elasticities through year zero ar equal to the estimated short—run elasticities. The
estimated short—run own price elasticity is —0.28 and the estimated short—run cross
elasticities with respect to the hourly wage rate and the user cost of capital are
0.34 and —0.10 respectively.

The last column of Table 3 shows the estimated long—run price elasticities.
The results indicate that energy and labor are substitutes and energy and capital

are complements in the long run. The estimated long—run own

price

elasticity is

—0.42 and the estimated long—run cross elasticities ith respect to tl.ie hourly wage

rate and the user cost of capital are 0.57 and —0.15 respectively.
The estimated intermediate—run elasticities shown in Table 3 indicate quite

rapid response to price changes. The cumulative elasticities through year three

are approximately equal to the long—run elasticities. Two of the

elasticities

are

actually slightly larger in absolute value than the long—run elasticities, indicating
a small degree of over—shooting in the intermediate—run response to price changes.
Dynamic stability of the system of demand equations is checked by calculating
the characteristic roots of (I —

r).

The characteristic roots for the matrix used

in calculating the elasticities shown in Table 3 are 1.0019

0.0435 i, 0.0425

3.0275 i, and 0.0652. The condition that all characteristic roots be less than unity
is not satisfied. However, the departure from the conditions for stability is small
and its statistical significance cannot be determined. The existence of complex
roots is consistent with the non—monotonic behavior of the intermediate—run
elasticities shown in Table 3.

*

—10—

1'J.

Concluding Comments

The use of a dynamic model of demand for inputs provides ne: information

on the characteristics of energy demand in U.S. manufacturing. The estimated
cross-adjustment coefficients indicate that energy is a dynamic complement of
capital stock and a dynamic substitute for both labor stock and capacity utilization.

Estimated short—run price elasticities of demand for energy are found to be

statistically significant. The response of demand to price changes is quite rapid,
with the full long—run response being approximately realized within three years
after the year in which a price change occurs.

The estimated long—run price elasticities are similar to those reported in
studies using static demand models. Berndt and Wood's [1975.] study of U.S. manufacturing and Fuss' f1977] study of Canadian manufacturing also find that energy
and capital are coruolements and energy and labor are substitutes in the long—run.

The estimated long—run own price elasticity of —0.42 in the present study is
comparable to the value of —0.47 obtained by Berndt and Wood for 1959, the mid—year
of the sample period used here.3

Table 1

Estimated Parameters
(t—statistics in parentheses)
Independent
Variables

Constant

Output

E

1

U
t••••1

L

1

E

Dependent Variables
U

IC

L

H

4.125
(1.301)

2.479
(0.858)

4.008
(4.447)

1.011

0.619
(6.930)

0.174
(6.261)

—4.699

—0.614

(—2.779)

(—0.354)

0.095
(1.100)

0.142
(2.655)

(10.389)

—0.279
(—2.250)

—0.100
(—0.926)

0.162

0.015

(0.861)

(0.089)

0.038
(0.669)

—0.098
(—2.287)

—0.046
(—1.458)

0.116
(2.186)

0.117
(2.420)

0.032
(1.944)

0.175
(1.734)

0.094
(1.512)

(—2.210)

—0.152
(—1.583)

—0.027
(—0.825)

0.547
(4.846)

0.531
(5.052)

—0.245
(—1.345)

—0.009
(—0.057)

—0.034
(—0.630)

—0.038
(—0.291)

0.163
(1.121)

(2.361)

—0.204
(—1.095)

0.342
(2.168)

(—3.083)

1.634
(3.334)

—1.195
(—3.072)

(—0.970)

0.998

0.990

—0.233

0.675

—0.817

—0.756

0.905

0.038

0.178
(0.685)

(0.514)

—0.152
(—0.629)

(—2.394)

0.796
(1.124)

(0.071)

0.836

0.818

—0.198

0.014

Table 2

Adjustmcnt Coefficients
Independent
Variables

Ki
Li
11t—l

Eti

Dependent Variables

K

U

L

H

E

0.469

0.245

0.009

0.034

—0.547.

—0.163

0.325

—0.178

—0.038

0.038

—0.342

0.817

1.152

0.193

0.204

1.195

0.756

—0.796

0.986

—1.634

—0.094

0.233

0.152

0.027

0.825

Table 3
Tune Path of Energy Price Elasticities

Cutnulative,Elasticity Through Year

-

Independent
Variable

P11

0

1

2

3

4

5

Long—run
Elasticity

0.279

—0.330

—0.393

—0.437

—0.444

—0.437

—0.415

0.337

0.406

0.514

0.566

0.563

0.550

0.568

—0.098

—0.116

—0.162

—0.170

—0.160

—0.155

•-0.153

TABLE 1

Energy Consumption by Two—Digit Industries, 1971

Percent

Energy

Energy

ja Total intensivenessb

Industry

20 Food and

of

kindred

300.6

products

7.81%

2.59%

21 Tobacco manufacturers

5.5

0.14

0.76

22 Textile miliproducts

106.5

2.77

4.01

23 Apparel, other textile products

19.6

0.51

1.00

24 Lumber and wood products

68.4

1.78

4.32

25 Furniture and fixtures

17.8

0.46

1.54

385.4

10.02

7.47

30.1

0.78

0.98

28 Chemicals and allied products

814.2

21.16

5.67

29 Petroleum and coal products

465.9

12.13

11.33

30 Rubber and plastics, n.e.c.

66.3

1.72

2.79

9.8

0.25

1.43

382.3

9.93

7.75

716.7

18.62

10.00

102.7

2.66

2.01

107.6

2.79

1.52

80.1

2.08

1.37

114.2

2.96

1.41

38 Instruments and related products

20.1

0.52

1.01

39 Miscellaneous manufacturing industries

18.4

0.47

1.52

26 Paper and

allied

products

27 Printing and publishing

31 Leather and leather products

32 Stone, clay, and

glass

products

33 Primary ietal industries

34 Fabricated metal

products

35 Machinery, except electrical

36 Electrical equipment nd

supplies

37 Transportatf on equipment

Total

3,847.1

a. Billions of kilowatt—hours equivalent.

b. Energy cost as percent of value

added.

100.00%

TABLE 2

Tests of Cross—Equation Equality Restrictions

1971
Critical
Valuea

1962
Critical
Test
Valuea
Statistic

1958
Critical
Test
Va luea
Statistic

Industry

Test
Statistic

20

231b

22.4

240b

22.4

17.7

22

171b

16.3

19.7

22.4

19.5

23

11.1

16.3

5.3

16.3

n.e.

24

4.0

16.3

9.4

16.3

6.7

25

13.7

16.3

13.9

22.4

n.e.

26

4.1

22.4

7.4

22.4

21.7

27

1.0

16.3

12.6

16.3

n.e.

28

4.9

22.4

18.5

22.4

13.6

29

11.3

16.3

8.6

16.3

n.e.

30

17.0

22.4

279b

22.4

3.6

31

584b

16.3

n.e.

32

10.5

22.4

10.5

22.4

15.1

22.4

33

12.4

22.4

14.3

22.4

4.4

16.3

34

21.7

22.4

549b

22.4

18.0

22.4

35

13.6

22.4

22.1

22.4

15.5

22.4

36

12.3

16.3

21.0

22.4

10.8

16.3

37

1.1

22.4

n.e.

7.7

16.3

38

3.5

16.3

n.e.

n.e.

39

0.3

16.3

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

not estimated

asignificance level

.001

bThe null hypothesis is rejected.

22.4

16.3

22.4

16.3

16.3

n.e.

TA3LE 3

Si5 of Principal inor3
Number of Observations with Incorrect Signs
1971

Iudusry

19.32

1953

20

24

0

0

22

0

0

6

23

0

0

n.e.

24

10

0

0

25

9

0

n.e.

26

0

2

0

27

10

0

n.e.

28

0

6

0

29

0

0

n.e.

30

0

10

31

1

n.e.

32

0

0

C)

33

1

0

0

34

0

10

1

35

0

0

0

36

0

0

0

37

9

n.e.

0

38

9

n.e.

n.e.

39

3

n.e.

n.e.

n.e. —

not

estimated

2
n.e.

TABLE 4

Parameter Estimates: 1971

Parameter

a
G

26

.856
(.017)

.414
(.022)

.518
(.021)

(.041)

.065
(.009)

.206
(.031)

.107
(.016)

.175

.093

(.034)

(.016)

.079
(.013)

.200
(.023)

.210
(.020)

.454
(.050)

.162
(.013)

.165

n.e.

.062

n.e.

— .033
(.077)
.073

Yr.

(.044)
—

yEG

.070
(.052)

n.e.

1EC

.181
(.029)
.158
(.127)

— .006
(.113)

— .093
(.081)

— .060

(079)
— .104

100

0G

1GC

Pseudo ,2

(.025)

— .104

(.016)

.149

.132

(.087)

(.116)

(.111)

.161

—

(.058)

.174
(.092)

.048
(.063)

.024
(.080)

— .037

— .105

—

n.e.

— .228

not

.025
(.065)

— .022

.031

.206
(.148)

.123
(.058)

.055
(.064)

.101

.103
(.087)

— .266

— .002
— .248

— .030

(.098)

(.083)

(.098)

n.e.

.153
(.076)

.077
(.070)

n.e.

.030
(.106)

n.e.

—

.098
(.084)
.033
(.046)

— .099
(.060)

13

13

23

17

.309

.603

.565

.216

estimated

.041
(.053)

(.064)

(.046)

— .197

(.060)

n.e.

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

n.e. —

(.087)

(.074)

— .282

.120
(.061)

(.078)

(.101)

Number of
Observations

.683
(.018)

(.095)

n.e.

icc

.371

(.077)

.040

GG

30

(.148)

n.e.

5(

— .302

29

(.040)

(.028)

bc

Industry
28

23

9

.799

TABLE 4
(Continued)

Parameter Estimates: 1971

Parameter

a

0

E0
EG
EC

1GG

.354

.662
(.014)

.668

.744

(.013)

.561
(.020)

(.003)

(.012)

.083
(.015)

.120
(.021)

.078
(.026)

.061
(.008)

(.011)

.390
(.024)

.269
(.020)

.232
(.019)

.230
(.009)

.173
(.022)

.050
(.013)

.027
(.006)

.041
(.005)

—

(.016)

n.e.

— .012

.231
(.133)

.088

.001

(.056)

.098
(.054)

(.063)

(.033)

.018

.100

.191

(.064)

(.059)

(.148)

.153
(.045)

.011
(.048)

.020
(.042)

.079
(.067)

.067
(.022)

n.e.

— .040
(.081)

.214

— .224

— .248

— .204

(.055)

— .074

(.072)

(.076)

(.179)

(.069)

(.035)

.146
(.070)

.036

.018

.081

(.063)

(.127)

(.045)

.073
(.037)

.129

.090

.035

n.e.

(.073)

(.041)

— .280

.153

— .242

Pseudo R2

— .308

.178

(.074)

(.100)

Number of
Observations

— .503

.078

(.238)

(.123)

GC

— .219

36

35

(.073)

— .061

—

0G

33

.118
(.091)

EE

Industry
34

32

— .056
(.079)

— .081
(.040)

— .029

(.136)

(.043)

18

15

.539

.638

— .002
(.052)

— .160
(.156)

— .049
(.041)

— .028
(.027)

8

.413

(.022)

— .173
(.049)

— .060

—

.083
(.062)
n.e.

(.019)

— .041

n.e.

(.013)

9

24

.912

.184

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard rrors.
n.e. — not estimated.

TABLE 5
Parameter Estimates: 1962

Industry

26

27

.377
(.032)

.784
(.010)

(.017)

.254
(.037)

.089
(.014)

.108
(.024)

.053
(.045)

.127
(.020)

.129
(.015)

.316
(.059)

n.e.

.952

.074

(.330)

.062
(.082)

(.040)

.049
(.015)

.002
(.012)

.004
(.010)

.937
(.349)

.031
(.080)

22

23

24

25

.635
(.022)

.787
(.026)

.677
(.020)

(.017)

0

.170
(.047)

.123
(.022)

.220

.106

(.025)

aG

.085
(.026)

.090
(.020)

.103

Parameter

a

.110

.657

(.02].)

n.e.

n.e.

— .025

— .074

(.035)

1EE

— .032

1E0

(.044)

(.133)

.007

.009
(.013)

— .045

.024
(.135)

.118
(.075)

.081
(.046)

n.e.

n.e.

.019
(.015)

.013

(.008).
—

1EG

.055
(.040)

100

— .020
(.009)

— .006

(.067)

(.013)

.053
(.015)

(.011)

— .014

—

.008

(.010)

(.014)

n.e.

n.e.

(.011)

GG

1GC

— .034

— .094

(.069)

(.076)

.016
(.013)

.044

— .056

(.012)

— .031

(.020)

— .009

—

(.011)

— .926

n.e.

— .011
(.013)

.007

.016

n.e.

(.020)

(.084)

(.389)

(.120)

.051
(.065)

n.e.

n.e.

.038
(.095)

.177
(.103)

n.e.

n.e.

.004
(.047)

.110

.078
(.036)

(.017)

(.138)

-.

—

(.017)

— .010

(.08)

Number of
Observations

—

.025
(.064)

— .125

Pseudo

-

—

.177

— .067

.071
(.039)

n.e.

n.e.

(.133)

.64

.21

.62

.65

.70

.31

II

10

1].

8

18

9

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.
n.e. — not estimated

TABLE 5
(Continued)

Parameter Estimates: 1962_

Parameter

0

EE

29

32

33

.295
(.082)

.318
(.015)

.478

.232
(.082)

(.023)

.593
(.022)

.689
(.008)

.092
(.023)

.173
(.029)

.168
(.027)

.139
(.016)

.474

.393

(.048)

(.044)

.286
(.018)

.157
(.022)

.124
(.014)

n.e.

.197
(.030)

.062
(.010)

.082
(.017)

.043
(.010)

— .514

.096
(.052)

— .202

.003

— .018

(.309)

— .047

0

(.027)

EG

-r

CC

(.049)

.146
(.025)

(.049)

.042
(.019)

.131
(.056)

.149
(.021)

.011
(.014)

.010
(.013)

.022
(.016)

.034
(.011)

(.050)

— .026

(.019)

(.026)

n.e.

.012

(.018)

GG

(.132)

n.e.

.282
(.104)

n.e.

Pseudo R2
Number of
Observations

— .182

(.130)

GC

— .269

.003
(.008)

.005
(.004)

— .178
(.028)

— .004
(.014)

— .043

— .008

not

— .023
(.011)

(.014)

.005
(.011)

— .001

— .023
(.007)

— .138
(.085)

(.059)

— .066

.014
(.060)

(.047)

— .070

—

.141

(.100)

(.019)

(.067)

(.047)

.80

.53

.81

.34

.99

9

17

14

13

9

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

n.e. —

.011
(.006)

.073

— .025

— .666

— .020

(.013)

.178
(.032)

n.e.

.018

OG

(.068)

— .306

(.014)

— .074

.030
(.026)

(.043)

— .184

(.110)

(.009)

.647
(.116)

EC

00

36

35

estimated

TABLE 6

Parameter Estimates: 1958
In4us try

Parameter

20

24

26

28

32

a

E

.498
(.015)

.729
(.028)

.333
(.025)

.632
(.024)

.314
(.010)

a
0

:162
(.016)

.165
(.031)

.138
(.044)

.143

.149

(.018)

(.025)

.190
(.016)

.106
(.014)

.047
(.012)

.225
(.024)

.282

.150
(.017)

n.e.

.483
(.053)

n.e.

.255
(.023)

— .153

-r

— .062

-y

EE

(.058)
.071
(.058)

E0

— .018

EG

EC

OC

-r

-rGC

— .015
(.021)
.134
(.032)

.009
(.040)

n.e.

.036
(.057)

.067
(.029)

.054
(.021)

.094
(.026)

.106
(.044)

.063
(.034)

.074

n.e.

.001

— .061
(.091)

.103

.014

(.042)

(.010)

(.029)

.086
(.037)

n.e.

.029
(.095)

— .148

— .003

— .105

— .213
(.018)

.146
(.047)
n.e.

— .252

not

.079

— .001
(.056)
— .085
(.067)

.033
(.051)

— .211

(.061)

(.034)

(.924)

(.067)

(.123)

.011
(.039)

n.e.

.014
(.028)

n.e.

.234
(.080)

n.e.

.032
(.120)

n.e.

— .187
(.091)

.56

.72

.83

.69

.53

29

7

10

22

17

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

n.e. —

—

(.033)

(.063)

(.048)

Number of
Observations

(.049)

(.024)

— .106

Pseudo R2

—

(.063)

— .037
(.031)

(.048)

— .096

CG

— .057

(.036)

(.045)

— .261

OG

— .119

(.039)

estimated

TPBLE 6
(Continued)

Parameter Estimates: 1958
Industry

Parameter

0
C

EE

33

34

35

36

37

.550
(.023)

.646

.707
(.036)

.813

.724

(.016)

(.025)

.090
(.0OJ)

(.029)

.234
(.030)

(.014)

.081
(.010)

.217
(.021)

.145
(.013)

.109
(.010)

.097
(.011)

.127
(.008)

n.e.

.062
(.008)

.103
(.024)

n.e.

n.e.

— .227

.087
(.073)

(.048)

E0
1EG

.146

.115
(.050)

— .032

.112

— .042

(.041)

n.e.

TEC

(.012)

(.043)

(.320)

- .013
(.457)

— .179

y00

(.078)

.075
(.051)

.064
(.062)

— .041

n.e.

— .003

(.372)

(.030)

— .176

1GG

(.072)

Gc

n.e.

yCC

n.e.

.061
(.036)
.023
(.022)

— .007
(.038)

Pseudo R2
Number of
Observations

— .135
(.210)

— .160

not

—

.114

(.110)

(.081)

(.072)

.127
(.060)

.070
(.075)

.127
(.062)

.033
(.068)

.043
(.040)

.037
(.114)

n.e.

n.e.

— .185

— .126

— .029

— .013
(.036)

(.043)

(.086)

.050
(.024)

.058
(.033)

.056
(.023)

n.e.

n.e.

— .091

— .099

— .009
(.032)

— .259
(.029)

(.051)

(.030)

.082
(.033)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

— .110
(.077)

.57

.33

.94

.74

.61

20

11

8

11

13

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

n.e. —

.149

estimated.

TABLE 7

Estimates of Price E1asticities Total Energy Constant: 1971
Industry
Elasticity

23
— .148

EEE

(.090)

—2.528
(.658)

— .425
(.582)

n.e.

Ecc

.150
(.053)

— .003

EEG

EEC

E

OG

—2.262
(.759)

—2.134
(.519)

—1.907

EGC

Ec

ECG

(.171)
—3.513
(.791)

—1.972
(.421)

— .656

—1.031
(.317)

—2.132
(.610)

— .613
(.213)

n.e.

—

124
(.162)

—1.151
(.835)

—1.439
(.522)

—2.531
(1.092)

.191

.418
(.116)

.643
(.252)

.303
(.124)

.388
(.214)

.109
(.127)

n.e.

.979
(.096)

(.273)

— .024

.037
(.190)

.383

— .037
(.144)

2.015

1.364

— .082
(.091)

— .608

(.717)

(.546)

(.577)

(.573)

(.693)

.552
(.433)

1.198

1.350
(.561)

.766
(.366)

1.255

.148
(.592)

n.e.

.748
(.302)

.318
(.183)

.458
(.532)

.295

.716
(.382)

(.518)

.680

— .050

(.665)

(.410)

.454

1.237

(.362)

(.526)

.691
(.289)

n.e.

.948
(.386)

.533
(.339)

n.e.

.084
(.434)

— .117

(.669)

.504
(.568)

(.151)

n.e.

.265
(.284)

n.e.

1.081
(1.068)

(.454)

n.e.

.775
(.492)

.096
(.386)

n.e.

.754
(.884)

n.e.

1.047

.676
(.430)

n.e.

.695
(.749)

(.440)

not

— .684

30

29

(.640)

n.e.

— .029

EGO

28

(.601)

(.428)

ECE

n.e. —

(.307)

(.198)

n.e.

Eoc

— .203

(.061)

1.976

EQE

26

estirated

TABLE 7
(Continued)

Estintates of Price Elasticities, Total Energy Constant: 1971

Industry
32

Elasticity
—

E

EE

.312
(.257)

—3.497
(.986)

—1.329

EGG

(.326)

—2.223

Ecc

(.811)

— .088

E

E0

EEC

—1.457

—1.522

—1.292

(.678)

—2.004

(.218)

—1.968

(1.041)

(.350)

.428
(.202)

(.096)

.295

.193

.147
(.101)

.141
(.033)

2.123
(1.053)

.449

1.379

(.075)

—1.870

.086
(.076)

.460

(.468)

(.355)

n.e.

.079
(.045)

.192
(.067)
n.e.

(.687)

(.470)

3.645
(1.984)

2.143

.571
(.518)

.469
(1.626)

1.560

1.111

(.757)

(.499)

— .001
(.667)

.617
(.356)

n.e.

(.919)

.798
(.354)

.309
(.165)

.933
(.224)

1.483

1.333

.804

(.644)

(.197)

(.272)

.456
(.184)

.254
(.237)

.157
(.547)

.411
(.218)

.488
(.214)

— .251

— .183

(.260)

(.154)

(.178)

.124
(.471)

.966
(.854)

3.554
(2.585)

1.922

—

(.996)

(1.891)

1.270

not

(.895)

— .272

—4.300
(1.131)

(.297)

—1.529

36

(2.510)

.060
(.230)

(.590)

n.e. —

— .936

—4.113

(.068)

(.432)

ECG

(.671)

(.112)

.520
(.224)

.829

Eco

—2.748

(.358)

(.108)

.564

ECE

(.136)

— .793

.340
(.182)

1.731

Ecc

—1.096

35

(.102)

(.902)

G0

— .829

34

(.159)

— .377

EOE

33

estiriated

—1.359
(.934)

.004

—1.546
(1.552)

— .221

.758
(.420)

n.e.

(.084)

2.298

n.e.

(.580)
.912
(.555)

—1.242
(.507)

n.e.

n.e.

TABLE 8
Estil!lates of Price Elasticities. Total Energy Constant: 1962
Industry

Elasticity
E

EE

22

23

24

— .416

— .245

— .432

(.076)

— .718

E

00

(.103)

(.172)

— .769
(.094)

— .625

E

—1.022
(.762) (1.524)

GG

E

—2.024

CC

n.e.

25

—1.793 — .459
(.492) (.223)

(.109)

— .538

— .746

(.066)

—1.966
(.741)

n,e.

EEC

—9.418 —4.303
(4.309) (2.446)

— .843

.181

.124
(.023)

.154
(.028)

—

EOG

(.069)

.120
(.175)

.278
(.122)

.237

n.e.

n.e.

EOC

.677

.794

.473

(.067)

(.126)

(.070)

.035

— .025

(.064)

(.099)

.065
(.079)

.076

n.e.

n.e.

(.090)

GE

— .015

E00

— .069

1.056
(.520) (1.498)

Ecc

— .035
(.140)

.709

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

.543
(.592)

n.e. —

not

estimated

— .314
(.314)

n.e.

.259

(.020)

1.535

.028
(.048)

.134

(.524) (.230)
.078

.066

(.105)

(.208)

1.113

.384

(.176) (.076)
—

.094

(.028) (.048)

.415 — .068
(.210)

n.e.

.826
(.118)

.204

(.107)

(.201)

.047

.255

n.e.

(.110)

(.127)

—

.326

(.254) (.781)
3.669
(1.885) (2.848)
.486

.396

.078

n.e.

n.e.

(.534) (.246)
n.e.

n.e.

(.104)

ECQ

(.156)

.143
(.132)

(.144)

.117

CO

—1.030

— .409

(.456)

E

(.049)

.171
(.291)

.140
(.147)

1.364

CE

— .121

1.826
9.340
.960
(.663) (4.024) (1.461)

(.816)

E

— .895

.180

(.084)

EOE

(.057)

27

(.360) (.450)

(.043)

— .002

— .571

(.122)

(.805)

EEO

26

.039

.205

n.e.

(.088) (.070)
n.e.

n.e.

.403

.612

(.732)

(.397)

n.e.

TABLE 8

(Continued)
Estimates of Price Elasticities, Total Energy Constant: 1962

Indutry
Elasticity

EEE

29

32

3

35

36

—2.738

— .380

— .944

— .719

— .756

(.791)

— .641
(.139)

E

GG

—1.931
(.212)

E

C

EEO

EEG
E

EC

n.e.

(.162)

— .788
(.143)

—1.069
(.327)

—2.171

(.091)

— .770

(.124)

— .699

(.090)

—1.334
(.117)

—1.634

(.097)
—

.845
(.365)

—1.764

(.022)

— .615
(.076)

—1.986
(.684)

—3.890

(557)

(.302)

(.833)

.102

.135
(.030)

.135

.156

(.032)

(.015)

(1.200)

.071
(.099)

(.040)

2.667
(.845)

.161

.658

.282

.336

(.166)

(.068)

(.090)

(.040)

.118
(.161)

.151
(.040)

.303

.264

(.099)

(.031)

.771
(.051)

n.e.

EOE

.091
(.144)

.352
(.108)

.373
(.072)

.476
(.093)

EUG

.550
(.132)

.107
(.290)

.305
(.059)

.112
(.096)

— .039

n.e.

.328

.092
(.035)

.111
(.075)

— .116

.130
(.128)

1.100

1.061

1.867

(.130)

(.306)

(.242)

(.008)

.025
(.065)

.184
(.036)

.120
(.087)

n.e.

.914

.049
(.051)

E

0

(.219)

EGE

1.662
(.197)

E

GO

EGC

.269

CE

E

CO

E

CG

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e. = not estimated

(.060)

— .044
(.097)

(.304)

.164
(.482)

1.155

2.178

3.804

(.316)

(.729)

(.801)

(.089)

.254
(.060)

.226
(.124)

1.827
(.616)

.225
(.223)

(.273)

E

— .335

(.084)

.191
(.251)
.153

— .640
(.553)

— .340
(.221)

.425
(1.267)

TABLE 9

Estimates of Price Elasticities, Total Energy Constant; 1958
Industry
Elasticity
EEE

20

24

26

— .626

— .435

— .837

(.116)

E

—2.449

00

(.342)

—1.316

EGG

(.324)

E
C

—1.554

(.051)

— .827
(.162)

—2.288
(.359)

n.e.

(.347)

(.190)

—1.308
(.693)

—3.189
(.761)

— .452

28
—

.641

32

— .804

(.081)

—2.345

(.098)

— .861

(.373)

—1.895

(.365)

—1.466

(.322)

n.e.

(.445)

—1.480

(.254)

(.365)

.304
(.079)

.144
(.030)

.246
(.173)

.249
(.053)

(.072)

E

.154
(.091)

.290
(.046)

.331
(.083)

.393
(.079)

.482
(.120)

E

.168
(.080)

n.e.

.261

n.e.

.002
(.108)

.938
(.235)

.639
(.134)

.594
(.427)

1.099

.674
(.150)

.828
(.267)

.188
(.078)

.022
(.214)

1.246
(.363)

(.450)

.623
(.229)

n.e.

.692
(.703)

n.e.

.476
(.345)

.403
(.238)

1.996

2.353

1.102

(.354)

(.778)

(.200)

.536
(.125)

.705

.292

.064

(.228)

(.091)

(.629)

.793
(.223)

.208
(.204)

n.e.

.771

n.e.

.557

n.e.

EEO

EG

EC

B

0E

E0G
E

0C

E

C0

E

GC

E
CE

(.192)

n.e. —

not

.735
(.258)

n.e.

.263
(.258)

n.e.

estimated

(.210)

(.581)

(.267)

ECO

.320

— .290

—

.153
(.240)

1.083
(.307)

.180
(.131)

n.e.

.197
(.203)

n.e.

.075
(.058)

n.e.

.002
(.132)
.278
(.198)

1.199
(.334)

TABLE 9
(Continued)

Estimates

of

Price ElasticitIes, Total Energy Constant: 1958
Industry

33

Elasticity
—

EEE

.864
(.103)

—1.534

E00

(.345)

—1.598

EGG

(.341)

n.e.
.443

EEO

(.103)

EEC

EOE

ECE

Eco

n.e. —

not

— .441
(.244)

—1.054
(.601)
.097
(.067)

— .433

(.291)

—1.075
(.463)

—3.266
(.368)

(.135)

—2.979
(.527)

—1.841

(.112)

—1.699
(.631)

—1.651

(.543)

(.247)

n.e.

n.e.

.309
(.100)

.246
(.074)

.246
(.106)

—1.967
•(.822)

.289

.138
(.084)

(.054)

n.e.

.042
(.070)

.155

n.e.

n.e.

(.159)

1.042

.429

.347

2.230

1.798

(.217)

(.293)

(.893)

(.688)

(.530)

.734

.749
(.365)

(.181)

— .136
(.258)
.042

(.288)

— .005

.187

.501

n.e.

n.e.

1.874

1.151

1.065

(.610)

(.706)

(.317)

(.255)

.542
(.213)

.690
(.340)

.587
(.189)

n.e.

.221
(.152)

.850
(.301)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

.438
(.731)

1.068
(1.131)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

.099
(.492)

— .004

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

ECG

(.358)

— .383

(.036)

.531
(.291)

EGC

— .336

— .484

.080

(.192)

EGO

(.112)

37

(.050)

1.066

EGE

.219

36

.420

n.e.

Eoc

—

35

(.082)

.492
(.268)

Eoc

34

estimated

(.202)

(.394)

.356
(.220)

— .136

.517
(.351)

(.309)

.903
(.352)

TABLE 10

Estimated Aggregate Elasticities
Total Energy Input Constant

Elasticity

E00
EGG

Ecc

1971

1962

1958

—.66

—.87

—.67

—2.75

— .70

—1.63

—1.32

—1.75

—1.76

—1.46

1.62

1.51

.30

.14

.33

.09

.13

.03

1.27

.41

.89

1.12

.15

.46

.69

.14

.40

.43

.95

1.01

.50

.12

.42

.32

.53

.32

.31

.71

.30

•74

.18

.42

.40

.72

.79

EEG

EEC
EOE
EOG
Eac
EGE

Ecc
ECE
Eco

Ecc

TABLE 11
Estiuated Aggreat lasticitie.s

Total
Elasticity
EEE

EGG
Ecc
EEO
E,

EEC

tOE
EOG
Eoc

Energy Input Variable

1962

— .92

—1.12

—2.82

—

77

—1.72

—1.47

—1.91

—1.87

—1.52

—1.71

—1.61

.23

.08

.21

.20

.46

.25

.04

.10

.00.

.74

.18.

.63

1.03

.03

.37

.63

.07

.20

.35

.51

.75

.12

.34

.25

.60

.26

.07

.90

.u9

.69

.05

.34

.28

.48

.67

EGO

ECE

Eco
ECG

1958

1971

•—

.97

TABLE 12

Tests for Homogeneity of Parameters in 1971 and 1962

Industry

Degrees of
Freedom

Test
Statistic

Critical
Valuea

20

9,158

514b

2.41

23

5,59

0.76

3.34

24

5,74

1.71

3.30

26

9,126

494b

2.56

27

5,59

1.22

3.34

28

9,150

343b

2.41

29

5,68

3.11

3.32

30

9,98

556b

2.62

32

9,122

33

993

34

2.56
2.62

5,116

305b
1426b

35

9,70

0.38

2.70

36

5,107

4•16b

3.22

aS. f j

level

3.18

.01

bThe null hypothesis of homogeneity is rejected.

TADLE 13

Estimates of Allen Elasticities of Substitution: 1971

Industry
23

2.308

aEO

(.830)

— .034

a

EG

(.777)

n.e.

6.980
(5.574)

26
.927
(1.319)

28

.203
(1.050)

6.003

— .890

.670

(.581)

.855
(.471)

.226

n.e.

1.582
(1.558)
7.736
(4.053)

1.446

(.991)

—

30

3.680
(1.546)

3.894
(1.117)

— .122

29

(.877)

6.436
(2.723)

1.687

(2.515)

(.797)

(1.016)

(.779)

a

OC

n.e.

3.764
(2.379)

.898
(3.588)

n.e.

8.151
(9.374)

a

GC

n.e.

5.244
(2.202)

3.223
(2.040)

n.e.

4.285
(4.627)

32

33

GEO
a

—1.064

2.459

5.488

(1.942)

(.839)

.872
(.466)

1.019

(2.968)

3.177
(1.581)

1.664

2.239

1.995

1.080

(.392)

(.969)

(.293)

(.365)

5.367

3.440

5.496

2.119
(1.933)

2.020

6.77+

6.252

(6.998)

(3.273)

(2.739)

16.019
(8.225)

— .051
(24.293)

15.044
(8.793)

n.e.

—5.041

—6.52

—5.391

n.e.

(3.513)

(6.837)

(2.277)

3.258
(1.496)

estinated.

n.e.

(.854)

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

not

(.564)

(3.S3)

(5.385)

n.e. —

36

1.723
(1.518)

9.992

arc

35

.349
(1.329)

(2.268)

aoc

34

TABLE A.1
Other In?ustries, 1971

Para'ieter

Parameter

0

Industry
24

20

22

.521
(.014)

.o53
(.020)

.716

.764

.802

(.022)

(.030)

(.015)

.127

.202
(.022)

.119

.079

.067

(.015)

(.013)

(.010)

(.017)

25

27

.276

.145

.165

.157

(.018)

.131

(.010)

(.026)

(.019)

(.012)

.077

i.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

.043

.196

.288

.151

(.088)

(.074)

(.088)

(.165)

(.085)

.123

.153
(.057)

—

.088

.079

(.045)

(.070)

.110

—

.107

.367

(.012)

.208

1EE
—

—

(.065)
.223

—

—

—

—

.083

(.046)
—

.067

(.066)

(.046)

(.083)

(.108)

(.056)

.138

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

.058

.109

.014

(.037)

(.038)

.030

.069

(.046)

(.029)

n.e.

n.e.

(.042)
—

—

.043

—

.309

—

(.067)

(.062)

(.041)

.209
(.058)

.156

(.028)

.146
(.048)

.043

n.e.

n.e.

—

(.037)

.359

1GG
—

—

.046

—

.039

—

.333

—

.002

(.079)

(.042)

(.100)

(.082)

(.046)

.044

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

16

17

(.045)

— .050
(.038)

Number of
Observations

24

Figures in arwtheses are asymptotic standard errors
n.e. —

not

estinated

9

14

TABLE A.1
(Continued)

Parameter Estimates: Other Industries, 1971
Industry
Parameter

31

37

33

39

.305

.657
(.006)

.704
(.022)

(.028)

.085
(.018)

.139
(.019)

.156
(.017)

.166
(.012)

.157
(.013)

.179
(.020)

.092
(.009)

n.e.

n.e.

.260
(.107)

(.197)

(.040)

.111
(.023)

.034
(.035)

n.e.

.106
(.037)

1F
—

EO

.055
(.023)

— .051

E

— .057
(.053)

.108
(.088)

— .114

— .019

.665

.163

— .138

(.068)

—

.241

(.134)

— .030

(.032)

(.072)

(.073)

(.102)

n.e.

.064

n.e.

n.e.

(.029)
—

'too

10G

.075

— .630

— .132
(.061)

—

059

(.050)

(.256)

.130

.612

.151

.193

(.043)

(198)

(.O1)

(.057)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

— .089

(.112)

(.077)

— .079

1GG

(.047)

n.e.

1GC

— .485
(.176)

— .012

.090
(.069)

— .163
(.075)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

(.059)

n.e.

Number of_
Observations

6

.037
(.046)

9

9

Figures in parentheses are asymptotic standard errors.

n.e. —

not

estimatc.d

15

TABLE A.2
Estimates of Price Elasticities: Other Industries, 1971

20

Elasticity

— .079

EEE

.413
(.114)

(.LS9)

—1.211

—2.328

(.523)

— .511

EGG

(.355)

—1.172

(.288)

E

—1.574

CC

24

22

—

.011

— .613

(.124)

n.e.

(.106)

— .725

.458
(.588)

(.348)

(.293)

— .011

(.253)

—1.370

—1.072
(.613)

27

25

(.5.08)

— .882

—2.994
(.718)

(.352)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

— .005

— .025

— .036

(.518)

— .109

EEO

.437
(.092)

(.125)

— .152

EEC

— .024

(.065)

(.107)

(.058)

(.126)

(.071)

.015
(.118)

.633
(.166)

.047
(.059)

.341

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

.450

1.410

— .029

(.526)

(.297)

(.080)
—

E E
0

(.344)

.918

1.398

—

(.164)

(.437)

(.693)

(.428)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

.108

.066
(.510)

3.103

(.322)

.286
(.423)

1.281

1.005

(.215)

(.334)

(.347)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

1.925

EOG

(.513)

— .264

E
0

— .430

— .240
(1.040)

(.690)

.218

1.155

(.295)

.289
(.240)

E

.884
(.223)

CO

— .085

—

(.910)
—

.109

.596
.

(.219)

(.165)

E

2.314

CE

(.626)

—

E

C0

(.479)

— .304

ECG

(.593)

n.e. —

not

estimated

TABLE A.2
(Continued)

Estimates of Price ElasticIties: Other Industries, 1971
Industry
Elasticity

31

— .063
(.069)

—1.568

E00

(.418)

—1.848

EGG

(.63)
n.e.

Ecc

38

37

— .430

.074
(.153)

(.031)

—8.336

—1.806

(3.407)

—3.753

(.467)

— .268

(1.079)

39

— .082
(.294)

—1.224
(.718)

—1.759

(.440)

(.457)

n.e.

n.e.

.249

.112

— .052

(.135)

(.098)

(.230)

.185

— .504

(499)
.042
(.041)

EEO

.021

E,

(.063)
n.e.

EEC

— .008

—

(.110)

(.104)

.134
(.152)

.189

n.e.

n.e.

(.045)

C

0E

EOG

.308

1.923

(.261)

(1.073)

(.492)

(.854)

1.259

7.365
(2.803)

1.240

1.444

(.323)

(.372)

n.e.

n.e.

.831

(.425)

n.e.

Eoc

— .952

.566.,

— .220

(.944)

.197

EGC

(.436)

(.475)

.497
(.572)

1.651

3.768

1.099

1.261

(.894)

(1.226)

(.267)

(.342)

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

n.e.

(.530)
1'

co

— .032

n.e.

.016
(.355)

n.e.

E

CE

1.356
(.326)

n.e.

Eco

— .382
(.848)

n.e.

ECG

n.e. —

not

estimated

.030
(.644)

CHAPTER 5
TECUNICAL CHANGE IN ENERGY USE

John 1. Wills

I.
Over

time

Introduction

man's stock of knowledge about potential production processes has

Increased. 1Ten additions to that stock of knowledge are translated into actual
changes in production technique we say that technical change has occurred. It may
be that a technical change is "biased;" that is, it results not only in an increase

in
the

the amount of output obtainable from a given bundle of inputs, but also alters

resource aix which

to seek evidence of biased technical changes in eñergy and other inputs

chapter

in the

minimizes the cost of output. It is the purpose of this

TJ.S.

primarymetals'industry

after World Wai II.

In the theory of the firm without technical change, the production function

is assumed no to change. The great bulk of econometric work in this area, being
concerned with other issues than technical change, has also followed this path.
But it is the essence of technical change that the production function does change

over time. For empirical work the notion that a production function might simply
change in any unrestricted fashion is too general to be useful. There are, however
a variety of ways in which some amount of "flexibility" can be built into
estimated production functions.
It is useful, first of all, to require that the functional form and the

parameter values be unchanged over time. Otherwise the estimating problems,
especially with time series data, are overwhelming. Indeed, in the general case
it is impossible to simultaneously estimate both production parameter and
technical change measures from the same data unless additional restrictions are
imposed.

One such restriction which Is sufficient to identify both the production function and technical change, but which permits some flexibility, iS

that

technical

—2—

change occurs at a constant rate (or at least with a constant rate of change) over

the time period. This can be accomplished by entering "time" in the production
function symmetrically as an input, so that the change in output per unit of time,

inputs held constant, is a constant. This is one procedure followed here.
This can be done in such a fashion as to restrict all technical change to
being a magnification of output possible from given inputs, or it can permit
changes in technique which will imply changes in the input mix for any set of

prices. In the former case technical change is "neutral," in the latter it is
"biased.

The conventional definition of bias as first proposed by Hicks (19351 in the
context of a two—factor production function. In that case the following three
definitions are equivalent:

d(—

dL
sign

d()
dt

=

sign

dNL =

sign

Labor saving

L <

neutral
Labor using

dt

where K and L are capital and labor, respectively, ML is the cost share of labor,

and f(i.K,L) is the marginal product of the 1th factor. All of the above
differentials were to be evaluated at constant factor prices. In the ceneral
n—factor case, however, the first and last of the above versions wIll yield n—i

measures of the bias of technical change. Only version two yields a single
number; on that basis it is the definition used In this chapter.
1

One convenient characterization of biased technical change is that it is

factor—augmenting. Technical change is factor—augmenting if the production
function can be written:
=

f(A

X1 ,..., A

X)

—3—
where the t—subscript refers to time. The parameters of the production function
remain unchanged; all technical change can be considered to change the values of
the

the "augmentation coefficients." The X's now measure input quantities in

natural units (e.g., manhours) and the Aixj measure input quantities in "efficiency

units." So technical change has the effect of increasing the effective input
which can be derived from the natural units purchased in the marketplace. This
method can, obviously, be used to permit biased technical change, since the various
augmentation coefficients can change at different rates.

As discussed below, the hypothesis of factor augmenting technical change is

not rejected by the data. The hypothesis that technical change has been neutral
is rejected lndicat!ng that factors have been augmented at different rates. The
results indicate significant labor—using and material—saving biases. There also
appears to have been a small energy—saving bias, but it is not statistically
significant.

II. Econometric Specification
In Part A below we show how

time—series

data can be used to test for biased

technical change and for factor augmenting biased technical change (agsinst

alternative hypotheses of neutral technical change or no technical change). Estimates of the rates of factor augmentation and of the Hicks factor—use biases are

also derived. In Part B we show how cross—section and time series data can be
used together to test for factor augmentation. Also, two cross—sections on the
same data at different points in time can

provide

additional evideace on technical

change.

A. The Time—Series Model
Production technology can be represented by a production function:
Q

= f([X])

—4—

where Q is output and [X] a vector of inputs.1 For simplicity of presentation the
vector [X] is assumed to exhaust the input set. When this is not the •case the

principal problem arising is that of defining the output of a "su—production"
function and insuring that the empirical conditions for Its validity are met.
This is discussed where relevant below.

If production exhibits factor augmenting technical change the corresponding
production functinn is
Q

f([AX]).

In all empirical work we choose to represent the production function by the

translog functional form. Th translog production function (iithout technical
change) can be written
lnQ =

a0 + Ea lnX1

+

(1)

Z y lnX lnX
ii j

I

Q is the quantity of output and the Xi's are the quantities of

where

inputs. Equation (1) can be interpreted as a production function in its own right;
or as a second order Taylor's series approximation to an arbitrary twice differentiable functional form.

Differentiating with respect to lnX

1nQ

. _! =

=

+I

y lnX ,
= W.

i1.

.

(2)

since each factor will be paid the
i
value of its tnarginal product. If production exhibits constant returns to scale
Given competitive input markets

then

=1

—5—

so the left hand side of (2) represents the share of total cost accuring to factor

i, called N1. (It also happens to equal the output elasticity with respect to
factor 1.)

All we need to know about the production function can be gotten from estimating the system of share equations (3)

Mi

c

+ Z Y1j 1QX. ÷
3

Uj

i=

1,.. .n

1

(3)

j

where an additive disturbance term has been appended to each equation.

the shares necessarily sum to one, (and

y) any one

of the 11

Because

equations

is a

linear combination of the n — 1 others. This implies the following restrictions
on the parameters:

Ec =1

Ii

(4)

Zy =Zy =0

Because the equations represent shares in total cost, we should expect the

errors to exhibit joint covariance. Therefore the equations are estimated with
a Zeilner efficient procedure (joint GLS).

The sum of the disturbances across

the share equations is zero at each observation and the disturbance covariance

matrix is singular. Therefore, we eliminate one equation and then solve for the
parameters of that one equation via the restrictions (4). Ordinarily ti-ia Zeilner
estimate is sensitive to the choice of the equation to be omitted, but this

undesirable result is avoided by adopting an iterative Zeliner efficient
procedure.

Especially in the production function it may be the case that the input
quantities, being chosen by the entrepreneur along with output rates, are In fact
correlated with the error vector. Under this condition the (iterative) three—
stage least squares (3SLS) estimator is appropriate, provided we can identify
the pre—determined variables of the system.

—6—

Generally

it is not possible to use any time series to identify both produc-

tion parameters and technical change. There are several ways to achieve

identification. One way is by using a priori Information obtained perhaps, from
supplementary cross—section data. This is discussed further below, in Part B.
Here we identify technical change by assuming it occurs at a constant rate,

of

in the manner

f([X], t)

Q =

let

Berndt and Wood [1975a]. In

t be treated symmetrically as a factor. Then the translog function is:

CL0 + EctlnX +

lnQ

i

+

E

ii

E

:1-

jT lnXi

T

2

1

TTT

Differentiating with respect to lnX and T we have the system of cost shares plus
an equation for

, the rate of change of total output when input quantities

are fixed:
=
CLi

+ I

y1 lnX + IiTT

i =

lv....

n—i

(5)

=CLT+Yi1nXi+YTTT
where,

in addition to restrictions (4),

Ey=O .
Following

(6)

Berndt and Wood,

productivity."

The

3lnQ

Lt Q

computation

is measured as an index of "total factor

of that index Is explained in the Data Appendix.

A specialization is to treat technical change as factor augmenting. Factor
augmenting

technical
=

where

change (at a constant rate) implies that

f([AX])

—7—
A r
A

1

t

A. e1
:1.

0

and A is the constant rate of augmentation for factor 1. Thea

the

production

function becomes

=

f((LeA1T ])

Expanding and differentiating we

a

arrive

at production function share equations and

productivity equation identical in form to (5) but with the followin additional

restrictions implied:

TEa1XI
i

(7)

11T ijj
iT E E 1ij A

Of course, restrictions (4) and (6) still apply.
Factor augmenting technical change implIes, therefore, testable parametric

restrictions. A logical next step would be to test for neutrality of technical
change. Hicks neutral technical change Implies that

tuted

=

X,

all i, j. Substi—

into (7) this Implies that

'iT =

jT = O

all 1, j.

and

TT =
and again we can test for this.
The least general hypothesis of all is that there has been no technical
change whatsoever; i.e. the A1 =
A1

systems of equations (3).

0. In this case we are left with the

£

—8—

To summarize, the nested hypotheses are:
non—neutral, non—factor--augmenting technical change
non—neutral, factor augmenting technical ch.3nge

neutral factor augmenting technical change
no technical change

These tests are based on the log of the ratio of likelihood functions. See Theil
[1971].

The bias of technical change is measured by the iT terms. This is a
constant, independent of prices. Hence the possibility that the bias of technical
change depends upon where along the isoquant it is measured is ruled out in this
estimating procedure.

B.

Cross—Section !odel

An alternative to assuming constant rates of technical change is to permit
the bias or Factor augmentation coefficients to adopt different values in each

f([AX]) the At's are not directly observable. If we

time period. In

already know the parameters of the production function, we can estimate their
implicit values, but we cannot use any single time series to estimate both the

parameters and the values of the At. In this section we will impose information
from cross—section estimates on time series data to derive non—constant rates of
factor augtnentation.2

Return to the production function with factor augmenting technical change,
but not now constrained to a constant rate:
lnQ =

+ E n ln(AX1) +

E

i

i

Differentiate with respect to 1n(AX):

lnQ

ln(A1X)

—

+ E

ln(A.41)

y ln(A X) ln(A. Xi
-j

13

—9—

AX
+E

Q

3AX1

lnX

+E

i mA1

but

30

= WI
i

aAx
ii
=

ct

, from

+ E

the firstorder conditions for profit maximization, so

lnX + E ',' mA1

or, in matrix notation
[N] =

[a] + r[lnx + mA]

hence

(mA] =

[N

—

a]

[lxix]

—

so if we know the r and a matrices we can solve for lnA,3 or for changes in mA:

[dmA] =

F[d]

—

[dlnX].

(8)

The bias is the change in N which occurred as a result of technical change.

Call this dN*. From above
[dM] =

r[dlnx

+ dlnAl

and the effect of technical change is
[diI*J =

r(dmnA]

and from (8)
[dM*] =

r(r[dM1

—

(dlxix]

I

[dM*] = dM — r[dmnx].

(9)

and again, knowing the parameters we can estImate the biases.

A practical problem is that our estimates of [dmA] are likely to have large
variances, since they are rather complicated functions of the parameter estimates.

Our [dmA] estImates are functions of random variables and hence are random
A

variables themselves. e know that 1' is consistent for T, therefore r

is

—10—

consistent for r.

Therefore

our estimates will at least be consistent. The

biases, being simpler functions, should exhibit smaller standard errors.
Our parameter estimates are derived from cross—section data where variation
in input use depends only on variation in prices, and not on technical change.

An initial adjustment for labor quality differentials can be made. Then labor
input over time should be measured to account

for

this.

If non—neutral factor augmenting technical change has occurred over some time
period then production finction estimates which ignore it will appear to be

unstable. For example, suppose the production function
=

XB + u

is estimated at two separate time periods from cross—section data. If the true
production function is

(AX) + u
and if the ratio of the Ar's changes over the time period then the B estimates

derived will be biased. This will increase the probability of wrongfully rejecting the hypothesis that the parameters are unchanged. If we adjust the observed
quantities of inputs in the later sample by estimated factor augmentation, however,

we should derive parameter estimates closer to those of the initial sample. This
can be tested by a Chow test.

—11—

III. EmpirIcal Results

In Part A we use time—series data to estimate rates of factor augmentation and

factor—use

biases and come up with significant estimates of each. We reject

models of neutral technical change in favor of biased technical change; and accept

factor augmentation. In Part B we estimate two cross section models and compare
them. On the basis of this comparison we accept the hypothesis of an unchanged
production structure, both in natural and in efficiency units. In Part C T,Je

compare the time series and

cross

section results. The results of the "modified1'

time series model are similar to those of the full tie series model, and also

similar to the 1963 cross section results. Again

reject neutral technical

change. Data sources are discussed in the Appendix.

A. The Time Series Results
The specifications of the nested hypotheses to be tested are (in order of
decreasing generaiity):

1. Biased technical change

2. Biased factor augmenting technca1 change
3. Hicks—neutral, technical change

4. No technical change.
Table 1 presents the coefficient estimates and summary statistics for

specifications 1—3. The test statistic is equal to minus twice the difference in
the log—likelihood values for the null and alternative hypotheses, and is distributed

with degrees of freedom equal to the number of restrictions imposed,

see Theil [1971, p. 396].

Table 2 gives the results of the tests. The null hypothesis of "No technical
change" amounts to deleting an equation from the system and

so

requires a compli-

cated correction of the estimated likelihood function value. But this is also
L.

equivalent

to a simple parametric restriction (aT = 0) ihich we test witu a t—test.

—12—

The evidence is strongly for accepting factor au'nientation. Factor augmentation is

relatively weak restriction of non—neutral technical change. It

imposes five independent parameter restrictionc but introduces four new variables;

net the number of restrictions is one. Indeed, the sum of squared residuals

actually falls (slightly) under the restrictions. (This is possible since the
parameter restrictions are non—linear.)

The estimated rates of factor augmentation are as follows: (t—values in
parentheses)
LK = —.0005
LL =

.0194

(

.09)

(7.61)

LE = —.0014

(

LM = —.0041

(2.74)

.74)

These results and tests are all based on the joint GLS estimates of the

production function. To the extent that there is any difference when a 3SLS
procedure is used to account for possible simultaneity, the differences do not

affect the implications for technical change. SInce the joint GLS estimates
generally provided better fit we use these estimates in the tests.
Two of the augmentation rates are not significantly different from zero,
but labor appears to have been augmented at just less than 2% per year, on

average. 1ateria1s inputs have been negatively augmented at approximately —4/10
of 1% per year. One may conjecture that this is the result of a decline in the
quality of some inputs.

We strongly reject the hypothesis that technical change is neutral. This
makes the final test of "No technical change" vs. "Neutral technical change" a
bit meaniigless, but it is worth pointing out that it is possible to accept the

hypothesis of "No technical change" if the &ternative is "Neutral technical
change" rather

than "Biased technical change."

What this

means is

that shifts in

—13—

the shape of the isoquants are a relatively more niportat feature of technical
change than are simple "sca1e—contractions of the isoquants toward the origin.
There is a significant labor—using, material-saving bias, measured by the

iT terms. The share of labor in total cost increased, on average, by just less
than

of

1 percentage point every year, holding prices constant. The cost share

of materials input decreased at approximately the same rate. (As seen in Table
1 these estimates are virtually identical whether or not factor augmentation is

imposed.) There is evidence of a borderline energy—saving trend; but if so, the
trend is weak. The capital bias is not significantly different from zero.
Imposing factor augmentation does curiously affecc the coefficient of Time

in the TFP equation. This coefficient represents the acceleration" of technical
change; that is, TFP itself represents - and so

=

-—- .

When factor
T
augmentation is not imposed the rate of acceleration of technical change is

.003, but with a large standard error. When factor augmentation is imposed, the
rate declines to .0031 but the standard error falls dramatically and the latter
estimate is easily significantly different from zero.

Concavity of the production function

Estimated production functions should display the same characteristics as

theoretical production functions. In particular, they should be monotonically
increasing; that Is, an increase In any input quantity should, ceteris paribus,

increase output. Also, they should display convex isoquants; that is, the
production function should be at least quasi—concave.
Some functional forms such as Cobb—Douglas automatically impose these

features on estimated production functions. There may be values of the 1ij'
however, for which the translog production function is not concave or not

monotonic. If the

fitted

cost shares are positive the production function is

monotonic and If the bordered Hessian of second partial derivatives of the

—14—

production function is negative definite (principal minors alternate in sign)
then the production function is quasi—concave, which is necessary for convex
isoquants.

All fitted cost shares were positive, so we conclude that our production
function is iaoaotonic. The last eighteen of the twenty—four years, however,

display a non—concavity in some dimension. That iS, the fitted bordered Hessian
is not negative definite when evaluated at these observations. It is not possible
to derive estimated standard errors for the fitted values of the principal minors,
so we cannot test directly for the significance of this result.
We can,

however,

impose concavity on the production function at the means

of the data, though not at each observation. Lau (1974] shows the parametric
method for imposing concavity; the restrictions are quite complex.
Given the complexity of the non—linear parametric restrictions, it is not
too surprising that we experienced some difficulty in estimating the equations

under this constraint. In particular, different starting values converged to
different estimates; often to local maxima which did not satisfy the convergence

criteria of the computer program used. Here we report the estimates that
correspond to the smallest residual sum of squares of all the attempts. These
estimates did satisfy the convergence criteria. They are reported in Table 3
below. The unconstrained estimates are reproduced for convenience in comparison.
We do not report the standard errors here; these reported

and y estimates

are non—linear functions of the parameters actually directly estimated; which

themselves entered the estimating equations non—linearly. Calculation of standard
errors here involves twIce successively applying a Taylor's approximation, and

it was felt that these numbers would mean little. The constrained estimates,
however, are generally not significantly different from zero although almost all
of the unconstrained estimates are significant.

—15—

The

constrained

model fits the data much more poorly than the unconstrained

model; we reject concavity on the basis of a likelihood ratio test. Because of
the poor fit it was judged that the tests of the nested hypotheses would be
better carried out with the unconstrained model.

Despite the fact that the concavity restriction causes significant changes
in the coefficient estimates in general, the implications with respect to techni—

cal change are not too different. Both models indicate a labor—using, material
saving bias of the same order of magnitude; and weiker effects on energy and
capital inputs.

The issue of concavity of the production function remains open. The data
clearly reject concavity, at least with respect to some input(s). And a production function which is not concave implies some bizarre results; i.e., violent

input quantity changes upon small changes in relative input prices. But yet we
achieve good fit and "reasonable" parameter estimates from the unconstrained

model. Since convex isoquants are properties of firms and we are here estimating
an industry production function, there may be a problem of aggregation involved.
Given that the rest of our unconstrained empirical estimates seem reasonably
good, we

leave

the concavity problem unsolved.

B. Cross Section Results
Because of the unavailability of a cross—section materials price index, the
cross section production models assume that the production function is separable
in these inputs; that is, that the production function
Q

= Q(K,L,E,N)

can be written
Q

This

= Q*(K,L,E) + H(M).

is in principle testable, but the same unavailability of data that requires

the assumption forbids the test.

—16—

Tha two years of crocs sections are 1963 and 195a. They were not generally
similar years; the former was an expansionary year and the latter a moderate

recession. Klein and Summers [1966] measure the annual rate of capacity utilization in the

primary

metals industry in 1963 and 1958 as 30.45% and 68. 75%

respectively. Since the regression model assumes no lag in input adjustment,
we adjusted capital input by multiplying the index by the above capacity
utilization rates for one of the sets of pooled estimates.
Also, because we construct'our energy quantity input by "translog aggrega—
tion' of electricity, oil, natural gas, and

coal,

we must discard any observa-

tion for which we lack data on a single one of these. This reduces the sample
size to fourteen in 1963 and ten in 1958, but this is clearly a better measure
of energy input than to aggregate by BTU content.
The mean values for each of the three cost shares for each year are:
1963

1958

NK

.471

.341

ML

.464

.575

ME

.063

.084

In Table 4 we present the coefficient estimates and summary statistics for

each cross section separately. In Table i, we present the results of three sets

of pooled estimates: 1. The simple 1963 and 1958 data, unadjusted for capacity
utilization differences, 2. The same, but with a capital use adjustment, and 3.
The 1958 data pooled with the 1963 data which has been "augmented" by applying
the rates of factor augmentation for capital, labor, and energy derived in
Part A, above.

Our first test is a test for constancy of the production structure over

the five years. The procedure is a standard Chow test. We consider two

—17—

soeclfications of the

null

hypothesis:

1. The production function is unchanged in natural input units,
2. The production function is unchanged in efficiency input units, but is
changed in terms of natural units.

The first corresponds to the pooled estimates where all inputs are unadjuste
for technical change, the second to the pooled estimates where the 1963 data

was augmented. For the former we use the results from the estimates made when
the capacity utilization rate adjustment was made, since these were generally

better results, i.e., lower residual sum of squares and more significant para-

meter estimates. The test results are presented in Table 6.
We acceot the notion that the production structure is unchanged, both in

natural units and in efficiency units. Indeed, augmenting the latter cross
section by the augmentation coefficients derived from the time series model
lowers the explanatory po'7er of the joint regrcssion, though only negligibly.

Deriv1n annual estimates of technical change
We use the 1963 parameter estimates to derive year—by—year estimates of

the

annual rate of change in the augmentation coefficients of capital, labor, and

energy inputs. This is achieved through the use of formula (8) from Part B
of Section II, where d in A1 =

(A1/A).

Note that estimating this series requires dcleting one roz and column from
the matrix of estimated

coefficients. Because of sampling variation the

derived series will be sensitive to this choice, so the results presented below
are for simple averages of the series derived Erom each possible set of coefficient estimates; capital and energy, capital and labor, and labor and energy.
We also estimate the annual hicks factor—use bias in a similar manner, but using
formula (9) of Section II.

—18--

The entire series are not presented here. The derived numbers displayed
considerable variation, though

in

most years the estimated rate of change in any

augmentation coefficient was less than 10%. The estimated average rates of
factor augmentation for the three inputs is presented below.

Average Augmentation Rates, Cross Section Data

and for the Nicks

LK

—.0024

LL

.0230

LE

—.0810

biases:

= —.0049

di*= .0028
dl•IE* =

—.0032

The cross section and time series results will be compared in Part C.

C.

Time Series and Cross Section Comparison
To compare time series and cross section regression estimates directly, we

must re—estimate the time series model using the (Capital, Labor, Energy) speci-

fication rather than the full, four—input model. Once we have done this, we
no longer estimate the Total Factor Productivity equation with

the

cost share

equations. We can still enter time into the production function to allow for
technical chanqe, though some information is lost since not all of the parameter

restrictions of the full model can be imposed. Still, our estimators are
consistent.

Me present the parameter estimates and summary statistics in Table 7 for
two specifications of the times series K, L, E model, with and without technical

change. The estimating equations here are:

1. without technical cinge:

I=cL+Ey11 logX +u.

iK, L, E

—19—

and

2. with technical change:
=

+

log

+ iT T + u1

I

X, L, E

3

where, as before, the cs and y's are parameters and the X's are input
quantities.

Here again, as in the complete time series model, we have the annoying
failure of the conditions for convex isoquants at some of the observations. And
again, on the basis of a log—likelihood test, we reject the hypothesis of no

technical change in favor of non—neutral technical change. And the derived
biases are siuiilar to those of the full time series model, being labor using and

energy saving. There is a slight capital saving bias in the modified time series
model that does not exist in the full model.
The estimated coefficients of this time series model appear roughly comparable to those of the 1963 cross section, as can be seen by comparing Table 7

with Table 4. The coefficient estimates are always of the same sign, for example
and of roughly comparable relative magnitudes.
With respect to technical change we derive roughly the same implications

from both the time series and the cross section data. The

estimated

constant

rates of factor augmentation from the time series are compared to the average
rates from the cross section below:

Factor Augmentation Rates
Time Series

Capital
Labor
Energy

Cross Section

—.0005

—.0024

.0194

.0230

—.0014

—.0810

—20—

The one difference is the tixe series gives aa insignificantly negative estimate
for the rate of energy augmentation; in the cross section it is negative and
of a much larger magnitude in absolute value.
Also we compare the average Hicks factor use bias rates beloi:5

Hicks Bias Rates
Time Series

Capital

Labor
Energy

Cross Section

—.0034

— .0049

.0044

.0028

—.0010

—.0032

Both samples imply the same conclusion: Technical chacige has been labor using
and perhaps slightly capital and energy saving over the time period.

—21—
TABLE 1
Coefficient Estitnates and Sutntnary Statistics

(t—statistics in parentheses)

Biased Technical Change

Factor—Augmenting
Biased Technical Change

Hicks—neutral
Technical Change

K
L

.184

(19.95)

.184

(20.06)

.188

(79.03)

.151

(20.76)

.152

(21.12)

.208

(87.59)

E

.051

(26.70)

.051

(25.78)

.048

(134.31)

.614

(71.11)

.614

(78.87)

.557

(233.71)

.087

C 4.71)

.036

( 4.69)

.110

(10.05)

0

(0)

.001

(

.09)

.023

( 2.28)
( 9,98)
( 6.67)

y
1KL

—.023

C 7.76)

—.026

—.064

( 7.74)
( 4.11)

—.064

C 4.13)

—.108

.172

(10.12)

.173

(10.11)

.014

—.012

—.013

C 2.85)

—.035

—.161

( 9.63)

—.032

—.023

YE

y
1LL

LM

—.161

( 2.65)
( 9.55)

EE

.055

(22.20)

.056

(22.01)

.056

—.021

( 3.96)

—.020

( 3.78)

—.025

.246

(10.46)

.246

(10.44)

.165

.0003

(

.0003

(

.52)

—.003

.0003

(

.0003

(

.43)

.0041

.0040

—.0002

—.0042

( 7.91)
( 1.70)
( 6.64)

( 7.95)
( 1.69)
( 6.82)

—.0003

(

.26)

.0001

(

X

—.0005

(

XL

.0194

1LE

1EM

y
T

1KT
1LT

—.0002

'rET

YMT
'rTT

.05)
.42)

XE
XM

Log—likelihood

138.136

—.004

(

.96)

( 1.70)
( 1.65)
(21.95)
( 5.16)
( 5.08)
(

.39)

5.93)
.09)

( 7.61)
.74)

—.0014

(

—.0041

( 2.74)

188.417

167.001

.3302

.8300

.8029

ML

.8344

.8334

.2689

ME

.9902

.9902

.9902

.7722

.7 734

.6259

.0064

.0516

.0000

.0395313

.0379953

.0435 37

TFP

Total RSS

—22—

TABLE 2

Tests of Hypotheses
1. II: Factor augvientng biased technical change
Biased technical change

H :

a

restrictions

#

::

=

1

<a = .05)

Conclusion: Accept A

n

2. H :

Hicks neutral technical change

n

Ha: Factor augmenting biased change
#

restrictions

X = 9.488

= 3

(a =

.05)

X = 42.832
Conclusion: Reject U

n

.3. H: No technical change
Hicks neutral technical change

H :

a

# restrictions = 1
=

.05)

:
Conclusion: Accept H

n

—23—

TABLE 3

Concavity
imposed

Unconstrained

.188

.184

.146

.151

• 053

.051

.613

.614

.152

087

cLL

E

1?

KL
KE

KN
1LL

LM
1EE

1EM
'1NM

aT

KT
CT
CE
MT
TT

—.027

0

—. 010

—.023

—. 115

—. 064

.129

.172

006

—.012

—.096

—.

161

.145

.055

—. 129

—.021

.340

.246

.0008

.0008

0

.0003

.0044

• 0041

—.0004

—• 0002

—.0040

—. 0042

.0003

—. 0003

—24—

TABLE 4

Regression

Results for the Two Cross Sections

1958

1963

cLL

KK
KL
KE
LL

.505 (22.26)

.341 (13.94)

.435 (21.18)

.571 (26.14)

.060 (21.75)

.232

(

.199

.008

C

3.64)

(

—.163 ( 3.32)

—.040 C

4.61)

.032

(

.177

(

3.99)

.127

( 2.37)

.049 (11.80)

.054

.4432

.1418

.5371

.4067

.8179

.4774

32.5164

17.9108

obs./d.f.

.1525797

14/23

# obs. with wrong
signed principal
minor
5

t—statistics in parentheses.

(

.0811044
10/15

3

obs.

with wrong
signed predicted
cost share
0
#

1.98)

—.087 ( 4.37)

1EE

RS S

.73)

C

—.014 ( 2.41)

Log-like

.127)

—.035

1LE

ME

2.60)

0

3.05)

—25—

TABLE 5

Regression esu1ts

for

data

.442 (22.43)

.486 (18.02)

.445 (22.45)

.483 (28.40)

.441

(19.31)

.481 (23.20)

.075 (13.51)

.072

(

8.44)

.074 (13.21)

2.30)

.151

(

3.26)

.147

(

2.98)

—.141 ( 3.40)

.147

(

3.93)

.145

(

3.61)

—.002 (

.13)

.133

•KE

LL

(

and

capacity

utilization

.007

(

.46)

—. 004

(

.25)

.159

(

4.09)

.157

(

4.76)

.159

(

4.56)

—.018 ( 1.64)

.010

(

1.00)

—.015

(

1.38)

1.48)

.014

(

1.31)

.017

(

1.60)

.011

EE

Adjusted for
factor

Adjusted for
capacity
utilization

Unadj us ted

KL

the Joint Estimates

(

.3901

.4218

.3895

t'IL

.5059

.5195

.5094

NE

—.0072

.0076

.0072

Log—like

S. 20294

8. 24759

8.64104
3324256

.3333997

.3199693

24/67

24/67

24/67

0

0

0

with
i, obs.
wrong signed
predicted
0
cost shnre

0

0

RS S

obs. Id.

f.

# obs. with
wrcng
signed
principal
minor

t—statistics in parentheses.

—26—

TABLE 6

Chow Tests

H: No structural change in production when inputs are
measured in natural units.
H :

a

a
F =

n

2.81
=

3.54

(c =

.05)

Conclusion: Do not reject H

a

H: No structural change in production when inputs are
measured in efficiency units.
H :

a

n

6

F

3.21

= 3.54

(c

=

.05)

Conclusion: Do not reject H

a

—27—

TABLE 7

Time Series K,L,E ode1 Estimates
without
tech. change

with
tech. change

.421 (100.18)

.470 (22.17)

.470 (113.32)

.407 (20.75)

.108 (108.50)

.123 (24.24)

.121 ( 10.21)

.189

t
1KK

(

6.30)

1KL

—.026 (

2.20)

—.115 ( 4.10)

KE

—.095 ( 32.22)

—.074 (10.18)

3.74)

—.032 C

3.67)

—.058 C 5.85)

17.33)

.132 (22.31)

.127

EE

(

.172

(

—.003 ( 2.30)

KT

.004

1LT

(

.8359

.8273

.2151

.4791

.9S68

.9891

78. 8486

87. 1849

R

RS S

# obs. with
wrong signed
princ. minor

.0218424

• 0158268

0

13

0

0

25/70

25/68

? obs. with

wrong signed
pred. share

# obs./d.f.

3.25)

—.001 ( 2.92)

ET

Log—like

5.89)

C

.058

LL

t—statistics in parentheses.

APPENDIX
DATA SOURCES

The data is for the primary metals industry; Standard Industrial Classifi-

cation (SIC) number 33. Included are the manufacturer of pig Iron and iron
products, all types of steel, aluminum, zinc, copper, and various other metals
accounting for a small portion of output.

Part A: Time Series Data
There are two special problems in construction of the data: 1) Construction of a total factor productivity (TFP) index, and 2) construction of a series
for capital input and the rental price of capital.

1) The index of total factor productivity is usually a Divisia index of
output less a Divisla index of input. According to Jorgenson and Griliches
(1967],

TFP = Q/Q - E
I
where

Px
=

w(XX)
Q

= output

= input

ii
=

price

quantity

th
of the i
input

Because of lack of data on Inter—industry flows we cannot use a net output

measure of TPP. The data is readIly available for a value added based measure
but as Star (1971] notes, if the material inputs do not enter the production
functIon in approximately fixed proportions, their neglect will bias the total

factor productivity measure. Our use of gross output data for a two—digit
industry group implies homogeneous industries within the group. This is slightly
different than assuming an aggregate production function for the industry group.

—2—
The total factor productivity index is readily calculated from data on

input quantities and output quantity; or on the corresponding prices. The
capital price and quantity indices are discussed in detail below. Otherwise
data is as follows:
L:

An index of production and non—production employees, from the Annual

Survey of 1anufactures (ASM). Following Griliches [1967], we calculate labor
inputs in production worker man—hour equivalents. The average wage rate of
production workers is calculated as indicated below. The difference between
total payroll and production worker payroll is then converted into production

worker man—hour equivalents by dividing by the average wage of production
workers.

PL: An average wage equal to production worker wage bill divided by number of
production worker man hours, both from the Annual Survey of Manufacturers.

Note that L ignores non—payroll labor costs; social security, pensions,
insurance, etc. These data are not available, though at this high a level of
aggregation it would almost certainly be highly correlated with the variable
used.
E:

Nominal expenditure on all energy inputs (from the ASM) divided by a

nominal price index f or all energy inputs (from the Bureau of Labor Statistics).

This measure will be incorrect if industry purchases of energy inputs are not
divided among the inputs in proportion to the inputs' weights in the aggregate
price index, but no alternative is available.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) nominal energy price index.
Q:

Value of Shipments in current dollars adjusted for changes in the value of

inventories of final goods (both from the ASM), divided by the BLS nominal price

index for the industry group output. (The BLS index actually includes some

—3—

metal products not classified in SIC—33, but their weight is trivial.) Value
of Shipments estimates are available only for 1953 on. Gross Output for 1947—52
is estimated on the basis of the Office of Business Economics index of
industrial production for SIC—33 (published in Business Stastics) which covers
the entire period.

PQ: The BLS industry—group price index.

p: Moody's index of MA Corporate Bond yields.
Material Inputs: Expenditure on materials inputs (in current dollars) is
calculated as Gross Output less the sum of total payroll, expenditure on energy,

and expenditure on capital services (all in current dollars). This is divided
into price and quantity components by dividing by a nominal price index for
inputs.

This price index is constructed as a weighted average of three published

BLS indices from the Handbook of Labor Statistics: 1.

materials,

crude

non—food, non—fuel

2. intermediate materials and components for manufacturing,

and 3. industry output price (since there are significant inter—industry flows),
The weights are derived from the 1963 Input—Output tables for the United States,
according to the source of direct requirements per dollar of Cross Output.
Capital:
require three pieces of information: The quantity (physical units) of
a stock of capital actually "used up" in the production process in a given time

period; the corresponding price per unit of service flow which firms can be
considered to charge themselves (the rental price), and the share of capital in

total cost. The last is equal to the product of the first two, and is also
identically equal to total property income associated with any producing unit.
The procedure for separating the value of capital services into price and
quantity components is as fol1ozs:

—4—

1. The first step is construction of an index for the capital st.

The

perpetual inventory formula is

Kt =

It

+ (l_u)K_i

where u is the rate of depreciation. Note that this is a physical relationship.
not a value relationship. Beginning with a

benchmark Kt we add annual net

investment deflated by a nominal pr±ce index.
2.

The capital stock index (K) is used, along 7ith an asset price index (q),

the rate of depreciation (u), the value of capital services

(property

income), and the effective tax rate (tx) to compute the rate of return (p) on
capital:

p = p(K, q, u, K' tx).
The exact form of this function depends upon the pattern of depreciation and of
taxation; see Christensen and Jorgenson [1969] for this and other details of
the procedure.
4.

Finally, since the value of capital services equals K

K, which is total

property income, we can compute an index of the flow of services as total

property income divided by our rental price.
We use Christensen and Jorgenson's [1969] corporate

Capital Price Index.

This series ends in 1968. We update it through 1971 with the help of Berndt
and Wood's [l975b) capital input price index.

Total property income is calculated as value added less total payroll
(both from the ASM).

Part B: Cross—section data
Since it is not possible to construct a cross—section price index for non
energy intermediate inputs we estimate only a three—factor K, L, E model rathet
than the four—factor K, L, B, N time series model.

—5—

Total expenditure

on capital

services is measured as value added less

.total payroll. We assume the flow of services is proportional to the stock, and
use gross book value as a proxy for input quantity. Griliches [1967] considers
this as well as several other measures involving insurance payments, rental
payments, property taxes, and depreciation but notes that the simple correlation
between all the measures is greater than or equal to .99.

L and

are measured as in the time series section. The quantity index

for energy inputs is constructed in a specIal fashion. We define a separate
"sub—production function" for energy inputs:

Q(capital,

Q

where energy

labor, "energy")

F(electricity, oil, natural gas, coal). We assumethat the energy

function is translog, so
+ E cx1lnX1 +

ln(energy)

I

E

E a.3 log X log X

ii

where
=

electricity

=

natural

=

fuel

=

coal

oil

gas

Estimating these a's and y's exactly as we do in the body of the chapter,
we can

"predict"

ln(energy) up to a constant, which is sufficient for our

purposes. This translog aggregation is permissible if the four fuel inputs are
separable from the basic proauction function.

The unit of observation is the state. All cross—section data are from
the appropriate Censuses of Manufactures.

FOOTNOTES

Chapter 2
'See Anderson [19711, Fisher and Kaysen [1962], Halvorsen [1976] and Mount,
Chapman and Tyrell [1973].

2Berndt and Wood [1975b] consider the demand for aggregate energy and other

inputs by total U.S. manufacturing. Berndt and Jorgenson [1973) and Fuss [1977]
consider the demand for individual types of energy by total U.S. and total Canadian
manufacturing respectively.
3The translog form was introduced by Christensen, Jorgenson and Lau [1971]
and [1973].

4Note that the adding—up restrictions together with the cross—equation
equality restrictions on the y1. impose linear homogeneity in prices on the cost
function.

5Note that the parameter estimates obtained from estimation of the cost share

equations can be used in (3) to compute the unit cost of aggregate energy. A1terI.L
tively, the unit cost of aggregate energy can be indexed using superlative index
numbers, see Diewert [1976).
6See Zeliner (1962] and Oberhofer and Imenta [1974].

7Jorgenson and Lau [1975] develop these restrictions in the context of translog

utility functions. The test for implicit separability is exact only at the point of
approximation. However, the test for explicit separability is invariant to the
scaling of the price variables.
8See Berndt [1977].

9Not having the elasticities of demand constrained to be constant Is one of
the major advantages of the use of a flexible functional form for the unit cost
function.
10See Krnenta [1971, pp. 443—444).

Chapter 2 (Continued)

11Consumption of residual and distillate oil is reported separately.

The quantity of fuel oil is computed by weighting the number of barrels of each
type of oil by kilowatt hours equivalent factors in U.S. Bureau of the Census

(19731. The use of prices as weights provided very similar results.

the price data are equal to average prices. The use of declining
rate schedules for electric energy and natural gas results in a divergence
between marginal and average prices for these inputs, but data on marginal prices

are not available. See Halvorsen [1975, 1976] for further discussion.
l2aUse of a .01 significance level would result in rejection of the cross—
equation equality restrictions for an additional four industries in 1971 and
five in 1962 and 1958.

13The monotonicity test at the means of the data can be interpreted as a
local test at the point of expansion, see Jorgenson and Lau [19751.

l3aA procedure proposed by Lau [1974] provides a statistical test of
concavity but was not used due to computational difficulties.

14Results for 1971 for the industries for which the model did not perform
well are given in Appendix Tables A.1 and A.2.
15The cross price elasticities should generally be smaller because the sum
of the own

and cross price elasticities is zero and most of the cross price

elasticities are positive.

16For elasticities involving coal, the weights are the shares of each
industry in consumption by the industries for which the four—input model
performed well.

17Data for 1958 were not included in the pooled regressions because 1958 was
a recession year and therefore not fully comparable with 1971 and 1962.

Chapter 2 (Continued)

[1977) obtained a virtually Identical result f or EHV for total

Canadian manufacturing for 1971.

'9Since the estimates of

are obtained holding manufacturing output

constant, these elasticities do not reflect induced output effects on
energy demand.

ChaPter2 (Continued)
20Halvorsen [1976] obtained an estimate of —1.24 for EE with cross—section
state data for total industrial demand for electric energy in 1969. The estimate
of

in that study, 0.23, is very close to the estimate of 0.20 obtained in this

study for 1971.

21See Allen [1966] and Uzawa [1962].

22Because

the Cobb—Douglas functional form is a special case of the translog

form, It is possible to test whether the more restrictive Cobb—Douglas form is

appropriate for the cost function. The Cobb—Douglas form was rejected for all
industries at the .05 level except industry 34 in 1958, industries 22, 23, 25, 27,
and 35 in 1962. and industries 23, 29, 34, and 36 in 1971.
23Estlniates of the elasticities of demand for fuel oil, natural gas, and coal

in electric power generation are reported in Atkinson and Halvorsen [1976].

Chapter 3
1The results will also provide further information on the existence of a
consistent aggregate of production and non—production workers, see Cook [1968] and
Berndt and Christensen [1974).

2Sixteenof the seventy—two estimated cross elasticities are significant at the
ten percent level using a two—tailed test.

3See Berndt and Wood (1975b1 and Fuss [1977].

Chapter 4
1The constraint that the firm is on its production function also implies
singularity of (I —

), see

Nadiri and Rosen [1973, pp. 32—33). The restrictions

are not imposed on the system of equations.

calculating intermediate— and long—run elasticities, the value of the
labor own—adjustment coefficient is set equal to one.

3Fuss [1977] reports as a representative result for Canada an estimate of
—0.49 at the means of the data for Ontario.

pte
'We could also investigate technical change through its effects on the cost

function which is dual to the production function. This would have the econometric
advantage of permitting a parametric test for constant-returns—to—scale, rather

than Imposing it as we do here. But it would also have the disadvantage of requiring us to maintain that the factor augmentation values were exogenous, since if

they are endogenous they will not show up in the dual cost function. Some
empirical work was done using a translog cost function; the results were generally
poorer than with the production function.
2Thjs is the procedure used by Sato (1970], and by Binswanger [1973] who uses
a translog cost function.

3We are looking at the reduced system of xi — 1 share equations here; for the

full system r is singular so

does not exist.

41t should be noted that there is some question about the proper estimation

of the standard errors of the parameter estimates. The Issue has to do with the
proper number of degrees of freedom for the model. The standard errors and t—
statistics here conform to Theil's [1971] and should be Interpreted as asymptotic
standard errors and t—statistics.
51n principle the cross section bias estimates should sum to zero, as do

those of the time series. This constraint is difficult to Impose given the way
in which these numbers were calculated. See above, Part B.

REFERENCES

Allen, R.G.D. [1966], iathematical Analysis for Economists. (New York St. Martin's
Press, 19€G).

Anderson, Kent P. [1971], 'Toward Econometric Estimation of Industrial Energy

Demand: An Experimental Application to the Primary Metals Industry,'
Report 11—719—NSF, The Rand Corporation, December 1971.

Atkinson, Scott E. and Robert Halvorsen, "Interfuel Subctitutinn in Steam Electric
Power Generation," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 34, No. 5 (October 1976),
pp. 959—978.

Baughman, Martin L. and Frederick S. Zerhoot [1975], "Interfuel Substitution in the

Consumption of Energy in the UnIted States, Part II. Industrial Sector,"
MIT Energy Laboratory Report MIT—EL75—007, April 1975.
Berndt, Ernst R. [1977], "On Measuring Goodness of Fit in Systems of Equations,"
University of British Columbia Research Memorandum, 1977.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Laurits R. Christensen [1973], 'The Internal Structure of

Functional Relationships: Separability, Substitution, and Aggregation,"

Review of Economic Studies, Vol. , No. 3, (July 1973), pp. 403—410.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Laurits R. Christensen [1974], 'Testing for the E:dstence of
a Consistent Aggregate Index of Labor Inputs," American Economic Review,
Vol. LXIV, ito. 3 (June 1974), pp. 391—404.

Berndt, Ernst 11. and Dale N. Jorgenson [1973], "Production Structure," Chapter 3

in D.W. Jorgenson, E.R. Berndt, L.R. Christensen and E.A. Hudson, U.S. Energy
Resources and Economic Growth, Final Report to the Energy Policy Project

(Washington, D.C.: September 1973).
Berndt, Ernst R. and David 0. Wood [1975a], 'Techno1ogical Change, Tax Policy, and
the Derived Demand for Energy," unpublished manuscript.

Berndt, Ernst R. and David 0. Wood [1975b], "Technology, Prices and the Derived
Demand for Energy," Review of Economics and Statictics, Vol. LVII, No. 3
(August 1975), pp. 259—268.

Binswanger, Hans Peter [19731, "The Measurement of Biased Efficiency Gains in

U.S. and Japanese Agricultre to Test the Induced Innovation Hypothesis,"
Ph.D. Dissertation, North Carolina State UniversIty at Raleigh, 1973.
Christensen, Laurits R. and Dale H. Jorgenson [1965], "The Measurement of U.S.
Real Capital Input, 1929—1967," The Revieu of Income and t1ealth, Vol. 15,
No. 4 (December 1969), pp. 293—320.

Christensen, Laurits R., Dale H. Jorgenson and Laurence J. Lau [1971], "Conjugate
Duality and the Transcendental. Logarithmic Production Function,"

Econometrica, Vol. 39, No. 4 (July 1971), pp. 255—256.
Christensen, Laurits R., Dale W. Jorgenson and Lawrence J. Lau [1973], "Transcendental Logarithmic Production Frontiers," Review of Economics and Statistics,
Vol. LV, No. 1 (February 1973), pp. 28—45.

Cochrane, D. and G. H. Orcutt [1949], "Application of Least Squares Regressions to
Relationships Containing Autocorrelated Error Terms," Journal of the
American Statistical Association, Vol. 44 (March 1949), pp. 32—61.
Cook, A.A., "The Demand for Coo'erating Labor in Manufacturing Industries, 1947—1964
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Washington, 1968.
Diewert, W.E. [1974], "Applications of Duality Theory," in Frontiers of Quantitativc
Economics, Volume II, M.D. Intrilligator and D.A. Hendrick, editors,

(amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing Co., 1974).
Diewert, W.E. [1973], "Separability and a Generalization of the Cobb—Douglas Cost,
Production and Indirect Utility Functions," Paper 13, Projection Studies
Section, Department of Manpower and ImmigratIon, Canada, Jnnuary 1973.
Diewert, W.E. [1976], "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers," Journal of Econometrics,
Vol. 4, No. 2 (May 1976), pp. 115—145.

Erickson, Edward N., Robert U. Spann and Robert Ciliano [1973], "Econometric
6Analysis of SubstitutIon Effects in Industrial Sector Energy Demands," Chapter

5 in Fossil Fuel Energy Demand analysis, (Jenkinton, Pennsylvania: Decision
Sciences Corporation, 1973).

Fisher, Franklin N. and Carl Kaysen [1962], A Study in Econometrics: The Demand

For Electricity in the United States (nsterdam: North—Holland Publishing
Company, 1962).

Fuss, Melvyn A. [1976], 'The Demand for Energy in Canadian Manufacturing; An
Example of the Estimation of Production Structures with

Many Inputs,"

Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 5, No. 1 (January 1977), pp. 89—116.

Griliches, Zvi (1967] "Production Functions in Manufacturing: Some Preliminary
Results" in The Theory and

Empirical

Analysis of Production, Murray Brown,

editor, (New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1967).
lialvorsen, Robert [1977a], "A Dynamic Model of Energy Demand

in

U.S. Manufacturing,"

University of Washington Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper, 1977.
Halvorsen, Robert (1976], "Demand for Electric Energy in the United States,"
Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 42, No. 4 (April 1976), pp. 610—625.

Halvorsen, Robert [1977b], "Energy Substitution in U.S. Manufacturing," Review

Economics and

Statistics,

of

forthcoming.

Halvorsen, Robert [1975], "Residential Demand for Electric Energy," Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. LVII, No. 1 (February 1975), pp. 12—18.
Hicks, John It. [1935], The Theory of Wages, (L'ew York: The MacMillan Company, 1935).

Jorgenson, D.W. and Z. Griliches [1967], "The Explanation of Productivity Change,"
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. )OCCIV, No. 3, pp. 249—283.

Jorgenson, Dale

W. and Lawrence

J. Lau [1975], 'The Structure of Consumer Prefer-

ences," Annals of Economic and

Social

Measurement, Vol. 4, No. 1 (January

1975), pp. 49—101.

Klein, Lawrence K. and Robert Suers [19661, The Wharton Index of Capacity
Utilization, Philadelphia, Economics Research Unit, University of Pennsylvania,
1966.

Kmenta, Jan [19711, Elements of Econometrics, (New York: The Macinillian Company,
1971).

iuh, Edwin (1959), "The Validity of Crosc—Sctiona1ly Estimated Behavior Equations
in Time Series Applications," Econonietrica, Vol. 27, No. 2, Pp. 197—214.

Lau, Lawrence J. [1974) "Econometrics of Nonotonicity, Convexity, and Quasi—
Convex1ty,' Technical Report #123, Institute for Mathematical Studies in the
Social Sciences, Stanford University, 1974.
Mount, T.D., L.D. Chapman and T.J. Tyrell [1973], hElectricity Demand

in

the United

States: i\n Econometric Analysis," Report ORNL—NSF—EF—4P, Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, June 1973.
Nadiri, N. Ishaq and Sherwin Rosen [19691, "Interrelated Factor Demand

Merican Economic Review, Vol. LIX, No.
Nadiri, N. Ishaq and

4,

Functions,"

Part 1 (September 1969), pp. 457—471.

Sherwin Rosen [1973], A Disequilibrium lIodel of Demand for

Factors o Production (New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1973).
Oberhofer, W. and

J.

Kmenta [1974], "A General Procedure for Obtaining Maximum

Likelihood Estimates in Generalized Regression Models," Econometrica, Vol. 42,
No. 3 (May 1974), pp. 579—590.
Sato., Ryuzo [1970], "The Estimation of Biased Technical Progress and the Production

Functian," International Economic Review, Vol. 11, No. 2, pp. 179—208.
Star, Spencer [1974] "Accounting for the Growth of Output," American Economic Review,
Vol. LXIV, No. 1 (March 1974), pp. 123—135.

Theil, Henri [1971], PrInciples of Econometrics, (New York: John Wiley and Sons,
1971).

U.S. Bureau of the Census [1976], Manufacturers' Shipments, Inventories and Orders,

(Washington, D.C.: 1976).
U.S. Deparmtnet of Labor [1976a], The Employment Situation, (Washington, D.C.. 1976).
U.S. Department of Labor [1976b], Wholesale Price Index, (Washington, D.C.:

1976).

Uzawa, Hirofumi [1962], "Production Functions with Constant Elasticities of Substitution," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. XXIX, No. 81 (October 1962),
pp. 291—299.

Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates Release, 1976.
Ze].lner, Arnold [1962], "An Efficient !(ethod of Estimating Seemingly Unrelated

Regressions and Tests for Aggregation Bias," Journal of the American
Statistical Association, Vol. 57, No. 298 (June 1962), pp. 348—368.

