                 NB WOR}TG PAP. SERIES



            MONEY AND BCO€ CAUSALITX' DETECTION



                      Cheng Hsiao

                   Working Paper No. 167




 COUI'ER RESEARCH CENTER FOR ECONOMICS AND MANAGflIENT SCIEJCE
            National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
                      575 Technology Square
                   Cambridge, Massaciusetts 02139


                        March 1977

               Preliminary:   Not for quotation

NBER   working papers are distributed infornUy and in limited
 nuthers for comnerits only. They should not be quoted without
 written peiiiiiss ion.
 This report has not undergone the review accorded official NB
 publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for
 approval by the Board of Directors.
NBER CornDuter Research Center and University of California,
 Berkeley. Research supported in part by National Science
Foundation Grant   50C75-189l9 to the National Bureau of Econanic
Research, Inc.
                               TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                        Page

I.     INTRODUCTION .                                   1

II.    CHARACTIZATION OF FEBACK—FREE PROCESS AND
         ITS DETECTION

III.   OTHER TESTING METHODS                            11

IV.    MONEY AND INCOME CAUSALITY DETECTION   . . . .   19

V.     CONCLUSION                                       36

FOOTNOTES                                               38

REFERENCES
                                                                        1


I.   INTRODUCTION

     In economic modelling the existence and sense of direction of the

causality are often chosen on a priori grounds. However, on many occa-

sions economists fail to agree on the direction of changes, or whether

feedback is occurring. For instance, the debate between the monetarists,

who view noney as a principal cause of cliannges in nney income, and
                                                                        the
critics of this view, who say money is a passive adapter to business con-

ditions with little independent influence, has continued for decades.

Whether one or the other side proclaims the truth is largely an empirical

matter. A fundamental study of this problem has been done by Cagan in

1965 who, relying on disaggregated U.S. data from 1875—1960 and nonpara—

metric methods, argues convincingly that the long—run relation between

money supply and the price level is largely unidirectional. His analysis

of the cyclical relations between money and income fails to yield a firm

conclusion, however.

        Recently Granger (1969) gave an explicit and testable definition of

 causality and feedback. Sims (1972) used a Hilbert space argument to

 show that Granger's definition was equivalent to the existence of a parti-

 cular representation of the "driven" process with respect to the "driving"
 process and proposed a univariate regression method to test for the direc-
 tion    of causality. Since then, a significant amount of interest in the

 theory and technique of causality detection has been developed in the

 economic literature. However, the particular aspect of inference advo-

 cated by each individual author fails to yield a consensus on the parti-

 cular problem being investigated. Take the case of money and income

 causality. Sims (1972) contended that there existed a unidirectional
                                                                          2

 causality from money to GNP   in   the U.S. On the other hand, DyReys, Star-

 leaf and Wang (1976)1, Feige and Pearce (1974), etc., based on different

methods, contended that money and income were, at most, weakly related.

Neither is the pattern uniform f or inter—country comparison. For instance,

Wall (1974) found that money was the driving force for income in the U.K.,

while Williams, Goodhart and Gowland (1976) found the reverse causality

to be the case.

        The dispute, as we see it, stems at least in part from concern over

the errors associated with the classical hypothesis testing where we may

(i) wrongly reject the true (null) hypothesis (type I error), or (ii)

wrongly accept the false (alternative) hypothesis (type II error). Take

the simple example of two uncorrelated processes      {xt, y• If both are
first—order autoregressive processes with parameters      and   respectively,
then the variance of the estimated ktl order cross—correlation ((k))

is:


                                a
                                    (1+
(1)              Var ((k))          (1-.   )



where    T is the sample size. For white noise the corresponding result

is:



(2)              Var ((k))


Hence if aS is positive, (1) is inflated relative to (2), whereas if

a5 is negative, (1) is deflated. Equation (1) then shows that very large

cross—correlations, all of them spurious, can be generated between two

uncorrelated   processes as a result of the large autocorrelations within

the two processes (for economic examples, see Granger and Newbold [1974]).
                                                                        3


An incorrect inference about the nature of time series data would then set

a critical region which would either give too high a significance level and

too low a power or vice versa. The concern of such a "spurious regression1'

phenomenon led Pierce and Haugh (1977) to propose causality detection based

on cross—correlations of whitened series, which may be viewed as an at-

tempt to set the correct significance level. The concern of "spurious

independence," or the power of the test, led people to propose testing

procedures based on a direct multivariate autoregressive—moving average

model fitting, generalized least square method, etc. (Caines and Chan

[1975], DyReyes, Starleaf and Wang [1976], Sims [1972, 1975], Wall [1974],

etc.). In this paper we intend to survey and suggest the theoretical

framework of the important aspects of causality detection with the pur-

pose of conveying to the reader the essential features and the different

forms in which inferences may be drawn from given data.

     Section II presents the basic theorem characterizing the causality

events and suggests two feedback detection methods which, like the

one suggested by Pierce and Haugh (1977), are based on correlation analy-

sis. In Section III we survey other well—known causality detection

methods and try to relate and to compare them with the methods suggested

in Section II. Section IV briefly reviews the theoretical controversy

of the relationship between money and income and presents some empirical

evidence based on the methods discussed in this paper. Conclusions are

in Section V.
                                                                                   4


II. CHARACTERIZATION OF FEEDBACK—FREE PROCESS AND ITS DETECTION

        Let fi , y } be joint covariance stationary, purely linearly in—

deterministic, processes. Let At be the given information set, includ-

ing at least Cx., y}, and AtXt be the information set apart from
                                                                              X.
Let At =    {A:s<t},        =   {A:s<t},   and similarly define X1, '1                 Denote by

2 (YIB) the mean square error of the minimum mean square error prediction

of Y given information set B .                 Granger's (1969) definition of causali-
ty and feedback are:2

        Definition 1 (Causality): If a2(YIA) <          2(yI), we say that X
is causing Y, denoted by X
        Definition 2 (Feedback): If a2(Y) <             2(YI)      ,   and

2(x) <          (XV), we say that feedback is occurring, denoted by

 tt
        To give an operative meaning of these definitions, we write the

linearly regular processes X and Y as:


(3)                              +    b.
                       aj
                j0

            x          cj        +d
where      and r are mutually uncorrelated white noise processes with unit

variance. In order to make the representation (3) unique, we take
                                                                              a0
to be zero and a0, d0 positive. The following theorem is proved by

Caines and Chan (1975), Sims         (1972).
                                                                        5



Theorem 1: If YX relative to the information set A, the following

statements are equivalent:

     (i) c identically zero.

     (ii) the least squares estimate            of   given the observations

   is identical to the estimate          of y given {xt}, for
 = . .   . , —1,0,1,   .




     (iii)if XY, there exists a unique representation of y with res-
pect to x of the form

              =
                       I( x_ + .JL   L   t—j'

where the processes x and       are orthogonal.

     Based on this theorem, various testing procedures have been proposed

to detect feedback. In this section, we propose yet two more testing

procedures. The methods are based on the idea of correlation between

two time series rather than regression analysis. In regression theory,

one variable is considered random or "dependent" and others fixed or

"independent." In correlation several variables are considered and

treated synmietrically. Since both X and Y are stochastic, we feel it

is more natural to consider them in terms of a correlation approach rather

than a regression approach. Of course, if we start with a joint normal

distribution, we arrive at the same tests in either case when the two

procedures are independent. The probability theory under the null hypo-

thesis is the same. However, if the alternative is true, the distribution

of the test criterion will be different.
                                                                                  6.
      Let        be a unique orthogonal projection matrix of            on

{x5Is<t} and let            be a unique orthogonal projection matrix of y on

X. Define

(4)         v =   (I   —
                                x
and
            Ut
                  (I —
                           fl
(5)         P(k) E (utvt+k).

By construction P(k) = 0 for k            0. Then

Lemma 1: P(k) = 0           for all k > 0, if and only if Y+X.



Proof: A direct proof is obtained by noting that from              theorem 1(u) the

partial covariances of y and              for   j   1 given X are zero. Thus

the   if part follows immediately. To prove that leia 1 implies all par—

tia]. covariances between y and            given     are zero, we note that

            0 only when u is orthogonal to                  By the inductive argu-

ment of the orthogonality principle, we conclude that P(k) = 0                 for

all k > 0 states that ut            is orthogonal to I .       Therefore lmm 1

holds.

      To devise testing methods from lpimn 1, we assume that the linear

regular nondeterministic process (3) satisfies the stability condition.

Therefore we can approximate it by a finite order autoregressive pro-

cess. Under the null hypothesis of no feedback from y                 to x, the

probability distribution of x given (X_Xt...,)          ,
                                                              P   (xIx_i, .   . .,
for    p sufficiently large, would be approximately a white noise.             The

correlation between Vt+k and          will then have mean zero and asymptotic

variances (T—p)1 .          Thus, one way to test feedback is to:
                                                                              7


       Test 1: Regress x on past x's, and denote the residual by

Regress y on current and past x's and denote the residual by              Compute

the cross—correlation coefficient between           and
                                                          t+k'
                                                                 (k), where

(6)         r(k) = [cA(O)      .
                                   c'(O)]   cA(k)

and c.(O), c.(O) and C-(k) are the sample variances and cross—covariances

of u, v. The test statistic calculated would be


(7)             =
                    (T_p)?(k)

       In a large sample this statistic is approximately chi—square distri-

buted with M degrees of freedom under the null hypothesis, because the

asymptotic distribution of a finite set of lagged cross—correlations

between two independent linear processes is normal (Hannan [1971, p. 230]).

The proof of (k) having the same asymptotic distribution follows

straightforwardly from that of Haugh (1976) except for the minor        compli-
cation here that although v is a white noise process, u is not. How-

ever, the independence of u and v implies that c(k) is still of

O(T); thus,         there is no change in the basic argument. Neither is there

a reduction in the degrees of freedom for this test because the constraints

placed on the residuals by the fitting process did not play a crucial role

as that in the case of Box and Pierce (1970) or Chitturi (1974).

       Quenou.Lli   (1948) showed, by a sampling experiment, that when the two series
 are   uncorrelated, the variances are approximately (T—p)1, even for small samples,
 and the bias is small.' On the other hand, if the alternative is true, the
 cross—correlation estimates based on moments are not necessarily efficient. The
                                                                        8


variance/covariance matrix of the cross—correlation functions are now

complicated functions of the true autocorrelation functions and the true

cross—correlation functions (Hannan [1971, Ch. 4]). The efficiency of

the statistics, as test statistics, depends not only on their variance

under the null hypothesis but also on their distribution when the null

hypothesis is not true. Although it does not necessarily follow that a

more powerful test will be obtained by using a statistic which is more

efficient than the one which is less efficient, there is a strong intui-

tive appeal to use a statistic which is consistent and asymptotically

efficient under both the null and the alternative. It is likely to be

locally more powerful than others (see Kendall andStuart [1961, Ch. 25],

Rao [1962], and the discussion in Section III below).

       The reason one suspects Test 1 is not fully efficient is that the       )


stochastic   processes (vs, Ut) are not serially independent. Using spec-

tral representation, we can trade our sequence of dependent random vari-

ables for a sequence of independent random variables. Thus, an approxi-

mate likelihood ratio test can be proposed for the two residual time series.

       The null hypothesis in the frequency domain can be stated as:

           H0: F(w) diagonal for aLl. ,

where
                      f (w) f   ((i))

 (8)         F() =
                      [u;               ]



             f(w) =   ir
                      -Lexp(_it)c(T),
                  =
                      *exp(_ir)cv(t),
                        Zexp(...t)c(t)       Iexp(_ir)c(T) (by construction)
                                                                                                      9



             c(t) = E [(ut_Eut) (uEUt)],                          c(T) =   E
                                                                               [(v_Evt)(v+1_Evt)],

             C(t) =       E
                              [(ut_EU)(v+_Evt)].

     If the spectra are sufficiently smooth, they can be divided into M

bands between (O,ir )         such that for each band each spectral matrix is con-

stant (see Wahba [1968] for a precise condition). We can then obtain an

estimate of (w) by first transforming                             and ' into Vu(Wd) and

         where

                      = (211)2
             w(wd)                               exp(itwd)

             w() =        (2irn)                    exp(itwd)
             d = 1,   .   . .           [n/2]   ,   with    n = (T—2p) and (]     the   largest

integer not greater than the indicated number. Let m                              satisfy      mM =

As   T- , we can group the Wd into i sets (excluding
                                                                                    =    0),   the Lth

which we call S, containing m adjacent d nearest to .                                   We   put


                                          W(Wd) w (Wd)
                              W     S
                                  dC

                      = 1
                          ; WdS w(w) w
             -                     r
                                   1.




             f uv(w)
                  i in                      u d         v     d
                              WdCS

where   the super asterisk indicates transposition combined with conjugation.

Under appropriate conditions, such an estimate is consistent (see Anderson

 [1971, Ch. 10], Brillinger [1975, Ch. 7]).

      The approximate likelihood ratio test for the null hypothesis is

 given by:
                                                                                                 10



Test 2:


                                   I'(w    )l
 9)            A
                                  () 1(w                  i     [1 —
                                                                       R(wfl
where
                             =
(10)
               R()
which is a measure of causal coherence from y to x                             Although (10) is

different from the definition given by Granger (1969) ,                         it may be viewed
as a direct generalization. We note that F(), 21, . .                              .H   ,   is
asymptotically indepently distributed as complex Wishart distribution

m1 W     {m,F(UL)} under appropriate conditions.5 Since the distribution

in the complex case               is   identical with the real case except for having

twice the sample size and twice the variable dimensions, we can show,

by    a similar manipulation as                     Anderson (1958, ch. 9) and   Wahba (1968),
that   when H is           true

(11)           A"    It




where         are M independent beta random variables with 2(m-.1) and 2
degrees of      freedom.          Therefore
(12)                 =
                          — log        A



has    mean
              rn-i       and variance
                                            M(m-1)
                                                           under the null hypothesis. Choose
m (large)      fixed and let H+°                ,    it is asymptotically normally distributed.
        If   the   sample size is large, this causal spectral analysis has
conceptual      advantages for conveying information about interdependent

events. Usually it also has                         desirable   properties for working with

reasonably smoothed spectra. For instance, if no feedback is occurring,
                                                                                 11




the residual spectra f. would be approximately a constant over the

frequency. If feedback Is occurring, then simply removing past effects

of x would not, in general, make f constant. On the other hand, if

feedback does occur, the causal coherence squared (10) would give a

measure of the strength of causality Y-'-X plotted against frequency.

We can   also    define causal phase and gain by
                        =
(13)
                ip(w)         arctan[ Imag(fw))1
                                          Re (f))
and
                            f (w2,) 1/2
(14)
            G(w)              ()
accordingly      to give us an idea of the causal lead and       amplification
or   attenuation from Y to X at each frequency component
                                                                  w.

III. OTHER TESTING TH0DS

       In this section, we try to relate the two testing procedures

suggested in the last section to other well—known testing procedures,

which are based on prefiltering and          regression   methods and, to the extent

possible, compare their relative power. All these tests are derived

from various equivalent statements of theorem 1.

       Test 3 (Sims test): From theorem 1(u),         Sims(1972)    suggested an F

test for causal detection. That is, first regress Y on past and future

values of X, taking account by generalized least squares or prefiltering

of the serial correlation in the residuals. If there is no feedback from

Y to X, future values of X in the regression should have coefficients

insignificantly different from zero, as a group.
                                                                                               12


        Test 4 (Pierce and Haugh (1976), Wall(1974)): First use separate
filters on X and Y to ensure that each is very nearly pre—whitened.
Then use cross—correlation analysis to determine whether the residuals
of the two prewhitened series are cross—correlated. If causality runs
from    X to Y    only, all the cross—correlations between                  the residuals of

X and    lagged    residuals of Y should be insignificantly different from

zero. Haugh (1976) showed that .mder the null hypothesis these esti-

mated residual cross correlations are asymptotically normally distributed

with mean      zero    and   variance   1/n. Thus
                          M
(15)              f=fl rk
                     k=1
is chi—square          distributed   with M degrees of freedom.

        Test 5:       From theorem 1(iii), it       is clear that one way to test

feedback free is to test the independence between the stochastic regres-

sors x and       the   disturbances v.     Various testing methods have been sug-
gested    by Wu (1973). However, the power               of   these tests depend crucially

upon the available instrumental variables. Therefore, except mentioning

it as a possible candidate, we shall            not      elaborate on it here.

        Test 6    (Direct test): From theorem 1(1):, we can test                  for feedback

free    by fitting an impulse response function                to   model    (1) and then   test

whether C=O. Such a procedure has             been   applied by Caines and Chan

(1975),    and   Wall    (1974), etc. on British data.

        All   these    tests have the same    distribution when         the null    hypothesis
   is true. It is, however, of no use               to   know merely what properties

a critical region         will   have when H holds.           For   in general we can   find
many,    and often      even an infinity, of sub—regions W of the sample               space,
all    having the same significance level. The problem of testing a hypothesis
                                                                                13


is essentially one of choice between the tests which minimize the proba-
bility of    a type II error, after controlling the probability of a type

I error. Although all these tests are consistent under the alternative

hypothesis in the sense that the power of the test, defined as the pro-

bability of rejecting the null hypothesis H0 when H0 is false,

approaches one when sample size goes to infinity, their relative effi—

ciencie.s are not identical. In particular, the power of these tests is

not independent of the process characterizing the perceived driving

forces. We use         following   simple examples to illustrate their inter-

relationships, and        to   the extent possible, compare their relative

efficiency.

        Consider the null hypothesis of the following simple model U0:

(16)          yu
              x = cc1 +
 against    the alternative H1:
(17)          x = t—l + >'t1t
where u and     are serially and mutually independent G aussian random
variables with mean zero and variances aU2 and V2 Then a direct test
 (test 6)    of no feedback from y to x is to construct the statistic

 (18)                   XA       1 B1Yt_1AXt
                   =                           .(T3)
                           xxt
 where         X are (T—1)xl vectors of (y2 ...,
             and                                      and (X2....,XT),
 and d is the least square estimate of the coefficient of
                                                               (of the

 regression of   on x1 and yi)M = I — Z(Z'Z)                1Z, with   I the (T—1)
 rowed identity matrix, Z = [X1, Y1], A I —
                                                                                                  14




B =               — YiXti(X_iXt_i)1Xt...iYt_i.                       '6 has   an F distribution

with 1 and T—3 degrees of freedom wider the null hypothesis and a non—

central F distribution with the non-centrality parameter cSB1S/a2 under

the    alternative hypothesis.
     We also use basically the same statistic for test 1 and 2 Since, wider
the null hypothesis, x conditional. on x_1 is a white noise, the classical
test based on R in the case of test 1 is equivalent to using the statistic
As far as test 2 is concerned,because conditional on x1, x and          are

white noise processes, their spectra and cross—spectra are flat, therefore M =                         1

and the      estimate of the spectral density matrix in this case is:
                                   n
                                   2         w(w)
                 !(O) =
 (19)
                                   j1 vd
                                   (1
                                         {                         wV(_d)) ÷ wU(_. (w(wd) ,w(d))}
                                                                                 v
                                                                                 d

                                   2           w(w)
                              Ii               wW         (wU(_d)) w(_wd))
                                   j=1
 Equation (19) is asymptotically distributed as a real Wishart distribu-
 tion of dimension 2 and degrees of freedom n(=T—2) (Brillinger (1974),
 theorem 7.3.3). Therefore, A has a beta distribution with T—3(n1)
                                                                       1
 and    1   degree of freedom. Since                      A=                   , we have
                                                               l+(1/T—3)Fl,T—3


 (20)             (T-3)   •                  = l,   T-3
                                                          =


                   is the same as test 1 in this case except that the
         Test 3, which
 former uses the regression analysis while the latter uses the correla-
 tion       analysis, uses the statistic:
                                                                                                 15




                            Yt—1AXtD1X tAYt—l
                      —
                            Y1iY           —
                                               /T—3

                      =           ÷ B(Y_iAXtD1XAYt_i)}'
                           {—i.


                      =           '
where
                   =      I—
                 I = (X, Xvi),
                 D =                  —
                       [XX
That    is,    Sims   test in this case is identical to the likelihood ratio
test    in the paraineteric model.

       Although test 1, 2 and                    3 and 6 use the same statistic,     they are

based on different conceptions about the joint distribution of y and                      x.
The probability theory under                      the null hypothesis is the same whether one
uses the correlation analysis or the regression analysis. The distri-
bution    of the test criterion when the null hypothesis is not true differs

in the two       cases (see               Anderson (1958)). Thus   the   power   function will   be

different       even though the same test is valid in each case. Whether
one prefers the former approach to the latter wiil be largely a matter
of judicious choice and individual preference. However, when T-.c , the
results are identical in both situations. (Kendall and Stuart                           (1965,

ch.    26)).
        Test 4 in this case uses the statistic
(22)                       X;AY..1(Y_jYt_1)Y;_1AX
                       =                                       •(T—3)
                  4
                           XAII_Y(YiY_iY'Y]AX
                                                                                                       16



Under the null. hypothesis              c4
                                             is again F distributed with 1 and T—3 degrees
of freedom. However, under the alternative the test is less powerful
than the testing procedures just mentioned. Since the difference of the
numerator of 6                    iS

(23)           XAY_i(Y_1Yi)'Y_iX_i D1XiYi(YiYt_1)1YiAXt,
which is positive       definite, while the denominator of                            is equal to the

denominator of 6 plus                 (23). Thus, although test 4 has the advantage of
eliminating    possible spurious correlation, it overkills by losing the

power of the test, which may partially contribute to the fact that most

of the time    series       Pierce (1977) studied showed no sign of causation.

       When      fo1bo a first order autoregressive process:

(24)                =             +
                                      Ut,
the    direct test            is independent of such a change in the characteriza—                          )



tion   of the perceived driving forces, but not for other testing methods.

For instance, to        apply Sims test without taking account the serial cor-
relation in    the residual is identical to the direct test, which is a

likelihood ratio test. However, the estimated residuals of the least

squares regression of                       on   and              are   now   serially      correlated.

The estimated serial correlation coefficient of the residual tends to

               av2D_htpz(_1x2(1_D_xx(2fl
                  2 —2 2
                                 ]—2d 2D—1{l+D—l
                              2                                                  2
                   D     [1+ (1)                                                     (1)]
where                         2
                              U
                                              l+aY+
         X
               =
                    (1—cL2)   (l_y2)
                                              lcr 1-a
                                  2()              __    2
          2
                    i2) (j.2) (l—ccy)
                              U
                                                      1—ct2       i

                       2c 2(aZ...yZ)                          2

       a2(2)    =                      +
                    (l-ct2)(1-)(l-cty)
                =
                        2
                                                                                       17




The usual procedure of re—estimating the model using the r—differenced
data will, instead of increasing the power, in general lower the power
of the test, thus making comparison of the power of test 3              and   test 6
very   tricky. The reason        that   such an adjustment is not necessarily

optimal is because under the alternative, the regressors are not inde-

pendent of the residuals. The prob].eni is similar to the errors—in—

variables case analyzed by Grether and          Haddala   (1973). It might     partially
explain why DyReyes, Starleaf and Wang (1976) found a              reduction in the
F—statistic   value     using   the generalized least squares method.

       A different problem arises for tests 1 and 2 with the change             in   the

characterization of the driving forces. We note that now y no longer

possesses a flat spectrum. The lagged cross correlations between the

two   time series   under study are not zero under the alternative hypothesis.

The theoretical coherence diagram is no longer a constant. However, it

is virtually impossible to compare test 6 with test 2. Test 6 presupposes

a known structure of the model, while test 2 takes account of any               given
lag   structure   and   gives   equal weight to all   frequency    components. Of

course, if the structure of the model is known, a direct test has               the
advantages of essentially weighting          each component by its importance
and also   having better tests available for use          with   it.


       Although   a direct comparison between test 2 and test 6          is impossible,

a   comparison of the asymptotic relative power of test 1 and test 6
may shed some light. We know that under the null, both tests have the
same central      F distribution. Under the specified alternative, test 6              is a
                                                                                          18




likelihood ratio test, but not test 1 because of the serial dependence

of                However, even in such an ideal case for direct test, one

fails    to establish the optimum property of a regression approach. The
criterion we use for evaluating the asymptotic efficiency of a test is
the concept of asymptotic relative effiency [iandail and Stuart (1961,
ch. 25)).
        Suppose     and      are statistics of an hypothesis specified by a
parameter e, computed from a sample of size T, their asymptotic
efficiency as tests is defined as:
                                                       2
(25)        e(t2,t2J )      = 11 {-.E(t1)]ée}               Var (t21800)
                              T- Var(t1I80)

where E(ri) and    Var    (Ti)
                                 are   respectively    the expected value and variance         )

of    r, i =    1, 2. The justification for this criterion is that, tider
certain regularity conditions, for               and        to have the same power
                                                       12
against    alternative values of 0 which differ from             0 by quantities    of
            1/2 is in the limit given by
order T                                          e(r1,12100). It can       be   shown   that
for    test 6
                                         2
(26)                         =
                                 (l_y2)Z
While   Test 1 is equivalent to test the partial correlation between
and     with the effects of x removed, thus

           fE[r(xt+iyIx))2                        n(1_cz2)2
(27)                                         =
            Varfr(x÷iyIx)]             =o
                                                                                   19



        Therefore the asymptotic relative efficiency for test 1 relative to

test 6 is:

(29)               e =
                         (1_cLy)2
              2i
If       >
               +    ,e   < 1..     It follows that even in the

ideal case when we know the true structure of the model, it is not necessarily

true that a direct test would be more powerful than test 1. Actually, none

of the statistics considered so far are asymptotically fully efficient in gen-

eral. However, a direct test presupposes a structure of the model, but other

testing methods do not. Test 3 in the ideal case is a likelihood ratio test,

but there is a problem of whether to adjust for serial correlation. Test 1

is    basically the same as test        3 except   that we choose a correlation approach
which allo''s us to get around this problem in some sense. On the other hand,
test 4    prefilters time series data to eliminate serial dependence, but it is

deficient because of the low power under the alternative. Test 2 puts the
time series data in the frequency domain, thus allowing us to write down the
approximate likelihood           function neatly. The test statistic with the inforina—

tion    generated by the causal coherence and phase         diagram would give a measure

of    the strength of the causality and the         extent of the time lags Y-X   plotted
against      frequency. They give a more complete picture of the relationship

between the time series than just some summary statistics.


IV.    DNEY AND INCOME CAUSALITY DETECTION

       The description of the money—income relationship has been a subject of
much debate in     economic literature. Standing on one side are the quantity

theorists who claim that money or its rate            of change tends to "lead" income.
(Friedman and Schwarz [963, Friedman [1970], Brunner and Meltzer [1964], etc.)
Standing on the other side are the new viewers who provide explicit examples

of the possibilities for non—correspondence between causal ordering and tem-

poral ordering of turning points (Brainard and Tobin [1968], Tobin [1970], etc.)
                                                                              20
                                                                                         T)
The    extreme critics even maintain that the money supply has no relevant place
in the determination of money income. They attribute the association between
money supply and income to the demand for money which contains income as an
important    argument. The money stock is somehow called forth to meet the

demand.    For    instance, Davis (1968), Gramley   and Chase   (1965), Kazken (1967),

etc.,    contend that cyclical fluctuations of monetary growth cannot be      attri—

buted to the behavior of the Federal Reserve authorities. These fluctuations
are claimed to result primarily from the behavior of commercial banks and the
public.
       The monetarists, on the other hand, although agreeing with the general
relevance of money and income, are far from reaching a consensus with regard
to the impact of economic activity on money supply. The strong view (e.g.,

L. Anderson [1968])contends that the behavior of the monetary authorities

dominates movements in money income. The weak view (e.g., Cagan [1965], Fried-

man and   Schwartz    [1963])does not exclude feedback from income to the money

supply,   except that the   monetary impulses are considered the major factor

accounting      for variations in money income.
      Such controversies can only be resolved by empirical studies. In
this section we use the concepts of feedback and causality as they apply
to stochastic processes to derive a time series interpretation of the
direction of cause and effect. Hopefully it will shed some light on
this empirically difficult problem.
       We use   seasonally adjusted U.S. quarterly money stock and current
dollar   measures of GNP from 1947 I to   1976 II, for our analysis.
Both   N]. and N2 were used as alternative measures of money stock variables.

All variables were measured as     natural logs. Following Sims (1972), we
prefiltered each logged variable using the filter 1 — 1.5L + .5626L2.
Tests    for the direction of causality were then performed using methods
1 to 4 di iid in 2 nd
                                                                                21



    Test 3 uses identically the same method as Sims (1972). The income

(or money) variable was regressed on current, eight past lags and four

future money (or income) variables together with a constant term, trend

and seasonal dummies, to test for income—money (or money—income) feedback.
If the four future coefficients are significant by an F—test, then we say

that feedback is occurring.

     Separate autoregressive processes were fitted to prewhiten the

money and income series before constructing test 4. Whether the direc-

tion of causality goes one way or another depends upon whether the chi—

square statistic based on the first four positive or negative cross—

correlations between the residuals of money and income is significant or not.

     Tests 1 and 2 use a different methodology. To test for causality

direction from money to income, we first regress income on its own part

and the constant term to remove its past effect. Then we regress money

on current and past incomes and the constant term to remove the effect

of income variables on money. Test 1, just like test 4, then computes

the chi—square statistics from the cross—correlations between the resi-

duals of these two series to test for the feedback from money to income.

Test 2, on the other hand, uses the money series, with the effect of in-

come removed, and the income series, with its past effects removed, to

compute   the causal coherence and   uses   the normal.   distribution as its

large   sample approximation to determine the significance of the feedback.
To test for causality from income to money, we similarly remove past
effects   of money from money and income series.

     The results of these tests were reported in Tables 1 and 2. All

these   tests indicate that the feedback from income to money, if any, was
                                                                   22



                         TABLE 1: ONEY TO P FEEDBACK DETECTION


                                     Ni                   N2

        (x2)                      11.097838*           29.3291**
    1     L




(N(O,1))                           1.06383              4.6479**



                                   7.81875**           14.1563**
    3(F.86 )

                                   8.76262              8.39573




*              Significant at 5% level.
**             Significant a 1% level.
                                                                        23




                           TABLE 2: GNP TO })NEY FEEDBACK DETECT ION



                                       Ml                     M2

                                     1.68625                3.92849
1(x)


4(N(O,1))                           —0.294991              —0.749216




        (F            )               0.011231               0.936669
    3
             Li.,86




        (x2)                          0.35256                4.39254
 Lf          L




*                Significant   at 5% level.

**               Significant   at 1% level.
                                                                                   24



extremely weak, hence confirming Sims' (1972) earlier finding. However, the
test for causality from money to income is less conclusive. Tests 1 and
3 confirm Sims earlier result that causal relation runs           from   Ml to income,
but not for tests 2 and 4. The reason that these results are different might
be explained by the observ-ation mentioned in the introduction. That is,
if the 'residual money and income data were not serially independent,
tests 1 and 3 might be in favor of the alternative hypothesis, hence
generating spurious correlations. On the other hand, tests 2 and 4 take
explicit account of the serial dependence of the time series data, thus
proper precautions were taken against spurious dependence. However, as
demonstrated in 3, the power of test 4 is low, thus wil]. in general favor

the null   hypothesis   of no relations. But test 2 does not have this de-

ficiency. That    is why test 2, as       well as tests 1 and   3,   shows that feed-

back from M2 to income is occurring, but test 4 is not.

     Figures 1 to 10 also provide a heuristic argument in favor of the

assertion that causality        runs   from N2 to income only. These figures of

causal coherence, phase diagran, gain and residual spectra of money and

income gave a more complete picture about the lead—lag relation between

two time series and their strength, which were used to derive our summary

statistics. For instance, figures 1 to 5 gave the sample measures of causal

coherence, phase, gain, and the residual spectra of QP and l2 after the

effects of past M2 were removed. Figures 6 to 10 gave the similar measures

with regard to H2 and GNP after removing the past effects of GNP. A com-

parison of causal coherence squared (fig. 1 and 6) and the gain from GNP

to M2aud 112 to         (fig.    3 and 8) indicate that the net effect of M2 to

GNP is much stronger than        the   net effect of GNP to M2.      Figure   7 indicates
                                                                               25


that   the causal lead from   M2 to   GNP   is consistent,   but figure 2 shows a

noisy lead—lag relationship from GNP to M2. Furthermore, figures 9 and 10

indicate that even after removing past effects of income variables, the

residual spectra of money and     income do not approximate white noise pro-
cesses. On the other hand, figures 4 and 5 indicate that once the past

effects of M2 were removed, the residual 142 spectrum approximates a white

noise process, but not the residual QiP spectrum, thus favoring the uni-

directional     causal relationship between 142 and GNP.
       On   the basis of tables 1 and 2 and the information provided by the
causal coherence, phase, gain and the residual spectra, we may confirm
the monetarists' contention that the proper definition of money is 142 and
that money or its rate of change "lead" incoii in some sense.
                                                       26




                          -                      0



                                                 0




                                                 U




                                                 a,
                                             N   Cl
                                                 c)




                                                 "-I




    I II   I I   II   I I IL   I I   I   I

N
             27




       0


      '4-I
       0

       '-I

      i-I



      p4




      0



      i-I
      r4




'.4
0425


0.325



0.225



0.125



0.025
   0.000   0.100         0.280              0.300            0.400   0.500


             Figure 3:   Causal Gain   of   GNP   to   142


                                                                             t\)
-14.50



—14.98



—15.30



—15.70



                     a   a    a           a   a   a   a       a   a   a   a   a   I I    t
         a                        i
—1e          e.tae                0.200               0.300               0.4e0         Ø500


               Figure    4:   Log—spectrum of N2 after removing the
                              effects of past N2                                               I',
                  30




                  0
                  8




                   I



I',
I.
N     F,,
            '-4
           3:1.




1
      0



    4-4
     0
     a)
     4

    Cl)

     a)
     Q
     a)
     a)

    C-,

    '-I
     Cd



     Cd




     F
    .1-I
                  32




        1
            0



            0




            C-,




N   N
                          33




                   p.4



                    0


                    0
                   •1-1

                   0
                   '-.4




                   0
               S   cc
                    '2)


                    p
                   •1-4




1•   N   '-4   0
                       34




                 C.,

                4-4
                4-4




                430




                U
               4-4




               4-4
                0
                2

               U



                OU-4




               430
               •r4




N     N
Ccj       Ui
 I    I
          4




     0




 1   10




i3.4c3




          elee             0.200          0.300          0.400   0.500

              Figure 10:   Log—spectrum of GNP after removing
                           effects of past GNP


                                                                         U'
                                                                               36


V.     CONUSION

       In this paper we suiimiarized the basic theorem characterizing causality
events and surveyed edsting testing methods. We also presented two
alternative testing procedures. One used          partial   correlation analysis,
the other suggested a causal        coherence   likelihood ratio test. The latter has
the    advantage of eliminating spurious correlation without the deficiency
of losing the power of the test. It is felt that if one suspects that
feedback    rather   than   unidirectional   causality is occurring in the model, the
correlation approach may       be   an appropriate one to use. Since the regression
analysis presupposes the dependence of one or more variables upon others,
while feedback is essentially a problem of interdependence, an
interest in the joint distribution of a pair of random variables. Fur-
thermore, it provides a unified approach towards the problem of adjust-
ment for serial dependence, which the univariate regression approach does
not.

       In section 3 we offered sri explanation of why various causality

detection methods might yield different conclusions. Section 4 applied

these methods to the empirical detection of causal direction between

money and income. We found that the relationship between Ml and GNP

was dubious, but the relationship between M2 and GNP was stable. Both

the suary statistics and the spectra diagrams indicated that there

was a strong unidirectional influence from M2 to (P.
       Based on the experience of analyzing money and income relationship

and the theoretical discussions in section 2 and 3, we feel that if the

sample size is small, and the residuals were serially uncorrelated, Sims

test is a powerful one to use and is easy to implement. If the sample size
                                                                         37



is   large, then causal spectral analysis would be a powerful exploratory
tool. Of course, parametric estimation should be regarded as the ultimate
goal in   this kind of work. However, the empirical identification of

multivariate autoregressive—moving average processes may   not   be feasible

in   many occasions. (See Akaike (1974) for some theoretical discussions
and Caines and Chan (1975), Wa].1 (1974) for some actual fitting). The
main value of causal spectral analysis is in its flexLbility in examining
the sources of variations in the data. It can be used    to suggest possible

models.
                                                                               38


                                  FOOTNOTES



1.     The result of their method III only.



2.     These definitions correspond to the weak feedback—free (WFF) process

given by Caines (1976). Cams also gave a corresponding definition on

causal process pairs without instantaneous causality (Granger [1969],

Pierce and Haugh [1977]), which he refers to as strong feedback—free

process (SFF). All the tasting procedures to be discussed below can be

easily   modified to test for SFF. However, since it is difficult       to say

who is    causing whom when instantaneous causality was   observed   and the

strong   belief by this author that should there be a causal relation

between two time series variables, the inertia    will make it   last into

future,   we choose the WFF definition.                                             )




3.     If we wish to test for strong feedback—free, we regress y on past
x' s   only and sum 2,(k) from k=O to kM in (7) and check for the critical

region of chi—square statistic with (?*1) degrees of freedom.



4.     The —p) here is not an adjustment of degrees of freedom, but
because we have only (T—p) estimated residuals.


5.     For a precise condition, see 3riUinger (1975) or Wahba (1968).

6.     I feel compelled to compare these various tests at its idea]. setup
with the given    prior   information. Otherwise, there are too many    alter-

natives to choose    from.
                                                                    39


                                 RefErences


Akaike, H. (1974) "A New Look at the Statistical Model Identification."
      IEEE on Automatic Control, AC—19, 716—723.

Anderson, L. (1968) "Monetary and Fiscal Actions: A Test of Their Relative
      Importance in Economic Stabilization." Federal Reserve Bank of St.
      Louis Monthly Review 50 (November 1968), 11—23.

Anderson, T.W. (1958) An Introduction to Multivariate Analysis. Wiley,
      New York.

_____________     (1971)   The Statistical Analysis of Time Series. Wiley,
      New York.

Box, G.E.P. and D.A. Pierce. (1970) "Distribution of Residual Autocorre-
      lations in Autoregressive—Integrated Moving Average Time Series
      Models." Journal of the American Statistical Association 65, 1509—
      1526.

Brainard, W. and J. Tobin. (1968) "Pitfalls of Financial Model Building."
      American Economic Review Proceedings 58, 99—122.

Bril].inger, D.R. (1975) Time Series: Data Analysis and Theory. Holt,
      Rinehart and Winston, San Francisco.

Brunner, K. and A.H. Meltzer. (1966) "A Credit Market Theory of the Money
      Supply and an Explanation of Two Puzzles in U.S. Monetary Policy."
      Essays in Honor of Macro Fanno. Padova, Italy.

Cagan, P. (1965) Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of
      Money. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., New York.

Caines, P.E. (1976) "Weak and Strong Feedback Free Processes." IEEE Trans.
      Automatic Control, AC—21, 737—739.

___________ and C.W. Chan. (1975) "Feedback between Stationary Stochastic
      Process." IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, AC—20, 498—508.

Chitturi, R.V. (1974) "Distribution of Residual Autocorrelations in
      Multiple Autoregressive Schemes." Journal of the American Statistical
      Association 69, 928—934.

Davis, R.G. (1968) "The Role of the Money Supply in Business Cycles."
      Monthly Review, FRB of New York (April 1968).

DyReyes, F.R. Jr., D. Starleaf and G.H. Wang. (1976) "Tests of the Direc-
      tion of Causation Between Money and Income in Developed Countries."
      Paper presented at the North American Meetings of the Econometric
      Society, Atlantic City, New Jersey.

Feige, E. and D.K. Pearce. (1974) "The Causality Relationship Between
      Money and Income: A Time Series Approach." Paper presented at the
      Midwest Economic Association Meetings, Chicago, April 1974.
                                                                 L.O



Friedman, M.  (1970) "A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis,"
      in Milton Friedman's Monetary Framework, ad. by R.J. Gordon, 1—62.
      Chicago: Chicago University Press.

___________ and A. SchwartZ. (1963) "Money and Business Cycles."
      Review of Economics and Statistics, Supplement, 45, 32—64.

Gramley, L. and S. Chase. (1968) "Time Deposits in Monetary Analysis."
      Federal Reserve Bulletin (October 1965).

Granger, C.W.J. (1969) "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric
      Models and Cross—Spectral Methods." Econometrica j, 424—438.

______________ and P. Newbold. (1974) "Spurious Regressions in Econo-
      metrics." Journal of Econometrics 2, 111—120.

Grether, D.M. and G.S. Maddala. (1973) "Errors in Variables and Serially
      Correlated Disturbances in Distributed Lag Models." Econometrica 40,
      255—262.

Hannan,   E.J.   (1970) Multiple Time Series. Wiley, New York.

Haugh, L.D. (1976) "Checking the Independence of Two Covariance—
      Stationary Time Series: A Univariate Residual Cross—Correlation
      Approach." Journal of the American Statistical Association 71,
      378—385.

Kareken, H. (1967) "Coercial Banks and the Supply of Money: A Market
      Determined Demand Deposit Rate." Federal Reserve Bulletin (October
      1967).

I(endall, M.G. and A. Stuart. (1961) The Advanced Theory of Statistics,
      Volume II. Hafner Publishing Co., New York.

Pierce, D.A. (1977) "Relationships —— and the lack thereof —— between
      economic time series, with special reference to money, reserves, and
      interest rates." Journal of the American Statistical Association,
      forthcoming.

Pierce, D.A. and L.D. Haugh. (1977) "Causality in Temporal Systems:
      Characterization and a Survey." Journal of Econometrics, forth-
      coming.

Quenou.lli, M.H. (1948) "Approximate Tests of Correlation in Time Series."
      Journal of Royal Statistical Society, Supplement, 11, 68—84.

Rao, C.R. (1962) "Efficient Estimates and Optimum Inference Procedures
      in Large Samples." Journal of Royal Statistical Society,(B)24, 46—
       72.

Sims, C.A. (1972) "Money, Income, and Causality." American Economic
      view LXII, 540—552.

Tobin, J.  (1970) "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?"
      ly Journal of Economics 84, 301—317.
Wahba, G. (1968) "On the Distribution of Some Statistics Useful in the
      Analysis of Jointly Stationary Time Series." The Annals of
      matical Statistics 39, 1849—1862.

Wall, K.D. (1974) "An Application of Simultaneous Estimation to the
      Determination of Causality Between Money and Income." Discussion
      Paper No. 8, Programme for Research into Econometric Methods, Univ-
      ersity of London.

Williams, D., C.A.E. Goodhart, and D.H. Gowland. (1976) "Money, Income,
      and Causality: The U.K. Experience." American Economic Review,
      417—423.

Wu, D.M. (1973) "Alternative Tests of Independence Between Stochastic
      Regressors and Disturbances." Econometrica 41, 733—750.
