                        NBER Working Paper Series




                           SAXPLE SELECTION BIAS AS A
                               SPECIFICATION ERROR
                      (with an application to the estimation
                           of labor supply functions)
                                James J.   Heckman


                            Working Paper No. 172



            CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
                        AID SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
             National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
          204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                                   March 1977
                                    (revised)


                        Preliminary; not for quotation.
        NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
        number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
        written permission of the author.

        This report has not undergone the review accorded official
         NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
         for approval by the Board of Directors.
The research reported in this paper was supported by an HEW grant to the Rand
Corporation and a U.S. Department of Labor grant to the National Bureau of Economic
Research. A previous version of this paper circulated under the title "Shadow Prices,
Market Wages, and Labor Supply Revisited: Some Computational Simplifications and
Revised Estimates," June 1975. I have greatly benefited from conversations with
Paul Schultz and James Smith, and from detailed written comments of Mark Killingsworth
on the first draft of this paper. Takeshi Amemiya, John Cogan, Reuben Gronau, Ed
Leamer, H. G. Lewis, and Bill Rodgers all made valuable comments on the second draft.
Gary Becker, Tom MaCurdy and Arnold Zellner made valuable comments on this draft.
Ralph Shnelvar performed the computations. I assume all responsibility for any
remaining errors.
           In this paper, the bias that results from using nonrandomly selected
 samples   to estimate behavioral relationships is shown to arise because of

 a missing data problem. In contrast with the standard omitted variable

 problem in econometrics, in which certain explanatory variables of a regression

 model are missing, the problem of sample selection bias arises because data

 are missing on the dependent variable of an analysis.       Regressions estimated
on the data available from the nonrandom sample will not, in general, enable

the analyst to estimate parameters of direct interest to economists. Instead,

such regression coefficients confound     meaningful   structural parameters with
the   parameters of the function determining the probability that an observation
makes   its way into the nonrandom sample.
           Sample selection bias may arise for two distinct reasons.    First, there

may be self selection by. the individuals being investigated. One observes

market wages for certain women because their productivity in the market

exceeds their productivity in the homeJ Similarly, one observes wages for

union members who found their nonunion alternative less desirable.
                                                                         Finally,

the wages of migrants (or manpower trainees) do not, in general, afford an

estimate   of what nonwigrants (nontrainees) would have earned had they
migrated   (participated in training). In each of these cases, wage functions

fit on the available data do not estimate the wage function that characterizes

a randomly selected member of the general population subject to the titreatmentli

of work, unionism, migration, and manpower training programs, respectively.

        Note that this does not imply that the more market productive women
are the ones observed working.


                                      1
                                            2


Moreover, in each case,      if it were possible to obtain the missing wage data
 for either the treatment or nontreatment population, it would be possible to utilize

 simple regression techniques to estimate the parameters of population

 functions.      Simple comparisons between pre and post treatment wages would
yield unbiased estimates of the economic benefits of the treatment.
          Sample selection bias may also arise as a direct consequence of
actions    taken by the analyst. In studies of panel data, it       is common to
 require that "intact" observations be employed. For example, in analyses
of   the time    series of the labor supply     of married women, stability of the

 family   unit   is often required.for an   observation sequence to be analyzed.
The effect of such criteria operates in precisely the same fashion as
self selection: fitted functions confound behavioral functions with sample
selection functions.
          It is fair to say that most competent analysts have been aware of
the possibility of both sources of selection bias. It is also fair to            say
that   the accepted econometric practice has       been to ignore the problem in
making parameter estimates but to verbally         qualify the estimates in   light

of   possible    selection biases.

          Recent   work in econometrics has attempted to improve on previous
work by making specific assumptions about the source of selection bias. In
particular, this work assumes that both the missing data and the available
data are drawn from a common probability distribution, typically assumed
 to be a normal law. Except for work by Amemiya (1973) and Gronau (1974), the
 authors of
/these studies rely on maximum likelihood estimators to produce parameter

estimates free of selection bias.
          In this paper, I present a simple characterization of the sample
                                     also
selection bias problem that is/applicable to the conceptually distinct
                                            3

econometric problems that    arise   from truncated samples and    from models
                                      1
with limited dependent variables. The problem of sample selection bias
is    fit within the conventional specification error framework of Griliches

and Theil.     A simple estimator is      discussed that enables analysts to utilize

ordinary    regression methods to estimate models free of selection bias.
           The techniques discussed here are applied to reestimate and test a

model of female labor supply developed by the autho; (1974). Besides

providing an illustration of the methodology, this application is of interest

in its own right for three reasons: (a) an important variable utilized in

the author's previous analysis, the labor market experience of women, was

incorrectly coded by the primary data source, (b) the simple estimators

discussed here allow for much more extensive testing of the maintained

hypotheses of the previous paper, (c) the method discussed here produces

an initial consistent estimator for the likelihood equations of the previous

paper. This last issue is important because the likelihood function proposed in

the 1974 paper is not globablly concave and hence the issue of selecting

an initial starting value is an important one, since local optima will not

yield consistent estimators.

           Four conclusions emerge from the empirical analysis of female

labor   supply that is conducted on    the 1967 National Longitudinal Survey

for   women age 30—44. First, estimated coefficients of labor supply and wage
functions are quite sensitive to alternative treatment of the labor market
experience of the wife. Recent work (Heclcian, 1977) suggests that unmeasured
factors that determine participation also determine past work behavior.
Treating   the wife's labor force experience as an endogenous variable in

participation   probabilities, using      standard instrumental variable estimation techniques,

        'This relationship is spelled out in greater detail in a companion
paper (Hecloan, 1976).
                                       4

significantly alters the coefficients of estimated labor supply and wage
functions. Second, in a modal that treats the labor market experience of
the    wife as endogenous, there is evidence that selection bias is an

important phenomenon in the estimates of labor supply functions, but there

is little evidence of selection bias in estimates of the hourly wage

function. Third, the empirical analysis casts some doubt on the validity

of the simple model assumed in the 1974 paper. With a minor modification

the basic structure of the model remains intact and concordant with data.

Fourth, conventional measures of labor supply overstate the amount of

measured work, create the statistical illusion of a standard work week and

work year, and considerably understate the true sample variation in labor

supply.
          This paper is in three parts. En the first section, selection bias

is presented within the specification error framework. In this section,

general distributional assumptions are maintained. En section two, specific

results are presented for the case of normal regression disturbances. Simple

estimators are proposed and discussed. In the third section, empirical

results   are presented.

              I. Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error
          To simplify the exposition, consider a two equation model. Few new

points arise in the multiple equation case, and the two equation case has

considerable pedagogical merit.

          Consider a random sample of T observations. The equations for

individual i may be written as

(la)               a       +


(ib)           12i x22     +
                                               5
                                         exogenous
 where          is a lxK vector of/regressors,              is a K.X1 vector of parameters,


    (2)            E(Uji) —
                                        E(UjiTJ.j)
                                                      —
                                                          an', j1,2,
                                   0,       i   i'.
                   E(UjiUjti1)

The final assumption       is an   implication of a random sampling scheme. Denote

the joint distribution of IT11, IJ by h(Uii. U2i) which may be a singular

distribution. The regressor matrix is assumed to be of full rank so that

if all data were available, each equation could be estimated by least

squares, and all parameters would be identified.

              Suppose that one seeks estimates of equation Cia) but that data are

missing on           for certain observations. The crucial question is "why are

data missing for certain observations?"

              No matter what the answer to this question, one can write the popula-

tion regression function for equation (la) as



                                 E(YiilX1i)


while the regression function for the subsample of available data is


             ECYii!Xii. sample selection rule) —                + E(tJjIâample   selection rule),


i         1,... ,T1 where, for convenience, the i subscripts are labeled so that the

first          C T observations have all data available. If the conditional expecta-

tion of           is zero, the selected sample regression function is the same as

the population regression function. In this case, least squares may be

applied to the subsample of the available data to estimate the population

regression function. The only cost of having an incomplete sample is a loss

in efficiency.
                                                6


           In the general case, the sample selection rule that determines

the available data has more serious consequences. Consider the following

selection rule: data are available on                        if




while if




we do not obtain observations. Clearly the choice of zero as a threshold

is an fressential normalization. Also, one could define a dummy variable

d. with the properties


(4)
                  diliffY2i>O
                  d       0 iff Y   .   c   U
                   i

so that one could analyze the joint distribution of Y1, di dispensing with

Y2 altogether. The advantage in using the                    selection rule representation (3)
is    that it   permits   a unified s1mnry          of the   existing literature. Utilizing
this representation,        one may write


                  E(U1ilsamPle selection rule)               E(UiiIYZi > 0)


                                                                           —
                                                             E(UijlUzi >


In    the case of independence between
                                                U1 and U2,        so that the selection rule

is                     independent of the behavioral function being estimated, the

conditional mean of            is zero.

          In general, the conditional mean of the U1 disturbance does not

vanish. Accordingly, the selected sample regression function may be written as
                                           7

 (5)            E(Y1i1X1i. Y2 > 0)
                                   —
                                                  + E(tJiijU2i   >    —




 The selected sample   regression   function depends on               and X2.   Regression
 estimates   of equation (la) fit on the selected sample omit             the final term
of     equation (5). Thus the problem of       sample   selection bias, initially
viewed    as a missing dependent variable problem may be             reformulated as an
ordinary    omitted explanatory variable problem.

           Several special cases of this model are of interest. First assume

that the only variable in the regressor vector               is the constant "1". In

this case, the probability that an observation is included in the sample is

the same for all observations and is not a function of any explanatory

variables. The conditional mean of              is a constant. Ordinary Least squares

estimators of equation (la) yield unbiased estimators for slope coefficients
but a biased estimator for the Intercept, and the population variance a11.
The same           applies to a more general model with X regressors as
            analysis

long as the set of      variables is uncorrelated with the conditional mean
of u1. In particular, if         and X2. are independent random variables,

this analysis continues to hold.

           In the general case with nontrivial regressors included among the

X2 variables it is unreasonable to expect that the regressors of equation

(la) (i.e., X11) are uncorrelated with the conditional mean of
                                                                             U1. Accordingly,
least    squares estimatomof the slope coefficients (81) are biased. Without
further assumptions about the distribution of U1, it is not possible to sign
the bias. If the conditional mean of the                disturbance is well approximated
by the linearterm.us of a Taylor's series expansion, this approximation may                be

substituted in equation (5) and     an   ordinary specification error analysis may
be performed.
                                           8


             From equation (5), it is evident that a symptom of selection bias

is that variables that do not belong in the true structural equation (e.g.,

elements of           not in X11) may appear to be statistically significant

determinants of           when regressions are fit on selected samples. For

example, in Gronau's analysis of the selection bias that arises In using

the wages of working women to estimate the potential wage of nonworking

women, variables that affect the probability that a woman works, such as

the presence of children, may appear to affect market wages when, in fact,

no causal association exists. Thus regression evidence that women with

children earn lower wages is not necessarily evidence that there is discrimi-.

nation against such women or that women with lower market experience—as

proxied by children—earn lower wages. Evidence that such extraneous

variables ttexplaintt wage rates may be interpreted as evidence In support of

the selection hypothesis. However, even if no such extraneous variables

appear in      the   selected sample regressions, estimates of the intercept and

the   population variance may be biased.
            If one knew the conditional mean of Ulx. or could estimate it,       one

could      enter it as a regressor in equation (5)       and use ordinary least squares

to estimate the          parameters. In the next section, I discuss a method

for estimating the conditional mean for the case of jointly normal disturbances.

Before tuning to this discussion, it           is   helpful to relate the simple model

presented      here to previous work in the literature.
            The justly celebrated model of Tobln (1958) may be fit within this
framework.       (See also Amemiya, 1973.) In Tobin's model, data are missing on
      jf        <0.    Setting   tli                6, X11 X, and U1 E U2,       the
"Tobit"     model arises) The bivariate density h(U1i U2.) becomes degenerate

        1Tobin assumed a normal density of U1. The conceptual logic of his
model does not rely on normality.
                                                 9

since U11 E
                 U2. Since X and                 are identical, the conditional mean of

    is not orthogonal to                and bias is guaranteed for the Least squares

estimators of equation (la) applied to selected samples.

          Tobin's model was a major stimulus to later work. Its simplicity

and elegance mask two important ideas that have been confused. Most economists

have interpreted his model as a prototype of a limited dependent variable

model: the range of observed values of the random variable                         cannot fall

short of zero. Putting Tobin's model                    this way, it is less interesting.

Most economists are willing to Live with this type of truncation of the

range of a variable and simple transformations can eliminate it (e.g., use

of logs).

          The important   feature of Tobin's model is that a selection rule
         0) generates the sample of observed data. Both Cragg (1971) and
Nelson (1975) note that the selection                rule generating    observations on
need not be as closely related to            the     population regression function as Tobin
assumed. Their models may be fit            within      the schema of equations (1) and (3).
          For example, consider Nelson's model.                    is observed if

                                                 >
                                           Yli        Z2i

where       is a random variable. In terms of the notation of equation (1),
his model becomes         —
                              Y1i
                                    —
                                  Z2, 2 —              0.   If    >    0,   Y1 is observed
while       2i c 0, Yli
        if Y .            is observed to be
                                          zero.1

          Elsewhere, I present a model that can be               fit   within   the sample
selection framework (Hecknan, 1974). This model will be elaborated in
Section   III along with the closely related models of Gronau (1974) and Lewis (1974).


                   however, that Y1. is not, strictly speaking, a limited
dependent variable since nothing           prevents Y1 from becoming negative.
                                       10
 I note, in passing, that multivarjate extensions of the preceding models, while
 mathematically
/straightforward,may be of considerable substantive interest. Two examples

 are of fered. One concerns migrants choosing
                                                 among K prospective regions.
 Each person can be viewed as
                                possessing K distinct wage functions, one for
 each region. If the self selection rule is to choose that region with the

 highest income, both the selection rule and the
                                                    subsample regression functions
 can be simply characterized by an obvious K + 1 variable extension of the

 previous analysis. The second example concerns the measurement of union—

nonunion wage differentials. Each person in a hypothetical population can be

viewed as possessing both a union and a nonunion wage function. One self

selection rule, based on the assumption of freedom of entry into unionism,

is to select the unionism status with the
                                          highest wage. Estimators of wage
                   pooled
functions based on/union and nonunion samples
                                                  yield biased estimates of the
economic return to unionism if   selection   into unionism status is nonrandom.
        Before concluding   this section, it is useful to clarify three

concepts that are frequently confused in the literature. The first is the

concept of a truncated variable. The second is the concept of a truncated

sample. The third is the concept of a censored sample.

        A sample is said to be censored when it is possible to use sample

evidence to estimate the probability that a hypothetical observation will

be observed. This is the situation assumed     in the model of equations (1)
and (3). A truncated sample differs from a censored sample because the
probability of sample selection cannot be estimated from observed data. A
random variable is said to be truncated when its range is limited.
                                                                   Clearly,
random variables can be truncated in   either censored or truncated samples.
Also, quite clearly, the operational distinction between a censored and
                                           11

 trlmcated sample vanishes if there is a priori information about the

 probability of sample selection for a hypothetical
                                                              observation. These
 categories often overlap. Thus in Tobin's model the sample is censored

 but the random variable is truncated.


                  LI. Simple Estimators for the Case of Normally
                             Distributed     and

           In this section, the model of equations (1), (3) and (4) is derived

 for the specific case of joint
                                     normality for U11 and U2. The normality
 assumption is used in the models surveyed in Section I and is a natural

 starting point for any analysis. A simple estimator for this normal model

 is derived and discussed.

          The joint distribution of
                                          U1, U2iih(U1i. U21),is a bivariate
normal density fully characterized by the assumptions stated in equation (2).

It is permitted to be singular as in Tobin's
                                                        model. Using well known results
in the literature, (see Johnson and Kotz (1972)), pp. 112—113 or Gronau

(1974), Lewis (1974)



                E(UlU2     >   — Zi2
                                           (a22)lfl

                E(U2i1 U2i >   — X2i82)
                                                221/2
                                           (a 22


                                             *(Z )
                                    A—
                                     i
                                          l—(z)
where   $ and   are, respectively, the density and distribution function far

the standard normal random variable and

                                                x2i2
                                                     l/2
                                                22
                                           12
                                                         ratio of the
              is the inverse of Mills' ratio, and is the/ordinate of a

 standard normal to the tail area of the distribution. There are several

 important features of A1.     (1) Its denomi.nator is the probability that

 a population observation with characteristics                 is selected into the

 observed sample. (2) A(Z)     is   a monotone increasing function of Z and

 hence is a monotone decreasing function of the probability of sample
                                                             ax
 selection (Z). In particular, lim A1     0, urn A -     and      > 0.
                                 Zr —               Zi_,00
                                                                i
 Figure 1 displays the relationship between A                and •.   In samples




          A




               a                                                1

                Fig.   1—Probability of sample inclusion.


 in which the sample selection rule guarantees that all population observa-

 tions have an equal chance of being sampled, X(Z) is zero and the least squares

estimatorS of equation Cia) has optimal properties.

        Using these results, equation (5) becomes


 (6a)                               0) =        +
              E(Y1.1X11, Y21                          121/2 A (Z1)

while the comparable expression for             becomes
                                                   13



 (6b)                                 >   0)   —            +
                 E(Y2iIX2j      Y21                X2162                   A (zr)
                                                                (022)1/2

If     one could estimate        and hence estimate Ai one could enter the latter
variable as a regressor in equation (6a) and estimate S and                              12
                                                                                                     by
                                                                                    (022)
least    squares. Similarly, if one could measure                          when     > 0, as     in Tobin's

model, knowledge of             and A would permit direct estimation of 2 and
                                                                                                      (022)12.
Representation (6a) reveals that if 012 —                   0,    so that the disturbances that

affect sample selection are independent of the disturbances affecting the

behavioral functions of interest, X may be omitted as a regressor. Thus, if either

      A or 012 is zero, or both, least squares estimators of                        are unbiased.

           The full s'atistical model of which equations (6a) and                       (6b)   are

expectations is now developed. One may                  write      the model as


                    a                  012
                                +                       +
(7a)
                                                            v1
                                     (022)

                                       022
(7b)                —           +                       ÷
                        X2j62                1/2 )j         V2
where
                                     22
                E(ViiIXii       x,    u2 > — x2a2) — 0

                E(V2i!X2j,            U2 > — X2i82) — 0
and
                                                                — X2i52) — 0
                E(VJiVJI!Xii X2, A, U2 >
for i &    Q It    is straightforward to demonstrate that

(8a)
                E(ViIX.Si A,          U2 >     — X2i52) a         a((l — p2) + P(l+ZjAi — 4))
(Sb)
                E(ViiV2jIX1i. x2, A, U2      — X252) — 012(1 + ZiAj
                                                        >                                 —
                                                                                               4)
(8c)            E(V11X2., A., TJ2 > — X2i52)
                                             —
                                                     + ZA — 4)
where
                            2


                        0110
                                                14

        reover, one can       easily establish that

    (9)                 0< (l+Aizix2) ci.

                 There are several important consequences of this inequality for

    the covariance structure of the disturbances
                                                            of equations (7a,   b).   Suppose
    that one knows Z and           Ai. and enters Ai as a   regressor in equations (7).
    Standard least squares estimators of the population variance of
                                                                    a11 and               a22
    are   downward biased estimators of the appropriate parameters. Also, the

    standard estimator of the interequation
                                                       covariance is downward biased in
    absolute value. Note further that if
                                                       contains regressors (apart from tilt?)
    the variances of         the disturbances of equations 7
        estimators
                                                               are heteroskedastic. Least
squares/are not CLS estimators, The GLS estimators               have an interesting

    interpretation. Unlikely observations (those with low probability of sample

inclusion) receive greater weight than likely observations. This follows
because the middle term in inequality (9) is a monctonically increasing
function of the probability of sample inclusion, '(Z)    Accordingly, less
likely observations receive greater weight and observations with zero
probability of sample inclusion receive the greatest               weight.
                The   GLS estimators based on known Xi possess unusual properties,
not fully developed here. In contrast with the usual case for GLS estimators,
parameters of the regression function enter the disturbance variance. This
is seen most clearly in equations (7a) and (Ba). Using the definition of
                                                                         p,
presented below the equations (Ba—Bc), the coefficient on the
                                                              Variable in
equation (7a) may be rewritten as pa2 so that the dependence is explicit.

                      elementary   application of L'Eospitaj's rule reveals that in the
limit,      as           —       + . and urn
            2                                  E(Vi)     0. Similarly, urn E(V11V2) - 0 and
lim
z
    i    E(Vii)        (1 — p )a11 .
                                                                         i
                                           15
 The consequences of this dependence are interesting although their fun

 development is peripheral to this paper. Nonetheless, a brief outline

 may be of some interest.

           With known        one may use least squares to produce unbiased

 estimates of the regression parameters of equation (7a):
                                                                            81 and pa2.
 Using the least squares residuals from equation (7a), one may form a

 consistent estimator of              Then, an approximate cts estimator that
                               ll
 converges      in distribution to the true GLS estimator may be found by
 estimating equation (7a) by weighted least squares with the estimated
 wcights obtained from equation (8a). An important feature of this problem
                 round
 is that one/GLS estimators are not asymptotically efficient compared to the
 appropriate likelihood function estimates which are based on a truncated
 bivariate normal distribution with known points of truncations.2
           The preceding analysis appears to       be      somewhat beside the point since
 as   a practical matter one does not know Z and A and                  hence one cannot
directly    estimate equation (7a). But in the case of a censored sample, it

is possible to compute the probability that an observation has missing data

so    that it   is possible to use probit analysis to estimate                and hence A.

               case of a truncated sample this is not so. However if prior
           En the

information is available on the probability that    is observed it is possible
          1Denote the residuals by V       .   Since   A    and Z are      known, and since
pa11 is estimated, one can estimate
                                  fl
                                 Zv        (pa)
                                            2
                                       —                       —    2
                           a11                     E(AZ            Ai).
This yields a consistent estimate of the variance that is guaranteed to be
positive. Note, however, that nothing in the procedure guarantees a value
of p inside the unit interval although in large samples it must lie in
that interval.
        2
          This is so because p and a11 appear in the regression coefficients
the variance so the information matrix is not block diagonal. An iterative and  in
                                                                            estimator
basedonthe initial consistent estimates previously discussed is asymptotically efficient
                                              16
 .o estimate        and        so   that prior information on the probability of

 sample inclusion eliminates the distinction between censored and            truncated
 samples.
            In the censored case, the probit likelihood function is


 (10)               —   It
                        i=l
where     di denotes the event "observation f         y1•" Under the standard conditions

 for identification in probit analysis (see Nerlove and           Press, 1976),   one

may consistently estimate 82/42, and hence                 and A1. The estimated

may     be substituted for the actual Ai in the preceding analysis.

           Appendix A, the asymptotic distibution is derived for the least
           In

squares estimator based on an estimated  instead of the actual A. The
least squares estimators are consistent and asymptotically normally distributed.
Moreover, in the important special case of the null hypothesis of no selection

bias (e.g.,     012 — 0      in equation   Cia)), the standard least squares estimator
of the variance—covarlance matrix of the regression coefficients is the
appropriate estimator. However, if 012 0, the standard estimator is inappro-
priate and the formula (A4) in Appendix A should be used instead.
           As in the case of exact GLS estimators based on known values of
approfm-te      GLS estimators are not asymptotically efficient nor do they converge

in   distribution to GLS estimators based on known A except in the important
special case of a null hypothesis of no selection bias. To achieve asymptotically
efficient estimators, maximum likelihood estimators must be employed. The
estimators suggested here provide initial consistent estimai.ors for the likelihood
equations so that a one step iteration (Rothenberg and Leenders, 1964) yields
estimates that are asymptotically efficient. Thus the task of computing efficient
estimates is simplified and the problem of locating a starting value Eor likelihood
                                     16-A
function   iterations is resolved. Elsewhere (Heckman, 1976) it is shown that

for one problem the initial   consistent   estimators discussed here closely

approximate   the likelihood maximizing parameter estimates.
                                               17


                LII. New Estimates of Female Labor Supply Functions
                       and Wage Functions Free of Selection Bias:
                             New Tests of an Old Model
A.    The Model
           In   this     section, the techniques of Section II are applied              to estimate
the     labor supply and wage functions of married women. In the absence of

fixed costs of entering and exiting the labor market, and                  under   the assump-
tion that workers are free to choose their hours of work, two functions

fully characterize the labor supply decision.

           The first function is the market wage function for the woman, Y1,

defined    by equation (la). The second function is the reservation wage that
records    the value that a woman places on her time if she does not work
                                                                                            (W).
Il the market wage exceeds the reservation wage (Y1i >
                                                       Wt), a woman works
and her hours of work adjust so that in equilibrium the marginal value of
her time equals her market wage rate.
                                                            more fully
           Under certain simplifying assumptions elaborated/elsewhere
                                                                       (Heckman,
1974a),hours        of   work, hi are proportional to the gap between market wages
and   reservation wages. Denoting this proportionality factor                by l/y, and
letting         —         —
                               be the gap, one is led to the following model:

(ila)             E(YliIXJI 72i
                                    > 0)   —
                                                    + E(UiiIU1i   >   —




(llb)            E(hiIXii, i' Yzi > 0)
                                       —
                                                                          Y2 >   0) —
                                                    E(Y2iIX11. X2,


                                                                             —
                                                    y    y    2i 2i              2i2
(llc)           1>0
                                        18

            This model differs from the sample selection model of equations Cia)
 and (lb) in one important respect. Unlike the case in equation (ib) there is
 information about        up to a factor of proportionality (l/y) if a woman
 works (Y21 > 0). The decision function that characterizes labor force entry,
 which is the sample selection rule for this model, is closely related to the
 hours of work equation. The model of Lewis (1974) and Gronau (1974) is
 exactly the model of equations Cia) and (lb) and does not utilize the potential
source of information that closely links the participation decision and the
labor supply function.
           From inspection   of equations (lla) and (llb), it is clear that both
wage and hours of work functions may be subject to selection bias. Least
squares estimators of the wage and hours functions fit for working women
confound the parameters of the sample selection function with the parameters
of the behavioral functions of interest.
           This is not to say that estimates of wage or labor supply functions
fit on subsainpies of working women are of no interest. A regression model
that deletes the conditional expectation of the error terms approximates a
function with a well defined interpretation. Consider equation (lib). The
same set of variables (X2) appears in the regression function and in the
conditional mean of U2. If one deletes the conditional mean, to a first order
approximation a regression equation estimates the vector

                    5.ia+
                    I I I
                                   9EWZiIU2i
                                         3X2
                                               >   —




Thus    ordinary least squares coefficients estimate the effect of a variable
moving along the behavioral function, the first term, and the effect of
the variable in sorting people out in the taste distribution, the second
term.
                                             19
           To clarify this decomposition, a concrete
                                                     example may be helpful.
 Let vector       consist of one variable——say, ability
                                                                to perform market tasks.
 Ability is expected to increase the supply of hours to the market for a

 working woman           >0). Moreover, ability is expected to increase the

 probability that a woman works. But this means that as one samples across

 working women with greater ability one is sampling women with progressively
                                3E(u21ju21 > — X282)
 lower average tastes for work                        < 0    Thus the regression
                                                                    .


                                          2i
 coefficient on the ability variable is a downward biased estimate of
                                                                                    2Iy.
          Estimates of        answer the question "what is the average effect

 of an additional unit of ability on the labor supply of
                                                                        women already
 working?" Economic theory provides a guide to the sign and magnitude of this
coefficient. Estimates of     answer the question "what is the change in the

average- labor   supply of women when one
                                                  moves across ability groups?" These
estimates give the basic ingredients required to estimate the aggregate labor

supply curve. Given a distribution of ability
                                                           in the population, one can
add up the average labor supply at each ability class to
                                                         compute aggregate
labor supply.1 Typically, economic theory does not directly yield
                                                                  predictions
about this parameter which combines
                                            parameters describing movements along a
given   labor supply function with the
                                   parameters determining the entry of workers
into the labor force.
        The parameter ify plays a crucial role in this analysis, and may
be interpreted as the uncompensated effect of a change in wage rates on
labor supply. From equation CUb) it is not clear how this parameter may                 be
estimated. Recall that '1
                         2i is defined as the difference between market
wages and reservation wages            —   W).    To demonstrate how y can    be   estimated
one may introduce an explicit function for W
                                                      1


                                   a         +

        1Nore precisely, equation (lib) multiplied by the probability that a
woman works, yields an estimate of the average hours supplied to the market
                         ii
by women with traits :c .,
                              zi
                                             20

and note    that

 (12)
                       Y2 Y1
                          E  —W          —
                                             X1151 — NiIP    1



Then    it is clear that if one variable appears in               that does not appear
in Ni. such as the market human capital of the wife, given estimates of
equation    (lla) one can estimate both y and 4. Note, too, that one can
                                                                           the
follow conventions in simultaneous equation theory to avoid/multiplicity

of estimates of y that arise in the overidentified case if one inserts

estimates of S1 (obtained from (ila)) to generate a predicted value of

wage rates in (12),       i.e., denoting such estimates by 5, estimating



                                     y            y ii       i    •r]il   (5       5)
                                                                                    1

where the final term vanishes in large samples.

          The crucial feature of labor supply function (12) is that the supply

of labor is assumed to be a function of the gap between market wages and

reservation wages. This gap, in turn, is a measure of the probability that

a   woman works.     Thus a   strong assumption of this formulation            is that a

woman more likely to work is also more likely to supply more labor when she works.

          Over    the empirically   relevant range,      the labor supply curve may
                                                                                        and Hanoch     (1976)
become backward bending (y < 0).         Moreover, as noted by Cogan (1975)/,fixed
costs   of entry and exit nay alter the simple relationship of equations (lib)

and (12), and may even result in opposite signs for the effect of certain

variables   on labor supply and participation.
          As an    example,   consider the effect of     money   costs of child care.
Holding   everything else the same, the           greater the number of   preschool        children,
the greater the cost of child care and hence the less likely is the event that
                                                   21
 a   woman works. However, given that a woman works, greater expenditure

on child care results in a reduction of income and hence an expansion in

hours worked if leisure time is a normal good. Time indivisibilities in

the availability of child care, and commutation costs tend to reinforce

the work increasing effect of child care costsJ

          It is straightforward to extend the model of equations (ha) —               (lic)
to allow for these effects. A more general model is the three equation

system


(13a)                      —           +
                               Xiiøl
(13b)                   —
                               X2.2    ÷ U2.


                       =
(13c)
                  hi             = X2i83 +


                  E(U.i)         0,        E(U.jU.it)
                                                              i = j'
                                                        0 otherwise.



As before, a woman works, and her hours are positive if                 and only if    >   0.
A noteworthy feature of equations (13b) and (l3c) is that the same set of
variables determine the participation decision and the quantity of hours
supplied. Under the null hypothesis that equation (llb) is
                                                                           correct, 82 and 33
are equal up to a constant of                                      33
                                       proportionality (82 —) and the joint distri-
bution of   the            is a singular trivariate density. Assuming normality for
          1Obviously, time costs decrease leisure consumed but need not decrease
hours of work. Writing the leisure demand function in terms of wage rates W
and full income (W'r + A) where A is asset income and T is total time available,
L     F(W, WE + A), aL/aT a    8h/3T n (1 —
                                       F2w, F2W). Since F2 is positive the sign of
the!   ¾$iguoiis. Ceteris paribus the higher the market wage rate, the more
likely is it the case that time and money costs operate in the same direction.
                                            22

 the   U     one can write


 (34a)                         Y2 >     a            +
                  E(Y1iIX21,
                                                         (a22)lfi
 (l4b)            E(Y31 —   hjjX2i. Y2 >    0)   —        +
                                                              ()hI2 X
 using     the same definition of A1 given before. 1



 B. Main Empirical Results

            The data utilized in the empirical analysis are a sample of 1735

women taken from the 1967 National Longitudinal
                                                              Survey of Work Experience Of
Women Age 30—44        (The   "Parties" data) who are white, married with spouse
present     with husbands working in the previous year (1966). A woman is

classified as working if she worked for cay in 1966 and satisfied the other

sample selection criteria. Using this definition, 812 of the women work in

1966. The primary data source is described elsewhere in detail (Shea, et al.,

1970). A more complete description of the means               of   the data used here and

the sources of sample attribution is provided in Appendix A.

            Given current professional ignorance about the appropriate dimension

of labor supply, a variety of measures could be analyzed. Instead, a careful

erami nation of the available data suggests that only one reliable measure is

available: annual labor supply as defined by dividing annual                earnings    in
1966 by a questionnaire wage asked in early 1967. A superficial
                                                                inspection
of the data source suggests that a direct measure of labor supply is available


                1Note that equation (13c) is cast in terms of hours of work.
Technically speaking, hours should be treated as a limited dependent variable.
In the empirical analysis presented below, I ignore this complication. Since
hours of work distributions are concentrated far away from zero, and    is
possible to use log hours rather than hours in a more general formulation.
                                                                                   it
                                   23

by taking the product of weeks worked in 1966 and "usual hours worked."

However these data are not usable since "weeks worked" includes vacation

time and sick leave—two important margins of adjustmenè.     Inspection of
the histograms of both weeks worked and annual hours defined as the product

of weeks worked and average weekly hours, suggests too much bunching of

hours in standard reporting intervals. Appendix C presents the histograms

for the measure used as well as the standard measures!   &i important point

to note in these histograms is that the distribution of annual hours of

work, properly measured, shows much less of the bunching away from zero

hours of work that is manifest in conventional measures of labor supply.

It is precisely this artificial bunching that has stimulated recent work

that introduces fixed costs into the analysis of labor supply behavior

(Rosen, 1974). Accordingly, it is not surprising to find the result

reported below, that with a proper measure of labor supply, there is much

less evidence in favor of models with fixed costs of work.




        Lone disadvantage of the choice of labor supply measure that is
offered in the text is that some women who work in 1966 did not supply a
questionnaire wage. Only five percent of the sample is lost for this
r eas on.
                                       24

           The specification of the economic relationships is conventional

 and   requires   little comment. Following Mincer   (1974),   the logarithm of
 wagerates is assumed to depend on schooling and market experience.
 Experience is defined as the number of years since leaving school that a
 woman has worked six months or longer. Following much         previous research,
 female   labor supply is postulated to depend on wage rates of the head and
 wife,   the presence of children, family assets and wife's education.

           Recent work by the author (Heckman (1977)) presents evidence that

 the   labor market experience of the wife cannot be treated as an exogenous
variable in the participation decision. (Evidence on this is offered below.)
This variable records the wife's previous work history and is highly correlated
with unmeasured determinants of current labor force participation. The
empirical analysis discussed below explicitly deals with the endogeneity issue
and considerable evidence is found for endogeneity of experience in labor
supply and participation    equations but little evidence for endogeneity in

wage    functions. Estimates of labor supply functions that purge "experience"
of its endogenous component produce more plausible labor supply estimates.
         The structure of the discussion of the empirical results is as follows.
First, estimates of equation (l3b) are discussed. Then estimates of the labor
supply and wage functions are presented. Finally, some tests of the simple
model of equations (lla) and (lib) are performed in a separate section.
          Table 1 records the estimates of the (a2) normalized coefficients
of equation (l3b) which generates the probability that a woman works. The
first column presents estimates based on the assumption that experience is
exogenous. The second column presents estimates based on predicted experience.
The instrumental variables used to predict experience are reported below the
table.
                                              25


                                          TABLE 1

              PROBIT ESTIMATES OF THE PARATERS DETERMINING THE
                PROBABILITY THAT A WOMAN WORKS (EQUATION (l3b))
                   (Asymptotic normal statistics In parentheses)



                                                       82/ (a22)
                              —
                                           (1)                                (2)
               .
                                   Estimates  Tiat                                  That
                                  Treat "Experience"
                                         Exogenous
                                                         As
                                                                      Estimates
                                                                    Treat "Experience"
                                                                            Endogenous
                                                                                             J
Intercept                               —.817 (4.7)                       —.412 (1.56)
Nbr. of children                        —.504 (10)
                                                              .
                                                                          —.493 (9.11)
 less than 6

Assets                                   .436x107 (.25)                    .619x10_6 (.29)
Eusband's hourly wage                   —.177 (8.0)                       —.167 (7.81)
  rate ($/hr.)
Wife's labor market                      .098 (15.0)                       .046 (1.81)
 experience (yrs.)
Wife's education                         .080 (15.3)                       .074 (5.3)
Log likelihood                    —920.9                           —1073.1
Observations                      1735                             1735

           The probability that woman i works is

                               xii8z
                                        1/2
                                  C22
                              (                    e_t224t
                              Jir
        The Instrumental variables used to predict experience are linear and squared
terms    for children Less than six, 1967 assets, husband's age, husband's education,
husband's    hourly wage, wife's education, and         interactions of all linear terms.
                                         26

           As expected from a reading of the literature, the presence of small

children, and a higher husband's wage rate lower the probability that a

randomly selected woman works. Women with greater education are more likely

to work. For both sets of estimates,          greater work experience raises the

probability of participation although both the size of the effect, and its

statistical significance, are diminished when predicted experience is used

in place of the actual variable in the estimation of the probit coefficients.

A straightforward application of the Wu (1973)) test rejects the null hypothesis

that    "experience" is uncorrelated with the error terni in (l3b)
          Following the methodology outlined in Section CI, the robit
coefficient estimates may      be   used to conaistentlyestiinate 8z/22, z and
hence   A(Zi). Hourly wage regressions with and without these estimated regressors
are presented in Table    2   which also presents some evidence on   the endogeneity

of   experience in   the wage function. Column 1 presents the estimates of the

traditional   wage function.     The estimates of the traditional equation

corrected for censoring, but assuming experience to be endogenous, -are

presented   in column 2. There is some indication of sample censoring but it
is not overwhelming. The test statistic on "A" in column 2 is only marginal, and
the wage coefficient estimates are essentially unchanged from column 1. Columns
3 and 4 record
the results of an analysis that predicts experience and tests whether or not
regression specifications based on predicted experience differ significantly
from regression    specifications with actual experience. Inspection of the Wu

statistic on the bottom line of colus 3 and 4 suggest that the endogeneity

             Wu test as used here consists of entering both "experience" and
          1The
the residual of "experience" from predicted "experience" in the probit function.
If the coefficient on the residual is significantly different from zero, one
rejects the null hypothesis of uncorrelatedness of experience with the error
term. The test statistic for this model gave a "t" of 2.1.
                                        27



                                                                                                                             ID
                                  put                                                                                    U
                                                          —'        ,-'                                                  a
                        £;aua2opu                                                                                       .Ci
                                                          .4
                                                             -                                                           I-i
                                                                                                                         0.02w
                  -t
                  . uojssai2aj in           f—I
                                                          'c
                                                          N-
                                                          9
                                                             o
                                                             N
                                                             0 ai o             e-i      N-
                                                                                                 %.1

                                                                                                 N-                     r.41d02
                                                                                                                                   0
                        TEUOflTPWIJo                                ,-4         -t       f.4     '.4                     02              Ci
                                                                                     I           r                                       a
                                                                                                                         0CC0
                                                                                                                         02

                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                         0tw 'a
                                                                                                                         I-iwo,
                                                                                                                        H 4.1 02
                        s;raua2opu
                               203 Jn                     N-
                                                               .                                                         W'-I .0
                                    en                   c'i                                                             CC)
                  .,      paa11o3                         f-I                                   —                       C)14'I-I
                  en
                  S."
                                                         S.-
                                                                           •
                                                                                                 4_i
                                                                                                -.-                    ,.4
                                                                                                                        s-i
                                                                                                                            Q
                                         en              -.t
                        t9UOflTPUlJ 00                   N-
                                                         0•                •    N        '0     -t                      04 C) 0
    —CC
    02W
    eflo,
                                              .                                 N.       v.4    In
                                                                                                     •          • 0)0
                                                                                                                   Ci,-I
                                                                                                                   4.10
                                                                                                                        X

                                                                                                            C) tOW
                                                                                     I                     —4
    I-IC)                                                                                                      C),WCC
        4-I                                                                                                — 4_i
                                                                                                           ,0           0.-IC)
    OW
    —w
                                                         t—        .
                                                                                                           E- 'a
                                                                                                            CC



                                                                                                            C           s-li-I
                         ZcTlosua3
    at
    -C 04

                                  10;     .
                                                         N-
                                                         en
                                                         ,-I
                                                               •
                                                                        •
                                                                                                           ,-I
                                                                                                           'a
                                                                                                                        0.o)E
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                          C) 0

                  —. paano3             '.-'             '-'       t—4
                                                                   '-.'                                     C)
                                                                                                           4_i   C)   C)
                                                                                                                                       4.40
    CnO
         02       CM
                  .'U0S991SaJ N-                                                                           02 rI,C'a.-4
                                                                                                              1t4401,n
                    t0flTPnI N00
                                                                                                           r1
    14-f-I                                               N-        N-           in       in               rI                           CIt
N
-
    &14J
    -Co                                                  0. 0. in
                                                         N-                     ,..      en
                                                                                         CM                    ICct'4
      i-f
                                                                                                           Ito'4.-IC
                                                                                                           42)
        U                                     •
                                                                                 I
                                                                                     •    •                '40024.102
    4•)
    Co
        02
                                                                                                                r4
       —
                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                           a W002
                                                                                                           C) C

                                                                                                          iIC) 4Jr4
                                                                                                                  03'-<C)

    CC
        I-.                             in
                                         •
                                                        'C•
                                                        en
                                                                                                           C)
                                                                                                           1-4

                                                                                                           0.
                                                                                                           >4
                                                                                                                0'4'
                                                                                                               CC)
                                                                                                              0024.14.1
                                                                                                                        6
                                        N-              .-I
        U
                  —uotssafla            '-'             ,—'
                                                                                                           C)          F-4i-4(jC)
                                                                                                                       o.a,-i a
    04-J          '."Et1aflTp2I N-                                                                         s-I
                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                       U1.J't,-I
                                 '0                     '0
                                                                               0    0                                                  41)


                                                                               -t• en
                                                                       •       v.1                                       C1-4
       4-)                       '-4
                                 0•                     N-
                                                        0•                         N•
                                                                                                          '4.1

                                                                                                           02
                                                                                                                      : 0g..
                                                                                                                       4.1

                                                                                I
                                                                                                           C): Ci'4C
                                                                                                          .-l
                                                                                                                                              C)

                                                                                                              4) 0r4.1
                                                                                                           C .COC)
                                                                                                          i-I 4J0UC
       '5-'
                                                                                                          s-i
                                                                                                           Ct          : Ci
                                                                                                                      ,-4i',-4'4r-4
                                                                                                                                02
                                                                                                          '-I U   002
                                                                                                          C i-fWO.,-I
                                                         02
                                                         1-4
                                                                                                          4.1 4J.C)46
                                                                                                          C 024_iWO
                                        4-i
                                        C)r•             -'                                               Cl
                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                                      -v-I                    C
                                        '402
                                                                                                                      It.IC).-I
                                                                                                                           laO
                            02
                                        0214
                                                  S—'
                                                         C
                                                         0
                                                        •,4                                    IC
                                                                                                          4.) 0'a04
                                                                                                          I-i
                                                                                                          02   CO
                                                                                                                      4-i

                            C)                          4_i                                               C
                            '—4         I-.
                                        001
                                                         It
                                                         0
                                                                                               -IC

                                                                                               i-I
                                                                                                            -I S InStiC
                            CC
                            i-I
                             '4         v-IC)
                                                        'a
                                                         Cl
                                                                               i.i
                                                                                               4_i
                                                                                               02
                                                                                               -I
                                                                                                          C)
                                                                                                            •C
                                                                                                            E-i  .caau
                                                                                                                ai
                                                                                                                 -iEoC
                                                                                                                                              Ci

                                                  ii               r<                                    ic
                            CC


                                        -    -           02
                                                                                Cl
                                                                                0
                                                                                               4_i
                                                                                               ci             3 v-It,-I
                                                                                                                 IC

                                                                                                                   OWl-i
                                                                                                                                              C)


                                         00.
                                        4-d4
                                              Cl
                                                  C)

                                                        9-4
                                                                               1-i
                                                                               C)
                                                                               44
                                                                                               1_i
                                                                                               02                                 0020
                                                                                                                                    ItO.
                                        i-IC)           '-4                     C
              I                         S               S                      i-i             S
                                        28
of   experience is not an important issue in the estimation of the coefficients

of the wage function. In my judgment, the best wage function is the tradi-

tional one recorded in column 1, but there is little to choose from between

the estimates presented in column 1 and those presented In column          2.

         The story with respect to the estimates of the labor supply functions

is different. There is strong evidence for both sample censoring and
            of experience.
endogeneity/ The estimates of the traditional regression specification are

displayed in column 1 of Table 3. These estimates are in agreement with

those in previous studies and require little comment. The regression estimates

recorded in column 2 are unreasonable. There is little evidence of sample

censoring, but the coefficients of the equation are not fit with much precision.

Column 3 differs from column 1 in that experience is treated as an endogenous

variable. The result of the Wu test applied to this equation strongly rejects

the null hypothesis that experience is an exogenous or predetermined variable.

         Column 4 displays the estimates of the labor supply function accounting

for sample censoring and endogeneity of experience. The null hypothesis that

experience    is predetermined and   the null hypothesis of no censoring are both

rejected.     Accordingly, the estimates in column 4 are offered as the best in
this table.
         A comparison of columns 3 and       4   reveals important differences. Except
for insigificant coefficients, all of the slope coefficients in the labor
supply equation presented in column 4 are larger in absolute value than the
coefficients in column 3. The elasticity of labor supply in the column 3
estimates   is high but not too much outside the range of estimates presented

by Schultz (1975, p. 31). The elasticity of 4.5 derived from the specification

in column 4 seems unduly large and requires some comment.
                                                                  TABLE 3

                 ANNUAL HOURS WORKED DEFINED BY DIVIDING EARNINGS BY WAGE RATES
                                                                                (EQUATION                                            (13c))
                                  (Asymptotic normal statistics in parentheses)



                                      (1)                       (2)                                                              't
                                                                                   (3)                                  (4)       as to                 (5)**
                                                                                       as                                     —,i-i:i
                                 -4                        eM
                                  idC                      Id                  ,-U                                            )iOas0
                                  o                        O't         00
                                   0,-i            •       O.r443              oGJtU                        0t                bOMO)           4-Ito           u0
                                                           ,1WIJ               O'riv4           0           0,10              }-Ibo
       Variables                  i-i to                     to ci    &-i
                                                                               •dto$4tq                     .,1m4-J           ,-l 0 rOOir,O)r-i
                                                                                                                                    it P1'tPQ.
                                                                               u in as as       as          P    (.0   ci     $4•                     '.-.'   Cd
                                 ,14                       'r4034}    C)       ,-tQ)Q.4J00                                I P .0
                                 t$4                       d$4I-i     to        0$4XCdo                     .rtaJasO$4    -IU     IU
                                  000                      It00$4$4                                                coasçz bOa1..-lflr1o
                                                           $40000               itboplast                   id00$4$4p.    I.1'HkOit                                Cd
                                 tc                        f-iQq-4Q            h0''.l.
                                                                               i,-4Hcd                                    Cd'HCd$4UCd
                                                                                                            c.4pcupw0
                                                                                                            kW000X03 u1>4-1cs]CdZ
Nbr. of children              —155.8 (3.73)              —94.1 (.93)           —141.04 (2.61)
 less than 6                                                                                                —925.1 (2.75)                        —207.2

Assets     ($)                3.1x103           (.18)    3.2x103      (.191)   3.2x103              (.17)   3.1x103                 (.17)       +3.]iclO3
husband's hourly               —33.1 (1.9)               —12.4 (.35)                                                                                                    t'J
                                                                               —16.9 (.9)                                                                               '0
 wage rate ($/hr.)                                                                                          —275.4 (2.5)                       —32.9

Wife's experience (yrs.)       48,6 (12.1)                39.1 (2.66)            57.2 (2.55)                    128.9 (3.4)                     60.0
Wife's education (yrs.)        21.1 (1.89)                11.7 (.66)             10.9 (.89)                     119.5 (2.5)                     11.70
       A                        . .   .     .           —201.8 (.67)             . .        .   .            2401 (2.36)                        . .
Intercept                     664.2                      912.1                 765.1                         —1755                              .
      K2                          .17                       .176                    .115                               .121                     .
Wu statistic*                  . . . .                    . . . .                 3.1 (t)                         9.8 (F)                       .
Implied labor supply            1.68                       1.35                   1.99                            4.47                              2.08
 elasticity w/respect
 to   hourly wage rates***
      *
       The Wu statistic is explained in Table 2
     **
       These estimates are obtained from the coefficients in
                                                                column 4 added to the effect of the variable
on the conditional mean of the
                                disturbance,
    ***These estimates re obtflped by         (3A/X21), multiplied by the coefficient on A(2401).
                                        djviing   he eperi?nce coefficient jsi. the wagp function into the
 sperience coefficient in the .LaDor suppiy lUnCtiOfland
                                                         dividing by average labor Supply.
                                       30
            The important point to note is that traditional estimates of
                                                                           the

 coefficients of labor supply functions of working women confound two effects:

 movement along a given labor supply function for working women and movement

 across taste distributions. Thus, for example, presence of an additional

 child under six has a dramatically negative effect on hours of work for

 a working woman (—925 hours reduction in supply).     But working women with an
 additional child have a greater average taste for market work since only

 the most work prone women remain at work after the imposition of a child.

           The two separate effects for each variable can be combined and

 evaluated at the sample mean. The result of such combination is displayed

 in column 5. By and large there is close agreement between the coefficients

 of column 3, which are estimates of the combined effect, and the coefficients

 in column 5. In particular, the estimates of the wage elasticities are in

very close agreement.

           The conclusion to be drawn from the labor supply analysis is that

traditional    methods of estimating labor supply functions give a downward
biased <in absolute value) estimate of the true effect of economic variables.
The wtimates presented here reveal a strong behavioral response to
                                                                   wage
change which is not discordant with previous estimates, but which casts a
new light on their interpretation.
           The estimated labor supply elasticity reported in column 3 (1.99)
is    quite similar to an estimate of .2.3 reported by Haney Rosen who uses
the same data set.1 Rosen's estimated elasticity combines the effect of a
               the labor supply of already
wage change on! working women with the effect of a wage change in altering

          1See Rosen (1976).
                                              31

    the composition of the sample of working women. Thus his estimate is

    compared with the estimate in column 3, and is an understatement of the

    effect of a wage change on the labor supply of women already working.

                A final feature of the estimates presented in column 4 is worth

    noting. The coefficient on "A" is large and positive. This suggests that

    unemasured factors that raise the probability of
                                                              participation also tend
    to increase the volume of labor supplied to the
                                                             market. The sign of the
    correlation is in accord with that predicted by the simple model of

    equations (ha) and (llb).


    C.   Tests of the Simple Model of Equations
         (lla)—(llb) and a kevised Model
           En this section, some informal tests of the simple model of
    equations (ila) and (llb) are conducted. Most, but not all, of the
    restrictions predicted by the model    accord with the data. An
                                              are in

expanded version of the simple model is offered that allows for the effect
of variation in the availability of informal day care arrangements that is
documented elsewhere (Heckman, 1974) as            well as variation in the fixed costs
of work examined by Cogan (1975) and Hanoch (1975). The structure of this

section is as follows. First, informal tests are discussed. Then, a

revised model is offered.



               As previously noted (page 21), one implication of the simple model

of equations (lila) and (ilb) is proportionality between the estimates of
     jail' 2    from the probit
a
    2 22                           function and the   parameters of the labor supply
                                   a1/2    1/
function        $3 (i.e., 83 =                     The   constant
                                  (1 )$21a222).                     of proportionality is
predicted        to be positive.
               The ratios of the probit coefficient estimates (taken from column 2
of Table 1) to the hours of work coefficient estimates (presented in column
                                     31-A


4 of Table 3) are displayed in Table 4. Given the sampling error in estimating

these coefficients, the ratios are remarkably close to each other. The

agreement is closer yet if one examines only the ratios of coefficients that

are statistically significant in both equations. These ratios are denoted

by an asterisk.

        A second test of the simple model is available. From equation (7b)

and Cub), one can   write   the hours of work function as

                                 1/2
                            hi "—(-z
                                y    i +A)+'1v
                                         i  y 2i

The variables In parentheses can be estimated from the probit coefficients.

From equation (Sc), the variance in the residual in the second term is given

by
                                       1/2
                                                            —
                            E(V) = (_22. )2   (1 +
                                                     AiZi       Ai).
                                             32


                                           TABLE 4

            RATIO OF PROBIT COEFFICIENTS (S2/a2) TO LABOR SUPPLY
                             FUNCTION COEFFICIENTS (3)


             Nbr. of                        Husband's          Wife's labor
             Children                       Hourly Wage          Market                Wife's
Intercept Less than 6          Assets         Rate             Experience            Education

.23x10       .53xlO—3*              ...3
                              .19x].O       .61x10—3*            .36x].0 3               .62x10—3*


    *Denotes a ratio of coefflcients that are statistically significant at
conventional levels' in both relationships.

                                           TABLE 5

                              ESTIMATES OF EQUATION 15

                                                               Standard Error of
                         k                                    Estimate
         (From regression coefficient)                (From regression residuals)
                 1424 (t stat, is 46)                              1221

                                           TABLE 6

                LABOR SUPPLY COMPARISONS WITh THE "TOBIT" MODEL



                                              "Tobit"                      Estimates from
                                             Estimates                    Table 3, Column 4
Nbr. of children                             —658.5 (9.5)                     —925.1     (2.78)
 less than 6
Assets ($)                                    . 24x10'2( .9)                  . axio2C.
Husband's hourly                             —201.4 (7.6)                     —275.4 (2.5)
 wage rate ($/hr.)
Wife's experience* yrs.                           87.02 (5.1)                  128.9 (3.4)
Wife's educationyrs.                              88.0 (5.1)                   119.5 (2.5)
Intercept                                    —669 (2.0)                       —1755
Estimated standard
 error of regression         1/2
                        (a22 Li)              1409                             .   . .
Ln likelihood                                ...7595,53
*
Predicted   experience as defined in Table 1.
                                         33

 Thus another   test of the simple model can be conducted. Run        the   weighted
 interceptless regression

 (15)           hivi —   k(_Z   + Xi)   w+
 where w — (1 +           —
                              xY1"2. The      regression coefficient is a consistent
 estimator of            which is the square root of the residual variance in

 the estimated equation. A test of the simple model is to compare the square

 root of the estimated residual variance with the regression coefficient.

 This comparison is made in Table 5. The agreement between the two estimates

is remarkably close. Moreover, as previously discussed in the first paragraph

of this section, the constant of proportionality estimated in Table 4 is

the inverse of a32íy          Using .6x103 as    an estimate of the average ratio,
                     1/2
another estimate of a22  /y is 1666, again a number close to the regression

coefficient estimate.

        Other informal tests of the simple model are possible. If equation

(lib) is the labor supply function, the model of Tobin, discussed in section

one ("Tobit") is an      appropriate description of the labor supply function.
Estimated   Tobit coefficients are displayed in Table 6. "Tobit" underestimates

(in absolute value) the coefficients of the labor supply function)             Except

for the intercept term, each "Tobit" coefficient is about seven—tenths of the

corresponding coefficient of the unrestricted labor supply estimates, repro-

duced in the second column of Table 6. Note, however, that the estimated

standard error of the Tobit regression (1409) is remarkably close to the

previous estimate (1424) obtained from equation (15).

        1This understatement of Tobit coefficients suggests that the Shultz
(1975) estimates of female labor supply elasticities, based on Tobit, are
downward biased.
                                        34
          At this point it may be helpful to take stock of what has been
                                                                               learned.

The simple citadel is almost right. The "Tobit" estimates of the slope

coefficients are smaller (in absolute value) than the initial consistent

estimates, but by a constant of proportionality (.7). The only discordance

in this pattern comes in the estimates of the intercept terms. The Tobit

intercept is disproportionately larger than the unrestricted labor supply

intercept than the ratio of slope coefficients would suggest is appropriate.

          The model of equations    (lla)—(llc) and    (12) may be modified slightly

to rationalize this pattern. First review the economics of the simple model.

To focus ideas suppose the wage function (corresponding to equation (ila)) is




(l6a)
                  W=a0+a1E+u
while the reservation wage function (i.e., value of time) is


(16b)
              W*y0+y1h+y2A+              c

where c, U are disturbances, E is (exogenous) experience, A is asset income

and h   is time   not spent at home. The simple theory assumes that a1 > C,
   >
         2 > 0.      A woman, works if W >   W* at zero hours of work, i.e.,


(17)



Her labor supply function is obtained by equating (16a) and (lób) when
inequality (17) is met, i.e.,

(18)          h _! (a0 + a1E —        — y2A)   ÷s
                                                  11
                                          35

           Suppose that there are work related costs such as day care and

 other household expenses. Recent evidence (Heckinan, 1974b) suggests that

 some women have access to limited quantities of low cost day care and other

household services from friends and neighbors. An
                                                        analytically simple way

 to characterize such limited availability of low cost substitutes is to

flew it as an augmentation of the woman's time budget that expands available

time by less than one hour for each hour worked up to some given number of

working hours. A consequence of the limited availability of low cost

substitutes is a discontinuity in the labor supply function at the given

number of hours.
                                                          At'
           Figure 2 illustrates this case. The solid line/is the labor supply

curve for a woman of given characteristics who uses market substitutes for

her time. Market substitutes for the wife's household input are assumed to

                                                          A'   c

                                                                   Fitted line
   hours


                                      E

                                                    F




                       BE'      A                Wage




                                    Figure 2

be available at fixed marginal prices. The reservation wage for such women

is given by A.1          The line, BEFO, illustrates a labor supply curve for


            recently discussed by Brunt (1976), no unique reservation wage is
defined if there are/work related costs. Nonetheless, the extension of the
                   Such
                                             36

a   woman who has access               sources that (imperfectly) replace her
                             to informal

time at   home up   to h* hours. Note that this woman has a lower reservation
wage, B, than the other woman, but that beyond h* hours, it             takes   a greater
wage rate to induce her to work more hours. This is so because of the wealth

effect that arises from her access to low cost sources, and from the assumption

that leisure is a normal good. The population of all women contains a

mixture of women with the two types of labor supply functions.

          In a general model it is plausible that both slopes and           intercepts
of labor supply functions are affected by the limited availability of low

cost substitutes for the woman's tine. Before more elaborate models are

explored it is useful       to   examine more fully   the   implications of the simple

model depicted in Figure 2.

          Given a-distribution of the two types of labor supply functions in the

population, and     given   that some women with a "broken" labor supply function

have hours of work in excess of h*, the average reservation wage in the

population is less than the average of the intercepts of the labor supply

functions,    In   a model that    ignores   interpersonal variation in the cost of

household    substitutes, the two     measures coincide so that the average of the

intercepts is the average of the reservation wages. An important consequence

of the inequality of reservation wages and         intercepts    is that any    empirical
procedure that constrains the intercept of the labor supply equation to be

the reservation wage understates the effect of wages (and other variables) on

labor supply. This insight is important because the model of equations (lla)—

(llb) and the Tobit model both impose this constraint on the data.

          To establish this result intuitively, note that using equations (16a)

and   (1Gb), equation (18) can be written as

labor supply curve to A defines a wage that plays the same role as the
reservation wage in a model with no work related costs.
                                       37


                              h -     (w - w*)


so that the wage that just induces a woman to work a positive number of

hours is the reservation wage w*. In terms of the notation of Figure 2,

A v*. If one constrains the intercept of the labor supply curve to be

the reservation wage, when the "broken line" function BEFG describes some or

all of the data, one underestimates the response of hours to wage rates as

well as the intercept in the labor supply equation. See the dashed line

B'G' in Figure 2. One can prove that "Tobit" and the model of equation

(llb) impose this constraint on the fitted function.

          By way of contrast with these results, it is helpful. to consider a

model with fixed costs of work. For simplicity consider money costs of

work. As both Cogan (1975) and Hanoch (1975) have shown, the affect of

fixed costs of work on labor supply is that women who work at all must work

a minimum number of hours, say h, to recoup the fixed costs. The reservation

wage is raised over a case without fixed costs. This model is depicted

in Figure 3. Ecre the standard labor supply function for a woman of given

characteristics is indicated by a solid line while the modified labor supply

function is indicated by a dashed line. As   before, "A" denotes the reservation
wage   in the standard case while "C" denotes the reservation wage in the case of
                                                       ,
                                                   ,
               hours



                   h




                       a
                               A      C     Wage

                                    Figure 3
                                                38

         fixed costs of work. In the presence of fixed costs, the reservation wage

         is greater and the level of the supply function is higher reflecting the

         assumption that leisure is a normal good, and that fixed costs subtract from

         income. Unlike the situation in the preflous case, the average of the

        reservation wages exceeds the average of the intercepts. Thus any model

         that constrains the intercept of the labor supply function to equal the

        average of the reservation wages overstates the effect of wages (and other

        variables) on labor supply)

                   The empirical   results reported in Tables   4 and 6 favor the model of

        differential access to low cost substitutes for tine in the home over a model

        with fixed costs in a dominant role. "Tobit" underestimates the reponse of

        labor supply to a change in economic variables, and the Tobit intercept is

        higher than the intercept of the unrestricted labor supply function, an

        implication of a model in which the true reservation wage is less than the

        intercept of the labor supply equation. Finally, note that the only modif i-.

        cation required to make equations (lla)—(llb) consistent with data is

        relaxation of the interequation proportionality of intercepts. The corres-

        ponding interequation slope coefficients are related by a common factor of
                           2
        proportionality.


                        argument is made by both Cogan (1975) and Hanoch (1975). These
        effects   would also arise if employers offered "tied" packages of wages and
         hours if each individual had his own "best" minimum hours offer in the market.
         In this case, the labor supply function for the tied case would coincide over       the relev
range   /with the standard labor supply function, but the average of the intercepts
         would understate the. reservation wage.
                  2Another implication of the modified model that the correlation
         between the disturbances of the labor supply function and the participation
        equation need not be unity because there is a source of variation in the
        labor supply function that does not effect the participation equation
        (maximum availability of close substitutes h*).
                                     38-A

        The choice of the dependent variable
                                               crucially affects the Outcome
of such tests. In results not reported here, use of the conventional
                                                                     measure
of labor supply defined as the product of "usual hours per week" and
                                                                       "usual
weeks" leads to precisely opposite
                                     implications, i.e., one would accept a
model of fixed costs. But as previously noted, the standard measures induce

the illusion of fixed costs via
                                  reporting error that overstates the extent
of labor supply and the fiequency of occurence of standard reporting

intervals so that empirical analyses based on this measure of labor supply

yield misleading conclusions.
                                         39

                             Summary and Conclusions
          In this paper, the bias that results from using nonrandomly selected
data is discussed within the specification error framework of Griljches and
mail. A computationally tractable technique is discussed that enables
economists   to utilize simple regression techniques to estimate         behavioral
function free of selection bias.         Asymptotic properties of the estimator
are developed.

          A modal of female labor supply and wage rates is estimated with this

technique. The empirical results suggest that selection bias is an important

problem in estimating labor supply functions but is less important in
estimating wage functions. Very high estimates of the elasticity of female
labor   supply are derived but these are shown to be consistent with conventional

estimates that ignore selection bias. The labor force experience of the wife

is shown to be an endogenous variable in labor supply equations but not in

wage functions.

          Some informal   tests   of the model of Beckman   (l974a)   are presented.
Many   implications   of the model appear to be in accord with the data but an

expanded model that introduces the notion of limited household accessibility

to low cost substitutes for the wife's time appears to fit the data better.

With a proper measure of labor supply, the implications of a model with fixed

costs of work in a dominant role are rejected by the data.
                                       APPENDIX A*


The Asymptotic Distribution of Estimators
Based on an Estimated
           For   notational convenience rewrite equation (7a) in the text


()                    a i8i +      a2
                                  a22
                                                 A1 ÷


                                                    il,...,T1< T

When    an estimated value of A is used in place of the true A1, equation (7a)
is    modified to read


                 Yli —   i$l + 22
                                c12
                                             A1 +
                                                        (a22)
                                                                         (Ai
                                                                               -
                                                                                   Ài)
                                                                                         +
                                                                                             Vii.

Estimates of A are taken from probit functions fit on the full sample of T

observations. Thus, we Iciow

                                   8
                 /f (8/4 —             L/2
                                             —   N(0,     E),
                                 a22

Since A1      A(Z.)      A(— X2182/a2), and        since        A   is   a twice     continuously
differentiable function of


                 pun ? — plim    A(Zi) —     pun A(_X2i82Ia2l2)

and

                 /F (A1 — X)     N(O,               x2 z X).

          *
         Remarks by Takashi Amemiya stimulated this section. Of course, he
is not responsible for any errors.

                                          40
                                                41

 It   is useful to bear in mind that the sample size for the probit estimates
 (T) exceeds the sample size used to estimate equation (A2) (T1).
        The fact that X converges in probability to      does not imply that
 least   squares estimates of              a12ia2 based on A converge in distribution
 to an estimate based on a known                but convergence,      in probability does
imply consistency of the least squares estimator.

          There are three cases to consider: Case 1:                a12 —0 Case 2;                 —
constant.       Case 3: The general case.

          Case One is an important special case. Clearly, under the
                                                                    null
hypothesis that °i2 c        o (i.e., that      there is no selection bias) the regression

estimator based on an estimated A converges in distribution to the estimator

based on known A. This result is useful in practical work because of the

important   nature of the null         hypothesis.

          Case    2 is uninteresting. If no variables affect the probability of
sample selection, it is not possible to estimate a12fa2                 as long as

contains an intercept term. If the intercept is suppressed, Case 2 is a

special   case of Case 3 below.
          Case    3 is the general case and its development will
                                                                 require some
argument.       Sampling is assumed      to   be "fixed in repeated samples" sampling.
There are L distinct data patterns
                                               (x. x2 ), t
                                                     £     £
                                                                   l,...,L        Assume L large
enough so that all parameters of equation (7a) can be estimated as sample
size increases (this requires at least K1 + 1 distinct X2 configurations
                                                         2.
and at least K2 distinct     patterns).
                         x11       I
          For   each configuration, indexed by 2., the number of observations
                                                               T
becomes large (T2. •    co). But       suppose that tim
                                                         T -
                                                                   ,0   <
                                                                            F2.
                                                                                  <   1.   Given



          1The    ensuing   propositions are true for more general data schemes but
"fixed in repeated samples" sapling is conceptually simple and appropriate
to the survey data analyzed in the body of the paper.
                                               42


 the sample selection rule, only some fraction of the
                                                                      observations (c(z))
 have observations on
                          Y1.
         For    data configuration t, the error term of equation (Al) may be
 written as

                                          a
                                                        L    £


We seek the distribution of the terms



                  °12
                            T A
                             £
                                   (A —A )'(z )
                                    j it                it
                                                             T
                                                                 £ iiA V t(z )

                           id         £                      ii iç
Note that (z. ) appears in the expression because only proportion G(Z )
             it
                                                                                             of
                                                                                        it
the random sample of Tt observations generate an observed Y1.

        It is straighcfortjard to prove that the second term in equation (A3)

converges in distribution to the random variable


                                              Tt A1 V1
                                                    £   £
                                  t(z )z


The interesting aspect of (A3) is that the first term converges to a proper
normal random variable if      0. This is so because of the explicit
                          a12
exact dependence      built into successive values of Ai —              that    are all based
on the same set of probit coefficient estimates.

        In    fact,
                      T£ ii (Ai —A )                             2

                  2
                      Z
                                    ip•
                                              (z ) - N(0,
                                                    i
                                                             —
                                                             a12
                                                                 22
                                                                            )
        (a22)

where
                                                   43


                      (Ai)(Ai1)                   (a)1iz)"zi&,)nwzFLt)hhI2xzi E xb.

Then it is the case       that                                          -



                  a12
                                                 A(A — Xi)        •(z1) ,,——

                22           i—i v—i


                                            a2     L      L
                                                   Z      E         )
                                             22   £=1 L'=i    £ V

where   the variance does not converge to zero.
         The two terms in            (A3)
                               are asymptotically independent. (The proof
is trivia], and hence is omitted.) Now we derive the distribution of the
least squares estimators based on estimated X.
         Define

                      E                            Z
                                                                  —i
                          Xj1X11.s(z)                   G(z.)xA

                      I X.A.'flZ)                  S A (z1)
                                 T                        T



                                                   S
                          xj1x11(z)
           —   plim                                S




Under the previous assumptions, this matrix exists and is of full rank (K1 +          1).
         Then
                      1      —


           IF                        a12
                       1/2            1/2
                      a22            a22
                                                            44

                      '1 Xj1V1                                                               —
                                          •(Z)                           'z


                                r?                           2
                                                            a12
                                                        +
                      S i1V11 •(z)                          '22          S               —
                                                                                              A)   (Zi)
                                                                                        IT
          So

                      Si                            81


(A4)
                                                    a12          - N(O,           8 q   B')


where

                      £ Xn1G(Z1)X                                S
                                      T                                       T
                11    S An            z1)x1                      Z Au
                                                                              T

                       L         I!                                  L        L

                2
                       E
                      i—lt=i
                                 S X11
                                          2.
                                                 liii             L].
                                                                     £ L,SXjif
                       L         L'                                  L        L
               a22
                       S EX                 II                       S   EQ
                     i—i 2.3.                    1tL              L=J. t'—i

where            012
        n — (1 +                          —
                                                 Xi))
                     "22

                                                                                                      z
        hut,               az
                                it
                                      az )Xi(PLFL,)h12 (Zj)t(Zi)X2i
                                          it,

                     _____           ax
                 —
                     (az        31 )(Xj)(Xj)(PLFL,)hhf2 G(Zi)$(Zj                                     ) • (x21 £
         L'Lt
                           -z         -z'


and            has been previously defined.
        Li
                                                   45
                                                                                    2
            Under          the null hypothesis of no    sample   selection bias,   —,    and
                                                                                   a22
 B 4, B is the standard least squares estimator for the variance—covariance
 matrix of the regression coefficients. In the general case, the parameters
 of    4, are estimable so that B *         B'is   estimable.

            One may also derive approrimite cas estimators that do not converge

 in distribution to the GLS estimators with known
                                                                  A. The essential ingredients
 of their derivation are available from previous results. Let
                                                                     denote
                                                                   £
 the   number of observations on configuration £ that appear in the selected

 sample. Array the observations so that the first                      observations are on

 configuration 1, etc. Then for a sample of size                      one may write


                                            n1I 11                      0

                  K          E(V1V) a                    n2rT
                                                           0
                                                                      L'TlL

                                        2                 w12i1j        WlLiliL
                                   .f.i&    Wfli2ij       @22i2i2           S

                                      a22
                                                                       LLiLiL


where
                      azaz9.,               rx
and i1    is a             x 1 vector of "ls". Now Z is a positive definite matrix so

                                            EPP,
where P is an orthogonal matrix.

           Then define


                 4,
                           a (L_)
                               A  _____
                      9.
                              3Z vT£
9o   that K may be written as
                                                     46

                                  nI
                                   1
                                                              0


                      K—a11
                                       o
                                                                  a

                             2

                         a22

                                  L ®*L

and   K1 may be        written as

                                  I       •n1             0
                                      T11 1
                 Kl_a1
                                      o


                                                                        ®1P;'. . I
                                  i®;           (i                                   •}

                        1
where        -
                 (*2.)(n2.)(a11)
             a2              a2            L
        ——       12
and                   (1 +
                             a22afl
(see, e.g., Graybill (1969), Tbm. 8.3.3).

          Let the 1 x (K1 + 1) data vector for observation I
                                                                                  (X11, A1), be
denoted   by y. The observation matrix is                         the   x (K1 + 1) matrIx   R. Then
the   appropriate aS estimator is
                                             47


                                      —




Than

                            —          -
               ,TT
                     1GLS       S1)        N(O, V K1 R)


Note   that the elements of K are estimable.
                                    APPENDIX B.l


        In the 1967 National Longitudinal Survey of the work experience

of women age 30—44, 5083 observations are available. The following sample

selection criteria were imposed to reach a usable sample of 1735 women, 812

of whom work in 1966. The number of observations failing to meet a criteria

is given in the column to to the right of the rejection criterion. Observations

may be rejected for any of the reasons listed, and a given observation may

be rejected for several reasons.

        (1) Nonwhite                                          1477

        (2) Married Spouse present                            1019

        (3)   Farmers                                          252

        (4) Missing husband's income                           421
        (5) Missing annual         of husband
                                  hours                        336
              (Including no work group)
        (6) Missing wife's experience                          301

        (7)   Missing wage data on wife                        126


Assets were assigned in 165 cases. An equation is fit on the available 1570

observations. The equation is

              Assets   (1967) —   —6891   +    73   (wife's experience)
              +   1647 (wife's education) + 466.4          (number of children less than six)
              +   806.8 (husband's education) + 2040 (husband's age) — 17.475

              (husband's age squared).


                                          48
                                  APPENDIX B.2


                   Sample Means of the Data Used in the Analysis

(From 1967 National Longitudinal Survey of the Work Experience of Women 30—44)


                                            Workers          Total Sample
Number   of   Observations                   812                   1735

Number of children less than 6              .312                   .565

Assets ($)                                  11,711             11,974

Eusband's 1966 hourly wage                  3.45               3.73
  rate ($/hr)

Wife's education (yrs.)                    11.42              11.29

Labor force experience (yrs.)              10.63               7.80

Wife's annual    hours   worked            1289

Wife's hourly wage rate                    2.12

         A                                   .6412             1.12




                                      49
                                       APPENDIX C.l


            The histograms for reported weeks worked      in       reported annual
                                                               1966,
hours    worked,   and   estimated   hours worked based on a division of 1966 earnings
by   a   questionnaire wage rate are displayed In that order. The ordinate gives

the number of observations for the value of the
                                                         variable displayed on the
abcjssa.




                                           50
 0
               'U,


                                                                                                       P,

 ,na
 —

                                                                                                  p    ri
                                                                                            .1
                                                                                            .          N
 e
 447
                                                                                            4!
               0•                                                                           * I N •cnzmIu#op,
          —In
               N

               N
               -4
                                                                                    .:.:• I N
                                                                                            *1
                                                                                            *1
          —o
               0'                                                                           •:
                                                                                            •          N
                                                                                         •:
                                                                                         'I
                                                                                         *1
                                                                                         U
                                                                                 4. II N •CQ'b+cp
          rip.                                                          4               N OONIsJ*OM
          —c
               '0
                                                                                • 0II    4
          —c
               I'                                                               •        4
                                                                                                      —
               'C                                                                        4
                                                                                         4
          .o-4e                                                                          4
               a
               N                                                                         *4
          .G   N
                                                                                4
                                                                                          4
               p..                                                                        4
               N
               p.
               v,
               C
                                                                            .           4
                                                                                         'I
                                                                                        ••1— •IU,0+op
               v,
               4
               0'                                                                       •1
               p.                                                                   • 41
                                                                                      * II —
 .—
               4                                                                        *1
               .4
U,          '0                                                                          41
            '0                                                                          *1
UI
IL)
          InC
            N                                                          *                                   •Op.W*Cr,
 3-            0                                                                        41
      p        o                                    -
                                                                  .
                                                                                        •1
'U
Is.
               '0
               In                                                                       4,
                                                                                        4p G.—U,*WöON
—              6,
P
4         -0'0
U,             0                                                                        4
           4                                                                            4
3
ar        ——
               .
               in
                                                                                    4                 p. •'OCNW+CN

UI
     I     C
           .
a         —0                                                                        4         I       '0
.4        —0                                                                    4
3              0                                                                              I
.4
          ——
            0                                                                       *4
4
.4
          —4
          -4—                                                                       4         I
                                                                                              I
           4                                                                        4
—
          —'0
           0                                                                    4
U,         0'                                                                           0)
-4          p.                                                                          41
C         —o                                                                            *1
4
—
          —0
          ...O
'C
            U)
                                                                                        •1
                                                                                        *1
>           0,                                                                          4fI                 roOIa,.0..


U
3
U                    N        N     N    N    —         —    —        —                 0
a                    o                   0    0         0    0        04                0
C                    +    -
                              +     +    +    4         4                               4
0.                                  UJ   UI   III                     Iii
                     o        Isa
                              '0    N    0.   p.
                                                        UI
                                                        0
                                                             Mi
                                                             0'       —
                                                                                        UI
                                                                                        0
U,                   0'
                     0
                              In    0
                                    4S   N    4         0    '0       In                0
U,
a                     S
                              p.
                               S
                                         N              N
                                                        S
                                                             '0
                                                              S
                                                                      —
                                                                       S
                                                                                        04
                     -S       —          —    0,        p.            N                 —
tJ
      .4
      C
          -
                                                                                                                                                        fl.d-.m,.,e0p
                                                                                                                                                        r ed —Ou.iop)       52

      U,


                                                                                                                                                        U1e..l4


      •                                                                                                                                                 C .CIh    .Mw+om
  C
  •1                                                                                                                                                I



                                                                                                                                                        .


                                                                                          -                                                         I   -d   •flNCW,Cl9




                                                                                                                                                    I   •)   •I'—tOIj.Jon

  •              —
                 'I                                                                                                              • •1
  -I                                                                         •
                 —                                                                                                                         *1I
  C
  'I
                 —                                                                                                                         •i           I.   •eJmnt.J,cr,
  Cu
                 —
                 —                                                                                                                         *1
                                                                                                                                           •1
  I—
  C                                                                                                                              .              ,
                                                                                                                                          *1 CII SGCCW+OP1
  a                                                                                                                                             I
                 N
 I,
                 04
                 P1                                                                                                              •
                                                                                                                                      *I
                                                                                                                                      4

 *—              PC
                                                                                                                                 *4             ,
                 F,                                                                                                                             I
              —F,
                                                                                                                                 4              I
                                                                                                                                                I
 a
 ILl           t
               C
                               -


                                                                                                                        *   *
 o            —o                                                                                                                                I       CM •...4Ijj+Qfl
                                                                                                               0
 U
 a            —-'                                                                                                   *                           I
                                                                                                                                                I
 —            .—p..                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                                I
              0401                                                                                                                                      CM C.UJtoIY)
 •            PC.                       4                                                                                                       I

              Fit..
              P1—
                           *                *
                                                                                                                                                $
                                                                                                                                                        N 0fl111+OIfl
              —at                                                       *                                                                       I
          -   CIP)
              —t                                               *                                                        .                       I            wcCiu,cn
              Cdt..                                  4
 a            —t
                C                                                                                                                               I — •IQ1tw+ofl
 o            —P--                                                              4
 I            —'*
                                                                                4
                                                                                              *                                                 I
      I       —p.
              _I_                                                               *                                                               I
 C                                                                                                                                              I
              -.ei                                                                                                                                      — •F,N..IuJ+Ofl
a             —I.,
              —m
                                                                                                  **
a             —.
C
o
o
              0
              04
                U3
                                                                                    4
                                                                                        4
                                                                                                       **                                               —    •Cttw+ofl
a             ——                                                                                          *
              —o                                                                                              *                                 I

o             —c                                                                                       4                                                $et—40W*OO1
N                                                                           4
              Odo
                                                                                        4
                                                                                                       4
Cli
              —p..
              0d04                                                                                                                                      m.Ot..Iu*otd
-I            —v
              —p.-
                                                                            * I.
—
a
              010
              alp.
              n..
              —G                            *
                                                                   4
                                                                                                                                                        i •o,i.oi
-C
>             —C—
                                                                        4
                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                I
                —                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                        — .Oouw.-O-.


C-
LI

a
o                     a+           —
                                   0            0
                                                         —
                                                         0
                                                                   —
                                                                   0
                                                                                    —                         —             0             0
a                                  +                                                0                         0             0.            0
                      Cu
                                                                                                              •                           ,
                                                         Cu        Ui                                                       CU
                      0            0            0        0         0                0
                                                                                        ILl                   Cli
                                                                                                              0             0
                                                                                                                                          III

                                                                                                                                          0
LI                    0            0            0        0         U                0                         0             0             0
o                     0.           UI
                                    •
                                                C        It)       0                                          0             0             0
                                                U                   .                    U                     U             U             U
                                   PC           PC       N         N                —                         —             I)            —
     N

                       S
                                                                                     Ill •NOOIIIeO_.     53
          ad...                                                     1                Vt •..EQIJ+O...
     U,                                                             4I
     C                                                                  SIII
                                                                    •           I
                                                                                     4 •cOqLu.o..
          —In

                                                                                     4 cr'c'w.o..
            Iv                                                          4'
                                                                        SII
            I-                                                          4i
                                                                        *I4
          tIN                                                       *
                                                                    *
            4                                                           4            Ifl •CP4t+Q..4
                                                                        *
                                                                        *            fl
          —c
                                                                        4
                                                                        •l  I       fl.Incew,o—

          —V.
            Iv                                                          4
            •0                                                          *           N     •Ct41zJ40...
                                                                        *
                                                                    *       I


           p..
                                                                        'I          N .VIGQ'w+O...

            I,
          —0                                                            *
           N
           C                                                                        ('4 CUIIL1+0...


          _e4
                                                                     4 — .Or,41L140...
                                                                     *
          —en
                                                                     *1 -.
           0'
                                                                     'I
 UI                                                                  *1
 II:                                                                 4 I — •I'1NtW+0.4
w         —c                                                        SII
           •0
'U                                                                  *1I — •0iooIuJ40
IS.       ..N                                                       *5
—
en
          —t                                                                        C.—t0w.0o
                                                                    4'I
           e                                                                        VI •VIGOIJJ+O0
Ut
_J                                                                  *1I
a                                                                   SI
—
a                                                                   S               In 0t0W+OO
C                                                                   SII
           '0                                                       5 I — •000lzl+O'J


I-
                  N        N           N     Iv   N                 0
oa                0
                  +
                           0S    0     0          04
                                                        —
                                                        0
                                                              —
                                                              0     0
Q.
                                 +     +     +          4     4     +
                           lii                                      b
                  —        S           "a
                                       IS)        IS)
                                                  —
                                                        Iii
                                                        C
                                                              Ii)
                                                              C     C
                  —
                  4I
                           p..   en
                                       —
                                                  en
                                                  N                 0
C
                                 II)
                                        .    C
                                             I     I          V'
                                                               I    0
a                 en       eq    01    N     —    —     N     In    —
U
                                     REFERENCES



 Amemiya,   T. "Multivariate Regression and Simultaneous Equation Models
            When the Dependent Variables are Truncated Normal," Econometrica
            42, No. 6 (November 1974): 999—1011.
              "Regression Analysis When the Dependent Variable is Truncated
          Normal," Econonetrica 41, No. 6 (1973): 997—1017.
 Becker, C.. S. "A Theory of Marriage: Part Two," Journal of Political
          Economy 82, No. 2, Part II (1974): 511—526.
 Brunt, Harold. "Comment on 'Shadow Prices, Market Wages and Labor Supply,"
         IDA, June 1976.
Cain, Glenn and H. Watts.       Income Maintenance and   Labor Supply. Markham, 1973.
Cogan, John. "Labor Supply with Time and Money Costs of Participation,"
        The Rand Corporation (August,1976).
Cragg, J. "Some Statistical Models for Limited Dependent Variables with
          Application to the Demand for Durable Goods," Econometrica 39, No. 5
          (September 1971): 829—844.

Gronau,   Reuben. "The Effect of Children on the Housewife's Value of Tine,"
          Journal of Political Economy (March/April 1973).
__________ "Wage Comparisons—A Selectivity Bias," Journal of Political
        Economy (November/December 1974): 1119—1144.
Ranoch, Giora. "Hours and Weeks in the Theory of Labor Supply," The Rand
        Corporation, R—1787 (July 1976).
Heckman, James H.   (1974a), "Shadow Prices, Market Wages and     Labor   Supply,"
          Econonetrica (July 1974): 679—694.

_________      (1974b).    "Effects of Child Care Programs on Women's Work Effort,"
          Journal of   Political Economy (April 1974): 491—519.
__________      "TheCommon Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sample
          Selection and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for
          Such Models," The Annals of Economic and Social Measurement (Dec., 1976).
__________      "Dynamic   Models of Female Labor Supply," Unpublished paper,
          University   of Chicago, March 1977.



                                       54
                                           55

Johnson, N.    and   S.
                    Kotzz. Distributions in Statistics: Continuous Multi—
          variate Distributions. New York: Wiley, 1972.

Lewis, H. Gregg. "Comments on Selectivity Biases in Wage Comparisons,"
        Journal of Political Economy (November/December 1974): 1145—1155.

__________   Unionism and       Relative   Wages. Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, 1963.

Mincer, Jacob. "Labor Force Participation of Married Women," in Mpcts
        of Labor Economics, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1962.

Nelson, Forrest. "Censored Regression Models with Unojserved Stochastic
        Censoring Thresholds," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
          Paper 63, 1975.
Marion, N. and J. Press. "Mu.ltivariate Log—Linear Probability Models for
       the Analysis of Qualitative Data," Discussion Paper #1, Center
       for Statistics and Probability, June 1976, Northwestern University.
Rosen,   Harvey. "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage—Hours
          Determination," Econometrica 44, No. 3 (May 1976): 485—508.

Rosen, Sherwin.        "Comment on   Heclnnants Paper," Journal of Political Economy
          (March/April 1974).
Rothenberg, T. and C. Leenders, "Efficient Estimation of Simultaneous
       Equation Systems," Econometrica 32, No. 1 (January 1964): 57—76.
Schultz, T. Paul. "Estimating Labor Supply Equations for Married Women,"
         The Rand Corporation R—1265—NIH/EDA (February 1975).
Shea, et al. Dual Careers: A Longitudinal Study of Labor           Market Expetience.
         Columbus,  Ohio: Center for Eimnn Resource Research, The Ohio State
         University, May 1970.
Tobin, J. "Estimation of Relationships for Limited Dependent Variables,"
         Econometrica 26 (1958): 24—36.
Wu, D. Unteative Tests of Independence between Stochastic Regressions
         and   Their   Disturbances," Econonatrica 41 (1973): 733—750.
