                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF CHILDREN'S HEALTH
                      AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT


                          Linda Nasif Edwards
              Queens College and Graduate School of the City
                    University of New York and NEER
                          Michael Grossman
               Graduate School of the City University of
                          New York   and NBER
                      Working Paper No. 180


CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF 1113MM BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
                National Bureau of Economic Research. Inc.
                 261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                                 May 1977




                   Preliminary; Not for Quotation

     NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for coments only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

     This report has not undergone the review accorded official NEER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for approval
by the Board of Directors.

     Research for this paper was supported by PHS Grant Number 5 P01
HSOO45J. from the National Center for Health
                                             Services Research, ERA,
to the National Bureau of Economic Research and by a grant from the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to the NBER.
                         AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF CHILDREN' S HEALTH
                                 AND INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT

                         Linda Nasif Edwards and Michael Grossman*


          The role of health and     intellectual   development in the determination
 of economic and      social   well—being is a subject of increasing concern for
 both    social   science and public policy. Numerous studies have demonstrated
 that adults' earnings and       life   eçpectancy depend on their schooling, health,
 and ability.1 Others
                           suggest important causal relationships running from

 health and intelligence at early stages in the life cycle to years of

 formal schooling completed and from schooling to adults' health. A common

 theme in these studies as well as in the massive literature on the effects

of home environmental variables on children's
                                                       cognitive development is that
well—being at later stages in the life cycle depends on well—being at early

stages.

          The basic purpose of our research is to contribute to an understand-

ing of the joint determination of children's cognitive development and

their health. Although there is a large literature concerning the first



   *
       This
          is a revised version of a paper presented at a conference on "The
Family and the Subsequent Development of the Child" sponsored by the Mathe-
matical Social Science Board in Stanford, California, March 24—26, 1977.
A preliminary version of the paper also was presented at a Health Economics
Research Organization (HERO) session at the Allied Social Science Associa-
tions 1976 meetings in Atlantic City, New Jersey, September 16—lB. We
would like to thank Harold J. Dupuy, Reuben
                                             Gronau, Edward Lazear, Arleen
Leibowitz, Irving F. Leveson, Robert Lipsey, Robert T. Michael, Barry U.
Popkin, Stephen A. Richardson, Sherwin Rosen, Nigel Tomes, and Robert J.
Willis for helpful comments and suggestions; and Ann Dukes Colle and Jacob
Gestlialter for research assistance.

   1For a partial survey of the literature on relationships
schooling,                                                  among earnings,
           health, and intelligence of adults and children, see Grossman
(1975).
                                     —2—


  of these issues, there has been little work on the latter.2 We
                                                                 also ex-
  plore interrelationships between various
                                                aspects of children's physical
  health and   their intellectual development
                                                and, in Particular, attempt
  to answer the important question
                                     of whether poor health retards the
  cognitive development of children.3

       More specifically, this Paper, which is part of a larger project,

 examines the detenninants of
                                cognitive development and health of chil-
 dren from six to eleven
                           years of age in Cycle II of the U.S. Health

 Examination Survey. We focus on the roles of home environmental
                                                                 vari-
 ables and proxies for the endowed
                                     (initial or inherited) level of health
 in the current health and
                             development functions with a view toward un-
 covering similarities in or differences between health and development

 effects. The empirical work is guided by an insight provided by
                                                                 a
 theoreticai model of
                                           transfers of human and non—human
wealth: namely, to understand the behavior of parents with
                                                           respect to
their children's health and development, it is important to
                                                            distinguish


   2
     Starfield (1975) emphasizes
                                  that, although many persons have studied
the effects of medical care and
                                  socioeconomic characteristics on infant
mortality, relatively few have examined the effects of these variables
the health of children who                                               on
recent exceptions, see, forsurvive   the first year of life. For a few
                               example, Kapl, Lave, and Leinhardt (1972);
flu (1973); Kessrier (1974);
Inman (1976).
                             Haggerty, Roghmann, and Pless (1975); and


   3Birch and Gussow (1970), whose entire book focuses
                                                       on the effects of
health on learning, point out that most of the evidence they
bear on the issue is indirect because "...                   bring to
                                           there has been little inves-
tigation of the specific relationships
                                       between the physical status of
poor children and their later developme    (. 10)."
                                                     For one attempt to
investigate these relationships in a sample of very young children,
                                                                    see
Broman, Nichols, and Kennedy (1975).
                                    —3—


low income families from
                           high income families. Clearly, this is a policy

relevant insight, for public policy often is aimed at low
                                                          income groups.
Our results indicate that it would be incorrect to formulate
                                                             policies
directed at improving the welfare of children in low income families
                                                                     on
the basis of empirical results
                               derived from examining the population at
large.
                                                 I—1


                                            I.    The Model


        In this section we outline an economic model of children's health
                                                                          and
  intellectual     development. The model serves as a vehicle for organizing and

  interpreting empirical research with a data set as complex as the Health

  Examination Survey. While our model
                                                 draws heavily on analyses of inter—
  generatjon transfers by Becker (1967, 1974); Friedman and
                                                                       Leibowitz
  (1975); Ishikawa (1975); Becker and Tomes (1976); and Tomes
                                                              (1977), one
 of its novel aspects is that it
                                         suggests appropriate ways to estimate the
 effects of parents' income and other variables on children's health
                                                                     and
 development.


 A. General Analytical Framework

       To start the analysis,
                                     assume that parents trake decisions over two
 periods (0, 1) or stages in their life cycle. In period 0
                                                           their children
 are completely dependent upon them for financial support, while
                                                                  in period
 1 the children become financially independent. 1 The
                                                      tiarents' utility functicn
 can be specified as


                          U   =
                                  U(C0, C1, N, Q),                                 (1)


where C0 and
               C1 represent their consumption in each period, N is their
total number   of children, and Q is      quality per child.     This utility

   1For a rrndel of intergenera0 transfers in which the Deriod of
denendency is treated as an endogenous variable and associated with
years of formal schooling completed
                                           by children, see Ishikawa (1975).
                                         1—2


  function embodies the assimiption that .sithin a given family the
                                                                       quality
 of each child is the sane.2
          En   a general model, child quality would depend on the child's expected
 lifetime      wealth, health, intellectual development, and perhaps other fac-

 tors,   so that these variables would enter the utility function as separate
 argunents.       To simplify the analysis and to obtain testable propositions,

 we assume, however, that child
                                    quality is determined solely by the child's
 lifetime wealth or, equivalently, by the present value of earned and non—

 earned income in the period of independence:



                            Q=B+tq(H, D)     .
                                                                               (2)

In this equation B is a financial
                                       transfer or bequest made by parents to
the child at the beginning of the
                                       period of independence3 and W is the
Present   value of earnings, Earnings    are assumed to depend cn the sthcks
ofphysical health capital (H) and knowledqe or cognitive development capital
(D) which are two compQnents of human capital,
                                                       In particular, the marginal



   2For a model in which the quality of each child
see Becker and Tomes (1976).                       in the family can differ,
                              They show that
ized across children in the same family as   quality would tend to be equal-
eauilibrium conditions in their model.
                                                 a result of the first—order

      more plausible assumption is that financial transfers are made during
the period of independence rather than at its beginning.  This, however,
does not affect the analysis if the tax treatment of the transfers are un-
changed and if individuals face "good" capital markets. See, for example,
Blinder (1973).
                                                    1—3


  products of these stocks (WH =                   and       =
                                                         W           are positive.4
             The amount of health and
                                                development are given by the following iden-
  tities (in the absence of depreciation)



                                H=H0+I                                                            (3)

                                D=D0+G ,                                                          (4)


 where H0 is the initial or inherited stock of health (genetic endowment
                                                                         of
 health) ,       I   is net investment in health,                is the initial or inherited
 stock of development, and C is net investment in development.5 To
                                                                   com-
 plete the rudiments of the
                                           model, we specify production functions of in-
 vestments in health and development as



                                I = 1CM,
                                           F, H0, 0)


                             C — G(X,
                                           F', H0, D0)                                           (6)




    4Throughout this paper, a single capital letter subscript
 first—order partial derivative, while a double               denotes a
order partial derivative. Thus,                                     subscript denotes a second—

                     NH    aw/aR, w1         D2w/H2,     WDH E


etcetera.  In Edwards and Grossman (1976), we discuss plausible signs of
the second derivatives of the earnings function, but we make no assumption
about these signs in this paper. Note that the marginal
equation (2) is constant                                 product of B in
                             = 1)
       =   0).                    and independent of H and                     °BB =         =
2BD                                                                                    2BH

      5We treat           and
                     H0             as exogenous variables. In a full model they would
have endogenous components that would be
                                         determined by factors such as
prenatal medical care and parental characteristics.
                                           1—4


 In equations (5)     and   (6), M is a vebtor of endogenous inputs in the health
 production function, X is a vector of endogenous inputs in the development
 production function, and F arid F' are vectors of exogenous variables that
 affect the efficiency of the production process. Examples of elements in
 the N vector include medical care, nutrition, housing quality, and parents'
 time; while examples of elements in the X vector include school quality,

 home learning aids, and parents' time. Examples of elements in F and F'

 are   parents'   schooling and parents' age.6 We assume that equations (5)
 and   (6) do not vary autng children in a given family and further that all

children in a given family        have   identical endowments (H0 and D0). These

assumptions insure that the optimal amounts of B, H, and D as well as Q

will   be the same   for    all children in the family.7

        Note that the initial stocks of health and       development   (H0, D0) are
included   in the production functions of both I and G. While no assimiption

is made at this time with respect to the directional effects of these

initial stocks on I and C, this flexible specification allows for a number

of possibilities, For example, the effect of medical care inputs on

changes in health may be greater when an individual's stock of health is

at a lower level (i.e. 3I/H0 c 0). Or, children with greater inherited

intellectual ability may augment that ability more easily (i.e.




   6The vectors F and F' might or might not be identical.


   71f the production functions and/or initial endowments of children
                                                                       vary,
B, D, and H would tend to differ aitng children but Q would not (see
Becker and Tomes 1976). In future work we may pursue theoretical and
empirical analyses in which endowments vary among children in the same
family.
                                                      i—S


  BG/DQ > Q)•8             Further, this specification allows for an interplay between

  health and development1 and in particular, it allows for the possibility

  that low initial health levels will affect
                                                               realized intellectual ability.9

         Parents maximize the utility function given by equation (1) subject

  to the children's quality function [equation (2)] ,                    the   initial stocks of
  health and development, the production functions of health and development

  fecuations (5) and (6)], and their wealth constraint. The last constraint

 has the form



                     S =
                           C0
                                +
                                    C1
                                         (1 +   r)1   + N [B (1 +   r)   + pM + qX)    ,        (7)



 where r is the rate of interest, p is the price of M,                     q   is
                                     r)
                                                                                    the price of X,
 and the quantity B(l +                     + pM + qX is the present value of expenditures
                10
 per child.




    8This assumption is made by Becker and Tomes (1976). on the other
                                                                       hand,
 Ploom's (1964) findings suggest that the initial level of measures such as
 height, IQ, and school achievement does not affect the rate at which
                                                                      a child
 augments these measures.

    9Most   of the literature on
                              the interaction between child health and de-
velopment emphasizes the impact of low levels of investments in health at
the preschool stage of the child's life
                                        cycle on subsequent cognitive de-
velopment (for example, Birch and Gussow l970 Broman, Nichols, and
Kennedy 1975). to examine the impact of both current and initial health
on development or to allow for full simultaneity between health and de-
velopment, it would be necessary to introduce more than one period of
• dependency.


    10From now on we treat M and X as scalars rather than vectors.
                                     1—6


       From the first—order conditions for the maximization of utility with
 respect to C0, C1, N, B, H, and X,1' we obtain

                               =    (q/Q)   = (1 +   r)1    .                     (8)



 This is the familiar result (which can be obtained directly by minimizing

 the cost of producing a given amount of Q)      that   the ratio of a price of

 an input to its marginal product in the Q      function   must be equal for all

 inputs. In the case of B, the price of B relative to the price of parents'

 current consumption (C0) is (1 +    r)     because in order to raise B, and

hence Q, by one dollar, C0 must fall by (1 +         r)3   dollars. The marginal

product of B is constant at one dollar. The cozmrion value of the two

equalities in (8) may be interpreted as the marginal cost of quality,

which is completely determined by the interest rate once the optimal




   11'The first—order conditions are


                      U0


                      U1


                      UN
                           =


                           =
                               l
                               Az
                                     +




                           =   AN(l +    r)1
                           =   ANp


                      UpQx =   ANq



where U. is the marginal utility of C., A is the marginal utility of wealth,
and z defines the present value of expenditures                      —l
                                                per child [B (1 + r)    +
pH + qX].
                                         1—7

  inputs are chosenj2 Second—order
                                         conditions require that the marginal
  products of M and X fall as N and X
                                          increase, respectively, and that
  children's earnings (W) is produced
                                         subject to rising marginal cost.13
          To summarize this model, children's wealth at the inception of in-

  dependence has a future earnings component and
                                                     a bequest component.
 Parents' investments aimed at increasing
                                               children's earning power are
 subject to decreasing returns, while those that are in the form of a be-

 quest are not. Cost minimization (or utility
                                                   maximization) dictates that
 no matter how much wealth (Q) parents wish to transfer to their children,

 the amount of earning power or human capital (w) they will provide is

 the same and is totally determined by the interest rate and the nature

 of the marginal   cost schedule of W.    Put differently, the least—cost ex-
 pansion path of 9   is one   in which M and X and therefore H, D, and W    remain
 constant.    If the optimal level of W is greater than their desired 9,

 parents   simply leave their children a negative bequest in the form of net

 debts.




   12An alternative interpretation of equation (8) for the optimal
ties of M and X is that        — 1 and (Q/) — 1                    quanti-
                                                  define the marginal rates
of return on investments in health and
                                       development. In equilibrium these
rates of return must equal the rate of return on a financial transfer (r).

   13The relevant second—order conditions are


                        9MM       CD
                                  Co
                        'MM 9XX
                        C-,       >n

These  conditions follow because the utility function
in B, N, and X and because the marginal product of B isin"weakly
                                                          the p
                                                                  separable"
                                                                function is
Constant 9BB =       =    =
                                                  I—8


                 These ideas are depicted
                                              graphically in Figure 1, which shows the
  determination             of the optimal annwits of Q   W,    and B for three different
  families.14  The curve labeled MC shows the relationship between w                    and
  the marginal cost of W for combinations of M arid X that satisfy
  (p/Q)          =   (q/Q)'5       The point at which the MC curve intersects the hori-

 zontal axis,                =
                                 W(H0, D0), is that level of lifetime earnings if no
 investments in health and development are made during the
                                                           period of de-
 pendence. The              curves labeled d1, d2, and d3 depict the relationship
 between          the marginal benefit of Q(d =               where   A is the marginal
                                                     UQ/AN.
 utility of wealth) and Q at three different wealth levels      >     >
                                                            (S3
 These functions may be interpreted
                                    as compensated (utility or real income
 constant)           demand functions for quality. The
                                                              optimal amount of W always
 is given by
                      Q2,
                            where MC equals (1 +   r)1.   The optimal amounts of




   14This diagram and our
                          discussion of the determination of the optimal
amounts of Q, W, and B are closely related to Fisher's
analysis of investment and interest.                   (1930) classic


   The precise nature of the marginal cost
                                              curve depends upon the be-
havior of marginal products of inputs in the investment
marginal products of stocks in the earnings function. Infunctions
                                                         the
                                                                  and
                                                             diagram
we assume diminishing marginal productivity of inputs
    <       0)
                                                       (I < 0 and
                  and constant marginal productivity of stocks (WHB =               = 0).
An alternative set of assumptions would                                       WDD

of inputs (I =                          be constant marginal
                                   = 0) and diminishing                    productivity
                                                        marginal productivity of stocks
(W 0 and WDD <
        <
                                 0).
                         These alternative asstnflptions would not alter the
sign of the slope of the MC function and therefore would not alter
basic analysj.s. It also should be noted that for simplicity of       our
tion the marginal cost curve is drawn as                           exposi-
                                           a straight line. In fact,   it
could take a variety of forms
a curve concave to the origin, including  a curve convex  to the origin,
                                            or a straight line.
                                   1—9




                                                                  C

                                             S
                                                             /,
        H
                      _j (c
                      LA%J >)                           //
                                                   //
            \



                  1



6 65'                                    0




            v/b        '   (jt J         \.jr \V                      h+



                       F , U\' t
                                           I — 10




 Q(Q1,   2' and   Q3) are     determined by the intersections of the downward
 sloping demand    functions and the supply curve of Q——the horizontal line

 whose   height equals (1 +      r).
         For family 2, the     intersection of    its demand   Cd2) and supply curves
 is   at Q2.   Since        is the optimal W for all families, the financial
 transfer (B) equals zero for family 2. Family 3 makes a positive finan-
 cial transfer equal to distance Q2Q3, while family 1 makes a negative
 financial transfer equal to distance Q2Q1. Thus, in this model, differ-
 ences   in human capital of children are determined solely by differences

 in endowments and     in   marginal costs of producing this capital. Differ-

 ences among families in their demand for children's quality have no bear-

ing on differences in children's realized human capital.

         So far we have assumed that the financial transfer can be positive,

zero, or negative. In analyses of intergenerational transfers that are

similar to ours, Becker (1967); Friedman and Leibowitz (1975); Ishikawa

 (1975); Becker and Tomes (1976); and Tomes (1977) point out that it is

reasonable to impose a solvency constraint, a constraint that parents

cannot leave debts to their children, or that B > 0.             In terms of Figure 1,
the   imposition of a solvency constraint changes the supply curve of Q             as

follows. The TMconstrained" supply curve coincides with the MC curve up to

the point where MC = (1 +       r)1    and thereafter is horizontal at (1 +
(schedule      ab). The imposition of the solvency constraint does not

affect the quantities of Q and W selected by families 2 and 3, but it does

alter the quantities selected by family 1.           Family 1 chooses quality Qj'
where its demand function intersects the MC function.
                                                                 Since Qj   also   gives
the quantity of Vt if B equals zero
                                           (Qj
                                                 = w) the   parents in family 1
                                         I — 11




 choose      a larger quantity of Q in the constrained case (compare
                                                                                and Qj)
 but a smaller quantity of W (compare             =      and W1 =
          We   impose the solvency constraint in the rest of our analysis.16 As
 a    consequence, households whose demand functions intersect the supply func-
 tion    in its upward    sloning segment 1W0   a) will    demand more H, D,   X,   and M
 as    their income rises. That is, we anticipate a positive effect of

 parents' income or wealth on child health
                                                      or development at relatively low
wealth levels, where B equals zero, but not at relatively high wealth

 levels, where B exceeds zero. 17


B.     Demand Functions for Health and Development
          The above framework suggests a two—regime specification
                                                                  of demand

functions for children's earnings 1W), children's health capital (H),

children's development capital CD), and endogenous inputs in the pro-

duction of health and development CM and X).             Since we analyze only

health and development empirically in this paper, hereafter we focus on

the Properties of their demand functionsj8 Parents who do not make

financial      transfers to   their children (B = 0)     are members of Regime 1 and
have demand functions of the fonn



     16formally,   if   the constraint is binding, then the equi1ibriir condi-
tion   for B is replaced by the inequality                     (1   + r) 1
                                                  (tJQ/XN) C


   17For similar conclusions, see Becker (1967) ; Friedman
                                                           and Leibowitz
(1975); Ishikawa (1975); Becker and Tomes (1976); and Tomes (1977).


     18For   an analysis of input demand functions, see Edwards and Grossman
(1976).
                                            I — 1.2




                         H =         Cs, p,   q, F, F', H0, D0)                         (9)


                         ID =        (s, p,   q, F, F' ,
                                                           H0, D0)
                                                                     .
                                                                                       (10)


 Parents who do make positive financial transfers to their children (B > 0)

are   members of Regime 2 and have demand functions of the form

                        H=           Cr,   p, q, F, F', H0, D0)                    (11)

                        D=           Cr,   p, q, F, F', H0, D0)
                                V2                                                 (12)


These demand functions are reduced form equations in the sense that the
marginal cost of W has been replaced by its determinants (p, q, F, F', H0,
and D0).
       We have already pointed out that parents' income or wealth (5) has a
positive effect on I-I or D for members of Regime 1, but not for members of
Regime 2. With respect to the rate of interest Cr), it               is obvious from
Figure 1 that an increase in r raises children's
                                                             quality CQ), lowers chil-
dren's earnings (W), and lowers H and ID for mexTibers of Regime 2, but has

no   effect on these variables for members of Regime 1.
                                              I — 13



          The six remaining variables enter the demand
                                                       functions for B and D
 in    both regimes: two input prices Cm and q), two            efficiency   measures
 (F and F'), and two endowment measures (H3 and D0). In general, the

 direction of the effect of any          of   these variables is the same in each

 regime, although the magnitude of the effect differs.               For exazrnle, in
 the   demand curve f or H, the own input price (p) effect is negative, the
 own efficiency (F) effect is Positive, and the own endowment (H0) effect
 is positive. The signs of the           cross input price (a),     cross efficiency
 (F') ,   and   cross endowment (Do)     effects   are ambiguous. Similar state-
ments can       be made with regard to own and cross effects in each regime's

demand curve for

          As   an illustration of how differences can arise        in the maGnitude of ef-
fects of comori determinants of if or D in the two regimes, consider the simple
model depicted in ?igure 2. The demand curve for Q of a family in Regime
1 is given by d1, while the corresponding demand curve of a family in
Regime 2 is given by d2. Each family has the sane marginal cost curve
          An increase in efficiency or a reduction in input prices would
cause the upward sloping segment of the marginal cost curve to rotate to
the right from W0a to W0a'. Family 1 would increase its optimal amount
of 0 or W from           =      to   =
                                                     would increase its optimal
                                         W. Family     2

amount of ic from            to W, but would not change its optimal amount of Q.
Although both families would demand more W, the expansion would be greater



   19For a detailed analysis of own           and cross    effects, see Edwards and
Grossman       (1976).
                                        I — 14




thqrcyrcU COt)




                 cA.,
                   N




                                                                               /
                        N
                                                                           / /
                                                                    ////
                            N                         I
                                                               //
                            /
                            /
                              /\         I   /
                                                 /



                                    /        N       I
                             /'
                                I
                                                 'H
                                                     N

                            S                             a'                       wQ
                                             2
                                       Ix — 15




         5. Visual and hearing acuity, as defined above.

         fficiency in the production of both     tynes    of children's human capi-

tal is measured by the parents' educational attainment (FIEDUCAT and

FEDUCAT) •16 Since mothers traditionally spend more time with children

than   do fathers, MEDUCAT should have a greater effect in the reduced form

ecruations than FEDUCAT (as measures solely of inherited IQ, they would be

expected to have equal effects).

         Information about the prices of the inputs in the health and develop-

ment production functions is difficult to obtain for the Cycle II data set.

There are no direct measures of relevant prices such as the price of medi-

cal care or the price of parents' time (or their wage rates). Moreover,

since the precise locality of each observation cannot be identified, it

is not possible to estimate these prices with local market data. There-

fore, we use a set of crude proxy variables to control partially for these

prices.

         To control for price variation due to region and size of place of

residence, we enter a set of three region dunmiy variables (denoted NEAST,

MWEST, SOUTH) and four sizes of place variables (denoted UflBl, URB2, URB3,
NURE).    Information about whether or not the child's vision has been cor-

rected (SEEG, NSEEG) provides some indication of the price of medical care.

To hold constant the cost of the mother's time (probably one of the most in—

nortant   inputs   in both the health and   development   functions), we control for

the   primary activity   of   the mother (full—time work,   part—time   work,   or no




   16The literature on household production functions comnonly treats paren-
tal education as an efficiency variable.
                                      I — 16




        To conclude, our model has an important implication for the
                                                                    estimation
of demand curves for children's health and     intellectual   development.
Besides suggesting the relevant explanatory variables, it calls attention

to   the need for   allowing for interactions between parents' income,
                                                                         clearly
an   important determinant of the relevant regime, and determinants of the
marginal   cost schedule of children's earnings.
                                          II —   1




                             II. Data and Estimation

        Actual estimation of the relationships represented by equations (9)

 through   (12) is conditioned by   the   nature of the data. In this section we

 describe our data set, specify which empirical measures will be used to

 represent the theoretical variables in (9) through (12) , and outline the

 statistical   techniques to be used for estimation.

A. The Data
       Our data set is Cycle II of     the U.S. Health Examination Survey (BEE)

conducted  by the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) . Cycle II
is a nationally representative sample of 7,119 children aged six to eleven
years examined over the 1963—65 period.1 This sample is an exceptionally
rich source of information about children's health, their intellectual de-
velopment, and the characteristics of their families. More specifically,
the data comprise complete medical and developmental histories of each child
provided by the parent, information on family socioeconomic characteristics,
birth certificate information, and a school report with data on school
performance and classroom behavior provided by teachers or other school
off icials. Most imrcrtant, there are objective measures of health      from
detailed physical examinations and scores on psychological (including
vocabulary and achievement) tests. The physical examinations and the
osychological tests were administered by the Public Health Service.
     A1thouh the sample contains children of all races, for three reasons
we restrict our analysis to white children only. First, this procedure


       'For a full description of the sample, the sampling technique, and the
data   collection, see NCHS (196Th).
                                           II — 2

 avoids the problem associated with alleged "cultural biases" in IQ and
 achievement tests. Second, in preliminary estimates of equations (9)
through (12), it was found that the hypothesis of equality between sets
of coefficients for whites and blackswas rejected. Therefore, these
groups   could     not be pooled for purposes of estimation. Third, the black

sample alone is too        small   to allow for reliable coefficient estimates.2

Our   sample is limited further       by excluding children who do not live with

both  of their natural or adopted parents or for whom there were missing
      3
data.     The resulting subsample reported on here contains 3,608 children.
       A caveat concerning the use of the model developed in Section I for
the analysis       of children's health and   intellectual development in Cycle
II   of the lIES   is   the following: the model and   its predictions apply to
children's    health and    development at the age of independence rather than
to   children in    mid—childhood. This discrepancy does not undermine the
usefulness    of our model as long as there are no systematic differences
across families in the time paths of htmtan capital formation. Given
such an assumption, our basic predictions will hold equally well for the
six to eleven year—old cohort as for young adults at the onset of
independence.

B. Variable Measures
       the   measurement (and even the definition) of the theoretical variables

that we wish to study——children's health and         intellectual   development—-is

a formidable task, Indeed, the measurement of these variables has been the




   2The full Cycle II sample contains 6,100 whites, 987 blacks, and          32
"others."


   3Natural parents cannot be distinguished from adopted parents. Our
procedure eliminates children who live with foster parents, stepparents,
guardians, or single, widowed, or divorced parents. It is designed to
control for the effects of marital instability. We also exclude the 72
children who turned twelve by the time they had been examined.
                                      II — 3


 subject of a large literature. Our actual choices of measures will be

 determined primarily by the data available in Cycle II and will be

 guided by the existing literature.


 1. Measures of Health

        The issue of how to measure children's health is very much an unresolved

 one, even among professionals in the area of public health.4 Most recent

 studies of children's health have used data taken from one or more

•of the following categories: measures of disability, measures related to

 the incidence of abnormal conditions, and measures derived from parental

 assessments of children's health (for example, Wallace 1962; Mechanic 1964;

Mindlin and Lobach 1971; Talbot, Kagan, and Eisenberg 1971; Kaplan, Lave, and

Leinhardt 1972; Hu 1973; Schack and Starfield 1973; Kessner 1974; Haggerty,

Roghmann and Pless 1975; Inman 1976) ,    Although we plan to follow the precedent
of these earlier studies, some of the above measures (disability and the

incidence of certain physical conditions) are not entirely appropriate

to our model because our health variable refers to the child's "permanent"

state  of health rather than short—run deviations from that "permanent"
state.5 Much childhood disability results from the natural sequence of child-
hood diseases   and acute conditions which do not reflect on the child's

"permanent"   state of health.6

       4mis is true not   only for children's health, but also for adult's health,
Sullivan (1966) , Berg           and Ware (1976) discuss the general issue of
                          (1973) ,
measuring health, and Starfield (1975) and Schack and Starfield (1973) focus
on the specific problem of measuring children's health.
     5By "permanent" state of health we mean the child's prospect for life
preservation and normal functioning.
       60f course, there is a positive correlation between the two in the sense
that a child with poor "permanent" health is more likely to contract acute
conditions and to have them for a more extended time period. For example,
Birch and Gussow (1970) discuss how nutrition (clearly a determinant of
permanent health status) and disease are intimately related.
                                     II —   4




        The ideal measure of "permanent' health from an empirical persnec-
tive is a single measure that appropriately sinmarizes all available
and relevant   information. Health, however, is clearly a multidimensional

concept. A single index is not feasible and would not be desirable from a

medical point of view. In particular, even if it were clear what the

components of such an index should be, there would be no agreement about the

weights assigned to each component. In the case of children's health, the

derivation of such weights would be especially complicated because some of

the components would be development—related: a given observation might

indicate   low health capital at one stage of development but not
at   another stage of development. Finally, although a single health status

index would be conceptually neat, it is possible that the various components

of health will be differentially affected by the socioeconomic factors.

Analysis of a set of components rather than a single index will allow us to

detect such differential effects.

      The set of measures we use are height, the peridontal index, the number

of decayed teeth, and the parents' assessment of the child's health.7 These

are described below.



     7We selected health measures from the HES based on the advice of John
NcNamara, M.D., Assistant Professor of Public Health and Pediatrics at
Columbia University School of Public Health and Associate Coitmtissioner in
the New York City Department of Health; Roy Brown, M.D., Associate Professor
of Community Medicine and Pediatrics at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine
of the City University of New York; arid Thomas Travers, D.D.S., Director
of lunbulatory Care in the New York City Department of Health.
                                        II —   S




        1. I}mIGHT, children's height standardized by the mean and standard

             deviation of height for each age-sex grout.8 Height is a standard

             indicator of children's nutritional status, and good nutrition is

             an obvious and natural vehicle for maintaining children's health

              (for examole NCHS l975b).

        2.
             IPERI, the child's peridonta]. index, which is a good     overall   index

             of oral health as well as a positive correlate of nutrition

             (Russell 1956). Due to the significant age trend in this vari-

             able (NCHS l972b) ,   it   is standardized by age in the sane manner

             as IHEIGHT. Higher values of IPERI indicate poorer oral health.

       3.    IDECAY, the number of decayed nrimarv and permanent teeth, ad-

             justed for age and sex as is IHEIGHT. IDECAY is a supplemental

             measure of oral health and also reflects nutritional status.

             Higher values of IDECAY indicate poorer oral health.

       4.    PFHEALTH, a dichotomous variable that indicates the parents'
             assessment   of the child's current state of health. PFHEALTH

             equals one when parents assess the child's health as poor or

             fair and equals zero if they assess it as good or very good.


2. Measures of Intellectual Development

       Three measures of intellectual development are used to represent intellec-

tual development capital (D):       an IQ measure derived from two subtests from



   8
    It is well—known (for example, Bloom 1964) that physical growth rates
differ by age and sex. For any observation IIIGHT is the difference be-
tween the child's actual height and the mean height for his or her age—
sex group divided by the standard deviation of height for that age—sex
group. If the actual height of each age—sex group is normally distributed,
this standardized measure could be directly translated into the child's
height percentile.
                                      II — 6




the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (denoted WISC),9 and reading

and    arithmetic test scores on the Wide Range Achievement (denoted RWRAT
and AWRAT, respectively)J0 Many persons have criticized these measures

of   intellectual development, but even more have used them to conduct
empirical     analyses (for example, the studies cited in Averch et al. 1972).

          We distinguish between reading and arithmetic   achievement because
of evidence that among various school achievement measures mathematical
achievement is the most important determinant of earnings (Ashenfelter
and Mooney 1968; Kenny 1977). Achievement rather than IQ would seen to

be most appropriate for our purposes since we wish to measure intellec-

tual development rather than innate ability. It is, however, intellec-

tual development at the onset of independence that is desired, and since

IQ   has been found to be a good predictor of success at school (for ex-
ample, Carroll 1973), we use WISC and    current achievement (RWRAT and

AWRAT) as alternative measures of D. All three measures are scaled to


     9The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children is a common IQ test,
similar to (and highly correlated with results from) the Stanford—
Binet IQ test. The full test consists of twelve subtests, but only
two of these (vocabulary and block design) were administered in the
HES. The possible difficulties in the estimation of full scale IQ
from these two subtests is examined in NCHS (l972b). For a full dis-
cussion of all psychological tests administered in the HES, see NCHS
(1966).

     10
      The Wide Range Achievement Test is a single test that can be
                          .


                                                                   given
to children of varying ages. In particular, the same test was given to
all of the 7,119 children in the sample. (Only twelve—year olds, who
are excluded from our basic sample, were given a different version of
WRAT..)  The two tests used here were found to "... have reasonably
good construct validity as judged by their relationship to conventional
achievement tests (NCHS l967b)."
                                         II —   7




 have means of 100 and standard deviations of 15 for each age—group (four—

 month   cohorts   are   used   for WISC and six-month cohorts are used for IRAT
 and AWRAT).


 3. Explanatory Variables

         The   explanatory variables in the reduced form equations are health
 and   development   endowments, prices of the composite health and develop-

 Inent inputs, measures of efficiency in the production of health and

 development capital, family income, and the rate of return on financial

 investments.      The rate of return on financial investments is assumed to
 be constant for all members of our sample. Measures of the other theo-
 retical variables are described below and are defined precisely in

Table 1. The table also contains definitions of the seven dependent

variables described above.

         The health endowment of the child is represented by the following
            11
measures:

         1. Birth weight, measured by the dichotomous variable LIGHT.        A

            child is considered to have low birth weight if he or she

           weighs less than 2,500 grams at birth.

         2. Mother's age at the time of birth, represented by three dummy

           variables (LMAG, HMAG3S, and HMAG4O). Mother's age at the

           time of birth is considered an endowment measure because

           relatively    older mothers have been found to have a greater
           frequency of infants in poor health, while relatively     young
           mothers are    likely   to have "unwanted" births and consecuently
           receive poorer prenatal care.


        mentioned in Section I, a number of the health and development
endowment measures which are treated here as exogenous would be con-
sidered endogenous in a more fully specified model.
                                              II — 8




                                         TABLE 1
                                 Definition of Variables




                                                                         Predicted
                                                                          Direction
                                                                         of EffectD,c
Variable
                                                                            (where
  Name                           Definition                    Sourcea


IHEIGHT    Height, standardized by the mean and standard             3
           deviation of one—year age—sex cohorts
IPERI      Peridontal index, standardized by the mean            3
           and standard deviation of one—year age
           cohorts
IDECAY     Number of decayed primary and    permanent teeth,     3
           standardized by the mean and    standard devia-
           tion    of one—year age—sex cohorts

PFHEALTH   Dummy variable that equals one if parental            1
           assessment    of child's health
                                        is floor or
           fair and zero if assessment is good or
           very good

WISC       Child's    IQ as measured by vocabulary and           4
           block  design subtests of the Wechsler
           Intelligence Scale for Children, standard-
           ized by the mean and standard deviation of
           four-month age cohorts

RWRAT      Child's reading achievement as measured by the        4
           Wide Range Achievement Test, standardized by
           the mean and standard deviation of six—month
           age cohorts
AWRAT      Child's arithmetic achievement as measured by         4
           the Wide Range Achievement Test, standardized
           by the mean and standard deviation of six—
           month   age cohorts

LIGHT      Dummy variable that ecuals one if child's             2           +
           birth weight is under 2,500 grams
LMAG       Dummy variable that equals one if the mother          1
           was less than 20 years old at birth of child




                                                            (continued on next page)
                                             II — 9


                                     TABLE 1 (continued)




                                                                            Predicted
                                                                            Direction
 Variable                                                                   of Effectb0
                                                                             (where
   Name                            Definition                    Sourcea    relevant)

 1Th1A535
             Dunry variable that equals one if the mother              1
             was more than 35 years old at birth of child

 i1AG4O      Dummy variable that ecuals one if the mother              1
            was 40 years old or more at birth of child
 FYPH       Dummy variable that equals one if child's                  1
            health at one year was floor or fair, and
            zero if it was good
MBFED        umsnv   variable that equals one if the child          1           +
            was   breast—fed
 IIAR       Dummy variable that equals one if hearing               3
            is abnormal and zero otherwise
ABN         Dummy variable that equals one if the physi—           3
            cian finds a "significant abnormality" in
            examining the child (other than an abnormal-
            ity resulting from an accident or injury)
SEES        Dumrrv variable that equals one if binocular           3           +
            distance vision is abnormal and child                              —
            usually    wears glasses

NSEEG       Dummy variable that equals one if binocular            3
            Vision  is normal and child usually wears
            glasses

SEENC       Dtnnmy variable that equals one if binocular           3
            vision is abnormal and the child does not
            wear glasses

DUCAT       Years of formal schooling completed by mother          1
FEDUcAT
            Years of formal schooling completed by father          1
FLANG       Dummy    variable that equals one when a foreign       1           +
            language    is   spoken in the home




                                                               (continued on next page)
                                             II — 10




                                   TABLE 1 (continued)


                                                                              Predicted
                                                                              of Effectn,c
Variable                                                                        (where
  Name                          Definition                       Source a


FIT        -. Dummy variable that equals one if child is            1             +
            the   first born in the family

TWIN        Dummy     variable that equals one if child is          1
            a twin

NEAST       Dtznmy    variables that equal one if child lives       1
MWEST       in   Northeast, Midwest, or South, respectively
SOUTH


URB1        Dummy variables that ecual one  if child lives          1
URB2        in an urban area with a nopulation of 3 nil—
URB3        lion or more (URBl); in an urban area with a
NUR?        population between 1 million and 3 nillion
            (URB2); in an urban area with a ponulation
            less than  1 million (URB3); or in a non—
            rural and non—urbanized area (NIJRB); omitted
            class is residence in a rural area


MWORKPT     Dwninv variables that equal one if the mother           1
MWORn'T     works part—time or full—time, respectively

KIND        Dummy     variable that equals one if child at—        1
            tended     kindergarten or nursery school



                                                                (continued   on next page)
                                  -
                                       lI—li


                               TABLE   1 (concluded)


                                                                    Predicted
                                                                    Directionb
                                                                    of Effect
Variable
                                                                     (where
  Name                       Definition                   Sourcea   relevant)


FINC       Continuous family income computed by assign—     1       See text
           inq midpoints to the folliing closed income
           intervals, $250 to the lowest interval, and
           $20,000 to the highest interval. The closed
           income classes are:

                           $500   —    $999
                         $1,000   — $1,999
                         $2,000   — $2,999
                         $3,000   — $3,999
                         $4,000   — $4,999
                         $5,000   — $6,999
                         $7,000   — $9,999
                        $10,000   — $14,999



MALE       Dtrnny variable that equals one if child is
           male
                                                            1          t
LESS2O     Nixnber of persons in the household 20 years     1          —
           of age or less
                                   II — 12




                            Footnotes to TABLE 1




   aThe sources are 1 = medical
                                history form completed by parent, 2 =
certificate, 3 = physical examination, 4 =                              birth
5 = school form.                           psychological examination,

   b
    A positive sign means that the variable is expected to have a positive
effect on a positive correlate of child health or intellectual development;
a negative sign miKs a corresponding predicted
                                                negative effect.

        general it is difficult to make predictions about the directions of
 effects of proxies for endowments,
                                    efficiency, and input prices. One con-
 sideration is that an increase in a health
                                            endowment, for example, might
lower efficjenc', in the production function of investment in health. If
so, investhent would tend to fall, while the final stock of health might
increase, remain constant, or decrease. A second consideration is that
most of the proxies are correlated with both health and development
endowments, health and development efficiency, or health and develooment
input prices. Given that cross endowment, cross efficiency, and cross
input price effects cannot be signed a priori the effects of these
measures also cannot be predicted a priori. The signs in the tableproxy
                                                                     are
based on two assumptions: Cl) the own endowment effect is positive,
                                                                      and
 (2) the cross effect does not outweigh the own effect if the two go in
opposite directions.


   dsthject to the modifications in note c, the effect of MEDUCAT
                                                                  or FEDUCAT
would be positive if the price of time were held constant and ambiguous if
it were not.
                                            II — 13




          3. The child's health at one 'rear, measured by a dummy variable

               indicating the parents' assessment of the child's health at

               one   year (denoted FYPH).

          4.   Whether or not the child was breast—fed (denoted MBFED)

          5. Hearing acuity, measured by a dichotomous    varjje that indicates
               whether   or not the child has normal hearing in his best ear
               (denoted IHEAR)

       6. Overall diagnostic imPressions of the physician concerning
          whether or not the child had any "significant abnormal-
               ities." Our variable (AnN) is a dur!miy variable that takes
               the value one when such abnormalities are present.

      7. Visual acuity, measured by a set of dummy variables indi-
         cating whether or not the child has noor vision14 and if


       child is defined here to have "normal" hearing if the average thresh-
old decibel reading of the child in his best ear over the range of SOD,
1,000, and 2,000 cycles per second (c,o.s.) is 15 or lower. 500, 1,000, and
2,000 c.p.s. are the frequencies that occur rtst freauently in normal speech.
A threshold of less than 15 decibels above audjometric
                                                       zero at these fre-
quencies is classified as corresponding to "no significant difficulty with
faint speech" by the Connittee on Conservation of Hearing of the American
Academy of Ophthalmojoqv and Otolaryngologs' (NCHS 1970a).

   131n    defining ABN, we exclude abnormalities resulting from accidents or
injuries because these cannot be treated as endowments. The remaining ab-
normalities are classified as heart disease (congenital or accuired);
                                                                               neuro-
logical, muscular, or joint conditions; other congenital abnormalities1 and
other major diseases.
   141n Cycle        II the children were examined without glasses. A child is de-
fined here to have "normal" binocular vision if his or her binocular dis-
tance acuity is 20/30 or better (NCHS l972a).
                                             XI — 14




                 it   has been corrected (SEEG,
                                                  NSEEC, SEEflG). Although, strictly
                 speaking,   information about the correction of visual defects
             cannot be included in an endowment variable, such information
             does provide some evidence about the price of medical care,
             one       of our other explanatory variables.

         The develoontent endowment is represented by the following variables:

         1. Mother's and father's educational          attainment (denoted MEDUCAT
             and FEDUCAT, respectively). Parents' educational attainment
             is       a crude proxy measure of the child's inherited
                                                                       intelligence.

         2. A dummy variable indicating whether or not a foreign language

             is    sooken in the home (denoted FLANG). This factor could con-
             tribute either positively or negatively to the child's intel-
             lectual endowment.

         3. Two dummy variables measuring asoects of birth order-—one in-
            dicating whether the child is the first born in the family
            (denoted FIRST) and one indicating if the child is a twin
            (denoted TWIN). Everything else equal, more parental time is
            available to first born children and non—twins than to later
            children or twins.

        4. Birth weight as defined above. Since birth weight is partially
            determined by maternal health and nutrition
                                                        during pregnancy,
            it    is frequently used as a crude index of overall fetal de-

            velopment (including brain development).15



     t5See Birch and Gussow (1970). Another
is                                          aspect of educational endowment
thepubliclvsuppljed
    data with measuresschool quality. In future work we hope to supplement
                       of school quality.
                                     II — 15




          S. Visual and hearing acuity, as defined above.

          Efficiency in the production of both tynes of children's htmaan capi-

 tal is   measured by the parents' educational attainment (tDUCAT    and

 FEDUCAT) 16 Since mothers traditionally spend more time with children

 than do fathers, ?€DUCAT should have a greater effect in the reduced form

equations than FEDUCAT (as measures solely of inherited IQ, they would be

expected to have equal effects).

        Information about the prices of the inputs in the health and develoz,—

ment production functions is difficult to obtain for the Cycle It data set.

There are no direct measures of relevant prices such as the price of medi-

cal care or the price of parents' time (or their wage rates). Moreover,

since the precise locality of each observation cannot be identified, it

is not possible to estimate these prices with local market data. There-

fore, we use a set of crude proxy variables to control partially for these

prices.

        To control for price variation due to region and size of place of

residence, we enter a set of three region dummy variables (denoted NEAST,

MWEST, SOUTH) and four sizes    of place   variables (denoted URB1, URB2, URB3,

Nun?). Information about whether or not the child's vision has been cor-

rected (SEEG, NSEEG) provides some indication of the price of medical care.

To hold constant the cost of the mother's time (probably one of the most in-

portant inputs in both the health and      development functions), we control for
the   primary activity of the mother (full—time work, nart—time   work,   or no


   16The literature on household production functions commonly treats paren-
tal education as an efficiency variable.
                                     II —   16




  work, denoted by the dummy variables MWOR1'T and MWORKPT). Everything else
 equal, mothers with higher oPportunity costs are more likely to work in the
 labor market (and to work longer hours).17 The cost of time, both of
 mothers   who work and those who do not, might also be related to their

 schooling (MEDUCAT).18 A similar comment applies with respect to the cor-

 relation betweeen the father's price of time and his schooling (FEDUCAT).

 The final input price proxy is a dummy variable that indicates whether the

 child attended kindergarten or nursery school (denoted KIND). We assume

 that the likelihood of kindergarten attendance
                                                  is negatively related to the
 price of this type of schooling and positively related to the value of the

 mother's time.

       Family income is represented by FINC, a continuous income variable

 computed by assigning midpoints to the income classes reported in Cycle



       Finally, two additional variables are included. The first, a dummy

variable indicating whether or not the child is male (denoted MALE)       holds
                                                                      ,




   17We overlook
                 problems with selectivity bias, which are   discussed in de-
tail by Gronau (1974). We have information
                                            on the primary   activity of the
mother at the time of the survey, but do not know how many   years she has
worked. The latter factor might be related in part to the    mother's age at
the birth of the child,


   18See 1-lecknan (1974) for evidence that the mother's
                                                         potential market wage
rate and the "shadow value" of her time are positively related to her school-
ing.


   19Since this family income measure does not hold constant the
                                                                 mother's
labor force status and the father's experience, we
income measure that held these two factors         experimented with an
                                           constant. The adjusted income
variable was very highly correlated with FINC (the correlation coefficient
was greater than .99) and the regression results were not altered
                                                                  when ad-
justed income was used in place of FINC. Therefore, we report results
based only on the use of FINC in this paper.
                                        11 — 17




 constant   possible sex differences in parents' desired child quality20 and

 is   included when estimates are reported for both sexes combined.     The
 second is a measure of family size (denoted LESS2O)          Although our
model does not call for the latter variable in the reduced form (it is
simultaneously determined with child quality), it is among our explanatory
variables for the following reason. Family size is not determined with
perfect certainty. The resulting random variations in the actual number
of    children will generate adjustments in final child quality. For ex-

ample, when a family has more than the desired number of children, this

increases the relative price of child quality and leads to a downward ad-

justment in desired child quality.22 Thus, we expect children in large

families to have lower H and 1).

         Tha above variable   definitions are summarized in Table 1, along with
predicted variable effects in the reduced form. Means and        standard   devia-
tions of the variables are     shown   in Table 2.

C. Estimation Method
         The relationship summarized by    equations (9) and (11) or (10) and
(12) can be written as:



      20See Ben—Porath and Welch (1976) for a discussion of this possibility.

      21LE3S20 does not measure comoleted family size, but rather the number
of  persons in the household younger than 20 years at the time of the Cycle
II interview. Therefore, LESS2O may overstate or understate completed
family size. The mean value of LESS2O in our sample (3.6) may seem highs
but it must be remembered that this figure is computed from a sample of
children, not from a sample of families. In general the mean computed
from a sample of children will be larger than that computed from a sample
of families for two reasons. First, families with no children do not
appear in a sample of children, but they do appear in a sample of families.
Second, annng families with children, the probability of any family being
represented in a sample of children is greater the more children in the
family, whereas the probability of any family being represented in a sample
of families is independent of the number of children in that family.


     22See Becker and Lewis (1973).
                              II — 18




                          TABLE 2
  Means and Standard Deviations of Dependent and Independent
  Variables, Whites, Ages 6—11, Mother and Father Present
                          (N = 3608)



                                                       Standard
Variable                    Mean                       Deviation

IHEIGHT                      .0456                        .9680
IPERI                       —.0394                        .9831
IDECAY                      —.0651                        .9677

PFHEALTH                     .0424                        .2015
WISC                      103.1951                      13.9566
RAT                       103.0055                     13.7343
AWRAT                     102.8672                     13.1335
LIGHT                        .0538                       .2256
LMAG                         .0696                       .2545
RIAG3S                       .1045                       .3059
}-1AG40                      .0310                       .1735
FYPH                         .0840                       .2774
MEFED                        .3007                       .4586
IHEAR                        .0058                       .0761
ABN                          .0030                       .0550
SEEG                        .0710                        .2568
NSEEC                       .0432                        .2034
SEENC                       .0482                        .2143



                                       (continued on next page)
                                II — 19




                          TABLE 2 (concluded)




 Variable                                       Standard


 MEDUCAT                       11.2406           2.7510
 FEDtJCAT                      11.2650           3.4470
FLNG                             .1020            .3027
FIRST                            .2894            .4535
TWIN                             .0233            .1508
NEAST                            .2384            .4261
MWEST                            .3276            .4694

SOUTH                            .1768            .3816
IJRB1                            .1971            .3978
URB2                             .1256            .3314
URB3                             .1815            .3855
NtJRB                            .1502            .3573
MWORK?T                          .1375            .3444
MWOR}TT                          .1375            .3444
KIND                            .7306            .4437
FIN?                           7.8277           4.4149
MALE                            .5116            .4999
LESS2O                         3.6159           1.6371




aThd        of dollars.
                                                    II — 20




                Y.
                 j
                     a   1
                             +   5
                                     1 X.
                                       j +u    ,        j   amernberof Regime 1

                                                                                            (13)
                Y, =a2 +5 2 X, +u
                                       j
                                               ,        j   amemberofRegjme2


 where j ranges from 1 to n. In (13), Y,
                                                         representh the 1th observation on
 either of the dependent variables,
                                                   X. represents the th vector of observa..
 tions on the independent              variables, a1 and    a2 are constant terms, B, and
      are vectors of coefficients, and
                                                   u1. and u2. are independent,   normally
 distributed     error terms with zero means arid identical variances.23              The
 two regimes are defined by the solvency constraint on the financial bequest:
 Regime 1 denotes the set of observations for which the constraint is effec-
 tive (B. = 0) and Regime 2 denotes those
                                                        observations for which the con-
 straint is     ineffective (B. > 0). In this context, the major predictions
of    Section I are restated as follows:
                                                      a1 and     are different fron
                                                                                      a2
and         and the element of             that is the coefficient of income will be
positive while the corresponding element of                    will be zero.24



     23Weoverlook the dichotomous nature of one of the dependent variables
(Pnizzwri-j). In principle an aPPropriate transformation,
transformation, should be introduced here, but we have notsuch as a logit
results renorted in Section lix.                            done so in the

     24With   respect to coefficients of variables other than
predicth                                                   income, our model
         differences between regimes but does not identify the regime in
which the effect will be larger. Even if we had enough additional infor-
mation to make predictions about relative
21), these predictions might be altered bymagnitudes  (see Section I, note
sures of health and intellectual development are nonlinear that
                                           the possibility       our mea-
                                                            transformations
of the theoretical variables, H and ID. Note,
                                              however, that this measure-
ment problem does not alter the
in the two regimes. For         prediction concerning the effects of income
                         a nnre complete discussion of this point, see
Edwards and Grossman (1976).
                                      II — 21



       Estimation of equation (13) would be straightfo,a if we could
 identify which observations belong in each of the two regimes.25 In
 our   data, however, there is no direct way to do so. An alternative

 Procedure would be to estimate B (which from Figure 1 can be seen to

 depend on those factors which determine the location of the demand and

 marginal cost curves of children's quality) and use the estimated value

 of B to classify observations. But again, this procedure requires in-

 formation about the value of B, at least for a subset of observations.
 Another tactic is to note that among the determinants of B, it seems
 likely   that variations in income will cause the greatest amount of varia-

 tion in B. This suggests the simple, though admittedly crude, procedure

 of classifying observations by family income.26

        We estimate the relations in equation (13) using this simple clas-

 sification scheme. The two sthsaxnples are children whose families

have an annual income of under $7,000 and those whose families have

an annual income of $7,000 or more.
                                       Although $7,000 is not the most
obvious cutoff noint to use to identify the regimes,27 we use it for

   25Even in this case, however, there is the possibility that in each of
the two regimes the error term would be correlated with some of the inde-
pendent variables, leading to biased coefficient estimates. For a similar
point in the context of the estimation of searate fertility demand func-
tions for women who work and women who do not work, see Willis (1973).

   26The appropriate estimation procedure for this type of
                                                           two—regime model
in the absence of direct information for
                                         classifying observations into
regimes is the 'switching of regimes" model described in Goldfeld and Quandt
(1973). The application of this statistical model to our estimation problem
is discussed in Edwards and Grossman (1976). We do not use this technique
here because it is very expensive.


   27Lansing   and Sonuist (1969) find thatabout 30 percent of families re-
ceive art inheritance. If this same percentage were applied to our sample
this would irnoly an income cutoff somewhere in the $7,000 to $10,000 interval
 (47 percent of our sample has family income of $7,000 or more and 22 percent
has family income of $10,000 or more). Such a cutoff would be infeasible
with our data set.
                                       II — 22




  several   reasons. First, this cutoff point separates our data into two

 roughly equal subsamples, so that standard errors of coefficient esti-
 mates in each regine will not differ due to differences in sample sizes.
 Second, since our obsenatjo consist of families with
                                                        young children,
 the current income of these families is likely to understate their life-
 time wealth (relative to the Population at large). If one
 takes account of this understatement, the top 50
                                                  percent of our sample
 may correspond   to the top, say, 40 percent of the population at large.

 Third, preliminary estimates of equation (13)
                                                      using, alternately, ob-
 servations with annual income greater than      or           to
                                                      equal        $7,000 and those
 with annual incomes greater than
                                    or equal to $10,000 showed that the co-
efficient estimates for these two subsainples do not greatly differ

 (although, of course, their standard errors are larger for the higher in-

come class). Finally, many persons are interested in the behavior of low

income groups, and public policy often is aimed at these groups.
                                                                             Hence,
we choose a $7,000 cutoff point because estimates derived from the re-

sulting pair of income classes will be more useful for policy—makers in

the fields of children's health and
                                       intellectual development than those
derived from a $10,000 cutoff point.

      Means and standard deviations of all variables in each of the two

subsamoles   are shown in Table 3. A cursory examination of this table
reveals that there are indeed imoortant differences between these two
groups with respect to both the dependent and independent variables.
                                          II — 23



                                      TABLE 3
  Means      and Standard Deviations of Denendent and Independent Variables,
                   Whites, Ages 6—11, Mother and Father Present

                             Income   < 7000a                Income   > 7000b
                                      Standard                        Standard
 Variable                 Mean


 IHEIG1-IT                —.0869          .9687             .1896        .9468
 IPEPI                      .0790       1.1126            —.1681         .8002
 IDECAY                     .1226       1.0750            —.2691         .7866
PFHEALT}j                  .0580          .2338            .0254         .1575
WISC                     99.3097       13.0889          107.4176       13.6436
RWRAT                    99.6754       13.7437          106.6246       12.7786
A1RAT                   100.1884       13.6789          105.7785       11.8497
LIGHT                      .0596         .2368             .0474         .2126
LMAG                       .0963         .2951             .0405         .1972
HNAG35                     .1043         .3057             .1074         .3062
HMAG4O                     .0362         .1868             .0254         .1575
FYPH                       .0963         .2951             .0706         .2562
MBFED                      .3092         .4623             .2915        .4546
IHEAR                      .0075         .0860             .0040        .0635
ABI4                      .0043         .0651              .0017        .0416
SEEG                      .0553         .2287              .0879        .2832
NSEEG                     .0431         .2030              .0434        .2038
SEENG                     .0442         .2055              .0526        .2234




                                                     (continued on next page)
                                    II — 24




                             TABLE 3 (concluded)




                          Income   < 7030a            Income >

                                   Standard                      Standard
Variable              Mean         Deviation        Mean


MEDUCAT               10.1985        2.7935        12.3730        2.2027

FEDUCAT               9.7286         3.2953        12.9346        2.7647

FLANC                    .1251        .3309          .0769         .2665

FIRST                    .2869        .4524          .2921         .4548

TWIN                     .0165        .1274          .0307         .1724

NEAST                    .1937        .3953          .2869         .4524

MWEST                    .3225        .4676          .3331         .4715

SOUTH                    .2342        .4236          .1145         .3185

                         .1346        .3414          .2649         .4414

URB2                     .0793        .2703          .1758         .3808

tJRB3                    .1703        .3760          .1938         .3954

                         .1799        .3842          .1180         .3227

MwomcpT                  .1426       .3498           .1319         .3384

MW0RT                    .1213       .3266           .1550         .3620

KIND                     .6275       .4836           .8427         .3642
FINCC                 4.6281        1.6811         11.3048        3.7928

MALE                     .4944       .5001           .5304         .4992

LESS2O                3.8302        1.7639          3.3829        1.4523




a1879 observations.


b1729 observations.


           of dollars.
                                        III —   1




                                     III.   Results

         Ordinary least scuares estimates of the reduced form equations for

 the dependent variables ccisc, RWRAT, AWRAT, IHEIGHT,    IPERI,   IDECAY, and
 PFHEALTH for each income class annear in Tables A—i through A—7      in   the

Anpendix. In discussing these results we focus first on the basic

hypotheses generated by the theoretical model and second        on snecific

findings concerning the effects of the exnlanatory variables and how

these effects differ for the two income classes.       All of our euatjons are
estimated for males and females separately as well as for both sexes

pooled. Only the pooled results are discussed in detail, however, be-

cause coefficient estimates were not found to differ significantly by
    1
sex.


A. Basic Hypotheses

        There are two nrimary predictions qenerated by the model:        the sets

of coefficients in the two reqimes will differ; and the family income

variable will have a positive effect in Regime 1 and no effect in Regime
2.    There is also the rncre   fundamental prediction that the set of
explant variables suggested by the model do succeed in explain-
ing a significant portion of the variance in the health and development
variables. The latter prediction is clearly supported by our results.
Adjusted R2's range from a hiqh of .238 (for WISC in the lower income

class) to a low of .025 (for IHEIGHT in the upper income class). Even




     1Estimates by sex are shown in Tables A—B through A-14
                                         111 — 2



  the lowest of these B2's is
                                 statistically significant at the 1 percent
  level   of significance. Thus, even though the explanatory variables are
  in   some cases imperfect proxies for the desired theoretical variables,

  taken as a set they do have a
                                  significant impact on our health and de-
 velopment measures.

          The prediction of two distinct regimes or two different relation-

 ships between each of our health and
                                            development variables and the set
 of explanatory variables is also generally supported by our results

 (see Table 4)•2 Statistically
                                      significant differences in the sets of
 efficients for the two income classes
                                                are reported for RWRAT, AWRAT,
 IHEIGHT, IDECAY, and PFHEALTH. Only       for IPERI   and WISC are the differ-
 ences in coefficients not significant.
                                                Although these results cannot
 be    characterized as "unanimous"        for the basic structure of our
                                      support
model,    they do constitute stronger verification than may be initially
 apparent. The two income classes used here are unlikely to coincide
completely    with the two regimes specified by the model. The resulting

misclassification of observations will tend to bias the coefficient in

the two income classes towards
                                  equality, making it more difficult to

obtain significantly different coefficient in the two income classes

even though such differences do exist in the two regimes. We observe




      2The "F" tests
                  presented here cannot prove the validity of our model
because there are alternative explanatj
                                           for finding significant dif-
ferences between coefficients in the two regimes. For example, the
true relationship between B (or D) and the set of
could be                                                explanatory variables
         identical in the two regimes, but different estimates still
could be generated if our proxy measures of H (or D) are nonlinear
transformations of its true value.
                     III —    3




                    TABLE 4

"F" Statistics from estinq Hnothesjs of No
 Differences in the Set of Coeffigients in
           the Two Income Subsa,nles


    Dependent                     ,,
    Variable                           30,3548


    wISC                               1.31


    RWPAT                              1.62


    AWRAT                              2.02


    INSIGHT                            1.54


    IPERI                              1.33


    IDECAY                             2.00


    PFHEALTH




  aCl value for          F301000 is 1.47 at
the 5 percent level of significance.
                                      III — 4




  significant differences in coefficients for five of our
                                                              seven   variables
 despite this bias towards finding no such difference.

       The final prediction of our    model—-that   income will have a positive
 effect on health or development for
                                        families in Regime 1 (our lower in-
 come class) and   no effect in Regime 2    (our upper income class)——does not
 receive strong support in our   results.    Even though the income coefficients
 are uniformly lower   in the upper income class than in the lower income
 class, only for the two achievement measures (AWRAT and RWRAT) do we ob-
 serve the predicted pattern of income coefficients (see Table 5). For
 both of these dependent variables, income has a positive, significant
 inpact for lower income families and a nonsignificant impact for upper in-
 come families. For the other dependent variables, family income is either
statistically significant in both income classes      (WISO, IPERI, and IDECAY)
or in neither income class (IREIcjrr and    PFHEALTH).

     One likely explanation for the significant coefficients in the upper
income class is the previously mentioned bias resulting from the mis-
classification of observations. In particular, it is likely that members
of Regime 1 are   erroneously included in the over $7,000 income
                                                               class,
causing an upward bias in the coefficient of FINC for that class. The
plausibility of this explanation is confirmed by an additional test. In
the upper income class we replace the continuous income variable FINC

with two dummy variables
                           indicating whether the family had income of
$10,000 and over, or of $15,000 and
                                      over. These dummy variables allow
for a nonlinear income effect in the upper income class. In no case was

income found to have a significant marinal effect when it exceeded
                                         III —   5




                               TABLE 5

            Regression   Coefficients of Family      Incomea


                     Income C $7,000                  Income >     $7,000
Denendent
Variable                     FINC                          FINC


WISC                            .762                             .245
                             (15.94)                           (8.01)

RWRAT                           .712                         .035
                             (11.61)                       (0.18)

AWRAT                         1.018                          .087
                            (22.   99)                     (1.25)

IHEIGHT                        .017                             .004
                             (1.18)                        (0.43)
IPERI                         —.033                            — .011
                             (3.45)                        (4.53)
IDECAY                        — .067                           —.019
                            (16.44)                       (12.94)

PFHEALTH                      — .006                       — .0002
                             (2.47)




   asource. Apoendix, Tables Al — A7. F statistics in
parentheses. The critical F value at the 5 percent level
of significance is 2.69 on a one—tailed test.
                                        In —   6




$15,000; and only for WISC and IDECAY did income have a significant mar-

ginal effect when it exceeded $10,000. Thus, for those observations in

the upper income class which have higher incomes——the very observations

most likely to actually belong in Regime 2——income        does   not have a

significant      marginal impact on health and devceioprnett.

B.       Effects of Other Variables

           In discussing effects of variables other than income on intellectual

development and health, we deal with narents' schooling, mother's work

status, number of children in the family, health endowments measured in

infancy, and health endowments measured currently.3 To focus the dis-

cussion, note that among our health variables height would be viewed as

the best health measure by persons concerned with the relationshin between

health output and proper nutrition (for examle, National Center for Health

Statistics l970b, 1975; Seoane and Latham 1971; Owen 1973). The peridontal

index and the number of decayed urinary and permanent teeth are good over-

all indexes of oral health and supplementar, measures of nutrition. It is

plausible that the peridontal index, which reflects status of the guns, is

less sensitive to appropriate dental care than the number of decayed teeth.

This proposition is sunported by the higher adjusted R2's in the decay re-

gressions than in the peridontal regressions. Parental assessment of the

child's current state of health is employed as a dependent variable to




     a
    The reader is left to inspect the effects of the following variables:
twin status of child, sex of child, foreign language spoken in the home,
first born child, and kindergarten or nursery school attendance.
                                    III —   7




show how results differ when health is measured sub-jectively by narents as

onposed to objectively by   physicians.
      Table 6 contains regression coefficients of mother's schooling and

father's schooling. These two variables have positive and statistically

significant effects on all measures of intellectual development in both

the high income sanle and the low income sarnole. When health is de-

fined in a positive manner,4 fifteen of the sifleen schoolinq coefficients

are positive, but only ten achieve statistical significance at con-

ventional levels of confidence. These ten appear primarily in the

low income sample. It is noteworthy that height, which nutrition-

ists would view as the most important health measure in Table 6, is

practically independent of schooling in the high income samole but de-

pendent unon schooling in the low income sarnnle. We reach the tentative

conclusion that schooling effects are more important for low income

families in the case of health but not in the case of intellectual de—

velonment.

      Presumably, schooling of both parents is positively correlated with

the endowment, efficiency, and the value of time. Subject to the modifi-

cation in Table 1 (note c), an increase in the endowment or in efficiency

raises health or development, while an increase in the value of time

lowers it. Since we are not able to control fully for the value of time

as schooling varies, our results imply that the efficiency or endowment

effect outweighs the value of time effect.




   4Recall that IPERI, IDECAY, and PFHEALTH are negative correlates of
children's health.
                                 In —     8




                                TABLE 6

Regression Coefficients of Mother's Schoolinci and Fathers Schoolin?



                     Income <    $7,000            Income > $7,000
Dependent
Variable           MEDtJCAT     FSDUCAT          MEDUCAT    FEDUCAT



wxsc                   .909         .706            .944       .574
                    (49.05)      (41.83)         (29.91)    (16.94)


RWRAT                  .817         .665            .717       .616
                    (33.13)      (30.97)         (18.97)    (21.52)


AWBAT                  .565         .720            .684       .354
                    (15.33)      (35.11)         (19.28)     (7.95)


IHEIGHT                .025         .018            .012       .004
                     (5.66)       (4.16)          (0.87)     (0.16)


IPERI                —.023         —.032           — .005     —.017
                     (3.54)      (10.07)          (0.25)     (4.06)


IDECAY               — .036        —.025           — .034     —.020
                    (10.37)       (6.94)         (10.74)     (5.66)


PFHEALTH               .001        —.006           —.003      —.002
                      (.33)       (8.44)          (1.46)     (1.78)



   agource: Appendix, Tables Al—A7. F statistics in parentheses.
The critical F' values at the 5 percent level of significance are
2.69 on a one—tailed test and 3.84 on a two—tailed test.
                                        In —   9




        There is some evidence in Table 6 that mother's schooling has a

larger impact on cognitive development than father's schooling. Five

of the six mother's schooling coefficients exceed the corresponding

father's schooling coefficients. This is consistent with the notion

that   mother's schooling is a more important determinant of efficiency
in development production than father's schooling. A related and
interesting finding emerges when separate development functions are
estimated for boys and girls (see Tables A-8 through A—b). In a].—
most all instances, mother's schooling has a larger effect on the
intellectual development of girls than of boys. On the other hand,
father's   schooling has a larger effect on the intellectual develop-

ment of boys than of girls. We do not know whether this reflects

basic properties of the development production function or whether it

reflects oschobogical forces in early childrearing such as the child's

attachment   to the parent of the same sex.
        Table 7   contains   regression coefficients of the two variables for
mother's work status in the labor force. The signs of twenty—three
of the twenty—eight coefficients in the table indicate that
children whose mothers work full—time or part—time have lower levels
of health and development than children whose mothers do not work. In
the    development functions only one of six work status effects is sig-
nificant for the low income sample, while three of six are negative and
significant for the high income sample.5 In the health functions


      5The coefficient of MWORKPT on RWRAT in the high income sample is
positive and significant.
                                111—10




                                TABLE 7

           Regression Coefficients of Mother's Work Statusa



                       Income C $7,000            Income >    $7,000
Dependent
Variable             MW0}U'T    MWORKPT          MW0R'T       NWORKPT



WISC                  —1.764        .566          —2.388         .190
            .   .
                       (4.46)     (0.53)          (7.55)       (0.04)

RWRAT                  —.645       —.793          —2.234        2.383
                       (0.50)     (0.87)          (7.27)       (7.51)


ANRAT                  —.495       —.338          —1.760         .085
                       (0.28)     (0.15)          (5.04)       (0.01)


IHEIGHT                —.110      —.227            — .072      —.095
                       (2.61)    (12.83)          (1.23)       (1.91)


IPERI                    .080     —.004             .106         .080
                       (1.80)    (0.003)          (3.90)       (2.03)

IDECAY                   .230       .068            .188         .007
                      (10.23)     (1.04)         (13.07)       (0.02)

PFHEALTH                 .011       .007            .005         .025
                       (0.49)     (0.25)          (0.25)       (5.00)




   aSrce. Anoendix, Tables A1—A7. F statistics in narentheses.
The critical F values at the 5 percent level of significance are
2.69 on a one—tailed test and 3.84 on a two—tailed test.
about the same number of effects are significant in each sample. While
no overall pattern of effects is apparent for the health measures, our
results suggest that mother's participation in the labor market has a
greater detrimental effect on the children in high income fand. lies than
on those in low income families. Interpretation of this finding is sub-
ject to the caution that unlike other parental characteristics, mother's
labor force status changes over the child's early life cycle. Our work

status variables provide infonation only on the orimary activity of

the   mother at the time of the Health Examination Survey. Before firm
conclusions can be reached with respect to the role of mother's labor
force status in the determination of children's health and development,
the effects of length of participation and of the life cycle pattern of
participation would also have to be examined.

         Regression coefficients of the number of persons in the housi—

hold 20 years of age or less are presented in Table 8. This variable

serves    as a proxy for completed family size. It has   negative and sta-

tistically significant effects on the three measures of intellectual

development. The effects of nirther of children in the family on health

are more erratic. When health      is defined in a positive manner, six of
the   eight regression coefficients are negative, but only four are statis-

tically  significant. A striking finding is the importance of family
size in the determination of the height of children from low income
families and   its   unimportance in the determination of the height of
children   from high income families.

       When health is measured by height, a consistent pattern of results

emerges from Tables 6, 7, and 8. Parents' schooling, nother's work
                                     III — 12




                              TABLE 8

        Regression Coefficients of Number of Persons in
              Household 20 Years of Age or Less



                     Income <    $7,000         Income >    $7,000
Dependent
Variable                 LESS2O                     LESS2O



WISC                      — .620                     — .720
                        (13.44)                    (10.03)


RWRAT                     — .808                     — .745
                        (19.03)                    (11.82)


AWRAT                     —   .354                   — .468
                         (3.54)                     (5.21)

Il-IEIGHT                 —   .060                   —   .022
                        (18.92)                     (1.63)

IPERI                         .013                 —.00001
                         (0.72)                     (0.00)

IDECAY                        .027                    .048
                         (3.39)                    (12.73)

PFHEALTH                   .006                      —.001
                         (3.49)                     (0.28)



   asource. Appendix, Tables Al—A7. F statistics in
parentheses. The critical F values at the 5 percent
level of significance are 2.69 on a one—tailed test
and 3.84 on a two—tailed test.
                                             III — 13




 status,     and   family size    are   significant predictor variables of height in
 the low income sample but not in the high income sample. On the other
hand, these three variables tend to be as important (or nore irnnortant)
predictors        of development in the      high income sample as in the low income
sample. A possible explanation of this pattern is that investments in
certain kinds of health are subject to irore sharply diminishing returns
than investments in intellectual develoqent. If so, determinants of
the margi-nal cost of investment in health would have relatively small
effects     in the reduced form demand curve at relatively high levels of

health and investment.

          Table 9 contains regression coefficients of health endowments

measured in infancy. In discussing this set of variables, we focus on

the effects of birth weight and breast—feeding on intellectual develon—

merit.     The dizmny variable     for birth weight under 2,500 grains or 5 pounds

(LIGHT)     has    significant,   negative effects on all measures       of development

in both high and low        income samples. Somewhat surprisingly, absolute
effects     are larger in the high income sample than in the low income

sample. Intuitively, one might expect high income parents to compensate

more for the effects of low             birth weight   than low   income parents by
making relatively larger investments in the health and intC.lectual

development of the poorly endowed child. Subject to some modifications

spelled out in Section I, our finding is consistent with a irodel in

which birth weight is a positive correlate of efficiency in production

and   a   positive correlate of the endowment.
                                                                       TABT4E 9

                                 Reqression Coefficients of Health Endowments Measured in Infancya



                                   Income     c   $7,000                                              Income     >
flependent                                                             ——                                            $7,000
Variable                                                                                                                                ——
                F'YPH    1MW.      JIMJ\G35       1Th1AG40    Mr3TTD      LIGHT      FYPH     LMAG     HMAG35        HMG40      MBFED     LIGHT

WTSC             4119   —2.213      2.634         —1.730       1.931     —2.343     —2.523   —1.201       .887        —.190
               (0.02)                                                                                                           2.231    —5.584
                        (5.20)     (6.13)         (1.00)     (10.56)     (4.03)    (4.42)    (0.55)   (0.62)         (0.01)   (10.21)   (14.15)
RWPAT          —1.284    —.668      1.966          —.038       1.785    —2.411     —1.615    —1.173    —.100
               (1.63)                                                                                                  .164    2.072    —5.139
                        (0.40)     (2.85)         (0.00)      (7.53)     (3.56)    (1.99)    (0.58)   (0.01)         (0.01)    (9.69)   (13.19)
AWBAT           —.505    —.645       .991          —.431       2.258    —4.619     —1.551     —.925    —.2%          —1.823     .903
               (0.25)   (0.36)     (0.70)         (0.05)     (11.67)   (12.64)                                                          —4.767
                                                                                   (2.05)    (0.40)   (0.08)         (0.86)   (2.05)    (12.67)
IHEIGHT         —.074    —.145       .190          —.094        .098                                                                              H
                                                                         —.363      —.233     —.274       .155        —.203     .017
               (0.97)   (3.36)     (4.80)         (0.44)      (4.08)   (14.50)                                                           —.404    H
                                                                                   (6.75)    (5.14)   (3.37)         (1.54)   (0.10)    (13.17)
IPERI            .083     .207       .018          —.130        .017      .032       .184      .115       .068                                    A
                                                                                                                      —.119    —.013       .063
               (0.96)   (5.32)     (0.03)         (0.66)     (0.09)     (0.09)     (6.20)    (1.33)   (0.95)         (0.79)   (0.09)    (0.47)
rrncr            .157     .182       .032           .095      —.032       .024       .252      .024       .116         .136
               (3.98)   (4.77)                                                                                                 —.026     —.156
                                   (0.13)         (0.41)     (0.39)     (0.06)    (12.38)    (0.06)   (2.95)         (1.10)   (0.38)    (3.10)
PFHEALTH         .197   —.011        .001           .021       .002      —.006       .142    —.043        .021       —.046
             (124.41)   (0.33)     (0.01)                                                                                      —.007     —.018
                                                  (0.38)     (0.03)     (0.07)    (93.04)    (4.70)   (2.38)         (2.94)   (0.59)    (0.99)



   asource. Appendix, tables Al—A7.    F statistics in parentheses. the critical F
significance are 2.69 on a one—tailed test and 3.84 on a two—tailed test.
                                                                                                 values   at the 5 percent level of
                                       III — 15



       The coefficient of the dumny variable for breast—feeding (MBFED) in-
 dicates substantial returns to this activity in terms of cognitive develop—
 ment While each discipline may offer its own internretation of this
 result, a plausible exalanation is that MBFED serves as an auxiliary mea-
 sure of both the amount of tine mothers spend with their children and
 families tastes for children.
          Regression coefficients of health endowments measured currently are
 presented in Table 10. All of these are based on the physical exainina-
 tions administered in the Health Examination Survey. Once again we focus
 on   endowment effects in the development functions.    All six coefficients

 of abnormal hearing (IREAR) are negative, and five of the six are statis-

 tically significant. it is not surorising that the impact of poor hear-

 ing is larger   in   the case of school achievement than in the case of IQ.

The importance of poor hearing in the determination of school achievement

is revealed by the following
                                  comparison. In the high income sample, with
all other factors held constant, children
                                              with poor hearing have a RWRAT
score   that is approximately 14 points lower than children with normal
hearing. This difference is twice as large as the 7 point difference in
the mean RWRAT score in the high income sample as compared to the low
income sample. The presence of significant abnormalities (ABN) also is
detrimental to achievement and IQ, although the effects are insignificant
in the high income sample. To a large extent, the last result is due to

the very low prevalence of abnormalities
                                             (.17 percent) in the high income
sample.

        Strictly speaking the vision variables in Table 10 (SEEG, NSEEG,

SEENG) cannot be interpreted as endowments
                                              because they combine
                                                           TABLE   10
                                                                                              a
                         Regression Coefficients of Health Endowments Measured Currently



                            Income <     $7,000                                         Income >   $7,000
Dependent
Variable      TIJEAR     SEEC     NSEEC           SEENG      ARN         IHEAR       SEEG     NSEEG          SEENG     ABN



wisc          —3.181     1.860    —1.555           1.483   —12.709       —8.209      2.208    —1.543          •604    —6.508
               (1.06)   (2.55)    (1.40)          (1.32)     (9.68)      (2.99)     (4.24)    (1.06)        (0.20)    (0.80)

RWRAT         —8.099      .527    —1.217          2.293     —5.424      —14.497      2.536     —.430          .423    —2.922
               (5.72)   (0.17)    (0.72)          (2.62)     (1.47)     (10.26)     (6.16),   (0.09)        (0.11)    (0.18)
                                                                                                                                H
                                                                                                                                I-1
AWRAT         —8.735     —.134    —1.034            .361   —10.574      —10.986     2.523      1.600         1.760    —6.573    H
               (6.45)   (0.01)    (0.50)          (0.06)     (5.42)      (6.58)     (6.81)    (1.40)        (2.06)    (1.00)
                                                                                                                                I-.
IHEIGH'r                                                                                                                        a.
               —.251      .193         .228         .107     —.146        —.139       .057    —.020           .051    —1.380
               (0.98)   (4.12)    (4.51)          (1.03)     (0.19)      (0. 15)    (0.50)    (0.03)        (0.25)    (6. 39)

IPERI            .320     .164      .305            .010     —.002         .167       .002    —.033           .175      .582
               (1.25)   (2.32)    (6.26)          (0.01)     (0.00)      (0.33)    (0.001)    (0.13)        (4.37)    (1.68)

IDECAY         —.014     —.182     —.127          —.163        .529       —.296       .008    —.120          —.082     1.025
               (0.00)   (3.32)    (1.27)          (2.16)     (2.27)      (1.09)     (0.01)    (1.80)        (1.01)    (5.55)

PFHEALTH         .235    —.009    —.040           —.036        .175       —.010       .012    —.004           .005     —.057
              (15.58)   (0.17)    (2.55)          (2.08)     (4.94)      (0.03)     (0.89)    (0.05)        (0.08)    (0.40)




   asource: Appendix, Tables A1—A7. F statistics in parentheses. The critical F values at the          5    percent level
of siqnificance are 2.69 on a one—tailed test and 3.84 on a two—tailed test.
                                       III —   17




 information on uncorrected vision with information on whether the child
 wears   glasses. Nevertheless, these variables convey useful information

 concerning the impact of investment in vision on intellectual develon—

 ment.6 In particular, the difference between the coefficient of SEEG

 and the coefficient of SEENG comnares children with abnormal     uncor-
 rected vision who wear glasses to children with abnormal uncorrected

vision who do not wear glasses. These differences are shown in

Table 11. In general investment in improved vision has a positive

payoff in terms of intellectual development in the high income sample

but not in the low income sample. Kessner (1974) reports that 40 per-

cent of children in a low income sample who were tested with their

glasses failed a visual acuity test. It is plausible that this per-

centage would be much smaller in a high income sample due to the receipt

of higher quality optometric services by children in such a sample. If

so,    this provides an explanation of the results in Table   11 and evidence

that    the returns to appropriate vision correction might be substantial..7


         similar comment can
                          be made with regard to hearing since children
with endowed (uncorrected) abnormal hearing might have had their hearing
corrected by investment. Such children cannot be identified in the
sample. In the case of vision, since children who wear eyeglasses were
examined without them, only endowed (uncorrect) abnormal vision can be
identified precisely. Information on the use of eyeglasses was added to
the regressions to make the results more comparable to those for poor
hearing. Moreover, this procedure controls in part for reverse causality
from intellectual development to poor vision due to excessive use of the
eyes.


   7The positive and significant coefficients of SEEG in the high income
santDle indicate that children with abnormal uncorrected vision who wear
glasses have higher intellectual development scores than children with
normal uncorrected vision who do not wear glasses. This might reflect
a negative correlation between SEEG and the price of medical care, or it
might reflect reverse causality from development to SEEG.
                               In — 18




                             TABLE 11

       Difference Between Coefficients of SEEG and SEENG in
               Intellectual Develoninent Rearessions



                     Income C $7,000            Income >   $7,000
Denendent                         —
Variable                Difference                 Difference


wisc                        .377                     1.604


RWBAT                     —1.766                     2.113


AWRAT                      —.495
                                       Ix: — 19




  C.   Stnnary
        A stated goal of public policy in the United
                                                     States is to improve
 the economic and    social   well—being of certain groups of children by im-

 proving their cognitive develooment and health.        To allocate scarce
 resources among competing programs with respect to children, policy—
 makers require information about the dollar costs and benefits of these
 Programs. Clearly, our results cannot supply policy—makers with all
 of this information. We have no measures of the costs of raising
 health or development via alternative programs such as those aimed at
 reducing the incidence of low birth weight
                                                  or lowering completed family
 size. Nor do we have measures of the
                                           dollar values of the benefits of

 such programs. Nevertheless, our results do contain policy         relevant
 insights about potential     benefits in terms   of "physical" (health or
 cognitive   development) units. Policy—rnakers are then free to assign
whatever set of weights they choose to these "physical" units and can
thereby translate increments in health or development into monetary
magnitudes.
       Further,   our results are useful whether or not the mechanism by

which a given variable alters health or development is fully understood.

In the case where the mechanism is known,     our   results can   be used to
identify the appropriate kinds of government intervention. A case in

point is the theoretical and empirical role
                                                  of family income. Here we
feel confident that the basic force at work is conmiand over real re-

sources provided by income. Alternatively, when effects of certain

variables are large but mechanisms are     not well understood, our findings
                                   III — 20




suggest   the nature of additional research that is required to formulate

nublic policy, rather than the appropriate policies per se. Consider

for example, our result that parents' schooling is an important deter-

minant of the height of children from low income families. This result

has   a very definite policy implication if the mechanism at work is a
positive correlation between schooling and nutritional intakes or be-
tween schooling and knowledge of what constitutes an appropriate diet.

The policy implication is much less clearcut if the mechanism at work

is a positive relationship between parents' schooling and genetic

inheritance.

       Our major findings are:

       1. The prediction of two distinct regimes or two different re-

lationships between each of our health and development variables and

the set of explanatory variables is generally supported by our results.

Statistically significant differences in the sets of coefficients for

the two income classes are reported for five of seven dependent vari-

ables. Although these results cannot    be characterized as   "unanimous"

support for the basic structure of our nodel, they do constitute

stronger verification than may be initially apparent. The two income

classes used here are unlikely to coincide completely with the two

regimes specified by the model. The resulting misclassification of

observations   will tend to bias the coefficient in the two   income

classes towards equality, making it more difficult to obtain signifi-
cantly different coefficients in the two income classes even though

such differences do exist in the two regimes. We observe significant

differences in coefficients for five of our seven variables despite

this bias towards finding no such difference.
                                      III —   21




        2.   The prediction that income will have a positive effect on health

or development for families in Regime 1 and no effect in Regime 2 receives

weaker support in our results. For the two achievement measures, income

has a positive, significant impact for lower income families and a non-

significant impact for upper income families. For the other dependent

variables,    family income is either statistically significant in both in-
come classes    or in neither income class. One likely explanation for the

significant    coefficients in the upper income class is the previously
mentioned    bias resulting from the misclassification of observations. In

particular, it is likely that members of Regime 1 are erroneously included

in the over $7,000 income class, causing an upward bias in the coefficient

of income for that class.

        3. When health is measured by height, parents' schooling, mother's

work status, and family size are significant predictor variables in the

low   income sample but not in the high income sample. On the other hand,
these three variables tend to be as important (or more important) predic—
tars of intellectual development in the high income sample as in the low
income samnle.
       4.    Health   endowment and investment measures have significant, posi-
tive effects on cognitive development. In particular, cognitive develop-

ment scores are higher when children weighed more than five pounds at

birth, when they were breast—fed, when their current hearing is normal,

and when abnormal uncorrected vision is corrected by the use of eye-

glasses. These findings suggest that prenatal and pediatric care pro—

grams that could identify high risk mothers and children at modest cost

would have relatively high expected benefits.
                                   III — 22




      Finally, our findings highlight at least two fruitful areas for future

research. One is an investigation of the extent to which endogenous cur-

rent health measures affect intellectual
                                           development, The second is an
investigation of health and development
                                          relationships at later stages in
the child's life cycle. Both of these will contribute further to our

understanding of how health and development interact and
                                                           will provide more
refined measures of benefits from investments in children's health.
                             H             Th'&LA1
            Onhnary 1c'cts4 S%J&aves Recressbn3 o4
            ftecjress tons__'nduAere1 on4l-rsidenced.tmrq
                            .rwcon,ff ciooo_                 tc&viahJec___
        Litki ABLE                             J _rIvco,,,ff Eo0 0 - -
        ______                                               l,('{             c2&95         c2,i8
           /-tiLc                &, 2/7                I   c'/?
                                  I
                                                           /ujl         1                    2oi
                        !l        i.iY                 I_______________                      253
                                 / 54 (,           I        O,53       J



                                                           's V ,'/vfl
                                                                                                             4
                                  ,7O
                                                   I
                                                           'A7S__             _57t I_,c?
          zssao ,6ctO                                      /37V J—. Y2O
                                                           t J —/ '3
                                                   F




         ___—       H
                             ___ ____ IO2 aU                                     523
                                                            6,/U              - 18c2        6
                                 O?L/3_-J                  S,D2
                                 cZ34                      I13                 lift
                                 /,73o_i                                                    6,O/
         A/o-rT
                    I
                             -2.3y3      -'/63 il—5S
                                                                              c9,t23/—  I /2/
    I                                      —                                            I

                                 ,366 I_______ /,J2                                     I

     VLE •-&,i?i    -

                                               I
                                                                     '-.--—

                                                                            —Zo?
                                                                                -'-——

                                                                                                         I

    Ls±c-                                   I              o753 H
    /Js&:rci-/,3Tc5I /VJ                                                    -1,5543 1       /O4      —
I


                                           I               96? I-6.s& J_____
r;/H C
I
                                                                        k?*     33) L IT
L         tJ                 /779
                                 G233


                                                                              ___
                                                  Th'LEP
       Ovdrar lqe* Suctte Resresbs o RWRP\T
                                                                                                                  -




       Reressiors \ra\\c 3reqton fl&
    rPcgn-)jr                        dvo mE u.jyk)e
                                            4'
      Lift4         r,yconjr .Wooo
                                   Cc.ff#c.t_             )p     —                                 -         C)


    _______ ________________ —/,2O3                                                             ____ __
                          S         - S3 __ ___ 1 -3, I
                                                                                               I__ ___
                                   __ ___ ____I__ ____
                                     -,ø6                                 I -25
                                                                                               U




     .1'? -   .-   '_..
    /-.             '... / /                          I                                        j
                                                                                                   ______
                                                          (L27_±_2,3S                                   1751
    ______                             I j_ 27J_th/!LJ                                                 oLS2
    __________                                        I
                                                             i L2/2___!
                                                                   hJr
                                                                        16,(b-,
                                                                        I Q  //                         ci

          /_/ r..r -C- —
               -.—.)                                      9,63       ii    —l
                                                          oily             I-
    _____                                            aaw
                                   I —/,z?9__I. /3__ dH—/,/3
     'iLc_7i: oio                                                           i602J' J_LLYJ
          .4/7-                                                  Ii
                                                                     —I




                                                                                 /23                   & 311?
                                    7'                    c2,bIH-,/6O
                                    —,o'                                        '/9?                   OPO/
                                                                 iot& !.
                                                                                           J




                                    — L///                        -'                   1




                                    m?/O
I_______ -,9r22                                                                        I
I


                                                          O,2                                          01O9
                                                          5      P
                                                                                                       O1    j/
    ao/1272c:7T
                                                                          --L   2Li
                                                  t



L4';- ,c2L                     2
                                        )fl)
                                    'f/cz.
                                            'i
                                       / / /o
                                   ,,'21         —_________
              1                                                            /727
                                    TR8LEP(1
              Othnary mn.4 SQ1suxves              Rerescyt,s t'c wRT
              Re9ressin5 ne.\uAe 3rc1 r4 4vrsidenc'e_dmrj ttavabfrs
     hJorp.Jbr,r
     ____                ts                       F
                                                   _______                  pJoç4ooo

                           7, ?OJ
                                            I    ô.íì
                                                 6.3)
                                                                    1     .33   9I
     —                                                                  -/,97_I_______
         ,c1/Yi::J /,19/c?                  i                             ,627                I   , .2S

         °°''' :i±tJ ',/5
     ,flt.<_F7      —,_/95
                                                                iI
                                                                    I
                                                                         /,_24O
                                                                          F623            I___
                                                                                                  5O0             I




                              .%20 J 33,//                                                1

                                                                                          I

     .2655a0 —.35V                                                      -,r? sa,          I
                              .O1       I                                '21 J 62
                 -        —.506
                             -

                                                1,23
                                                                1




                                                            H           —,g'          I           Oc3
                                                            I           —. t2S
                                                                                                  008
                                                ,6S                     - /ä3 t                   OIL
                         O7IcZ9         I                                             I           O2P03
                                                                               FL
              'S         —,                     OI43                                              OJO     -


                         -, /3      I           JOi                               ,                       —
     /JscEt,I/.ó3$ I                            4,56                    i;0O I                    1,9.b
                                    I

      4Lt/-yo,57fr I                                    F —,5pj                   I               LOb
I-                       ?.2, Yc?   I                   i 93 106
                x .137
                     I


4IJ.                                                    i                                                     -

         .1
                     I   //SJ                                           29??
             •              TRY3LE P
    Orthnoxtj \eqcr Sqica'res Re9rescw3 eS X hJG-HT
                            3 rez or v4 *rsideflce an\r_ciycab)e,
                                             p       ___                      _______
_______ _____                         F          crcssS'-._Ccr'.t
__________               oW    1                       - (7                   CL ____
    Fiji c           .0/7
    Mwo,FT
    htuorcKcr
                   —- //o
                   —.227
                                   (2t)          •               ___

    PcDucr-r
    HELX) EAr—
    tsSRo                                                                 ___ C'-   s)
    Ft*tJG___    _-J2S
                                                      —.233

                    —.   /yr                     -
    ;46:-
                 L -.              (o.t1v)            2o3
                                                                      -        (oai.
    P___          - —.zc)
                                   C1VSo)
                                   (2.7R)
                                   (a s)
                                                      TY9
                                                      —.
                                                                          —

                     .13                                   .05-7
                                                                              (o.sa)
                                   CY-c)              —.020                   (c.ô)
                     - /o7                             .057                   (o..r)
                                   (O7/)             —/.38o               -
-   CoStA.'
                                                            t) -t-J
                                                                 C—


      PT                                               2. 5E?
                                            Th13'_EA5
                               l.c'cts4 Sc.u.n.ve.s-
           Recjression5 ne\uck 3rein aM 4 residence
                                                           Re9resIbns
                                                    dt&mrN aYkkb)
                                                                                 IPEAI
                                           --i
    fl'oE/Idowri                      r,4ICoAltr .47000                   ..rA-taMff 7ô o 0
           ;71_) /;j            —-no
                                 i/ /                     /./?
                                  /                  I
                                                                                              I______
                                                     I    O,0/                                 0,7?
                                 mO33                I________ —, 61/
                           1                                    ./04
    /;!PKFI                                                     OS
    FY:iT -,32 1/O€17
                                                                                          p




    AECT
                                                                                       I ya4 H
                                 ,O,23           I        3,. HL,606
                                                          0I7O2  —,ooi I
                                                          /I?I            •/a3
                                 ,o3                                      1&q                  4,X
    /es7—-—,o2s                                  I o,
                                                 I       LTh94               -

                                                                         -,opg i_y__I
                                                                                      I




                                                         Lc302__H.H5                  J         /133
                                                                     tI.6b2                     0L9(       I


                                                                         —I19                  OP.?
    "'LL_,2L2_J O9 - —mOiS - I____
                                                                          .O3     I



                       : ,32O
                                                I_a7_J
                                                  /25
                                                       o3 I,93
                                                          I O,3      H


                                                         o2.2        -    ,Oo2    I
                                                                                               ôooJJ
                                                                         —s033    I            o, I3J
                                             I           0,41                                  437 -
     4,3/i! ,dO2 I                                                                             /,?
                                            I                    -
                                                                         —,647                         —

    4I;. ,
                       I
1


                                                                         ,4177
                       j2?/                 P

                                                                         £9X I
      I?               L                                                 /9o77   I.
                        I..eqs* Scu..n.ve.s Re9rescr,s o' I
        Rec1ressions \flQ\ck '3recjior cxr\O. *-csidence anr cxvktb)es
                   r     I         J.vcc1fE..7ccO
                                                      F                                 F
         IuJ/hJ   -— - '—.ca./ -.              ..X°:°i' )                            (o.zz) -
                         9

                                                                                 F

                                                                                     (2y)
        MLiJOj2jET
                                                    (LoY)
                                                              —   -    .Do7          (o-o2)
                                                                                                —H


    -   pSeuc6-r                            __ -    Sv)
        PEDUcr                                      (/o.a7)                          (/o.7y)
        LEs;20                                                    L
         E4G- 4_I4__ ----cv:")                                                       (2.7)(
         F/rH                 ___12__
    _Fisr                1H_.T                      (o.s)              .07           (2.7)
         U-JOG-                                                                       (c.oG)
                         t     -
                                     .o3L           ('o.Is)                          (2)
-                                     c9g                                             (I-b)
        forE_b
                         .4


                                      D3                                     ,
        uMr        --
                                      oa            (o.oé)
        /<//j-°                                                       -.01
                                   —ID/v
                                   . I8             (33a)              •oo2            (ooi)
                                   —. 7,?           (rz7)             —. Izo          (i. Rô)
        SEc'G                         13            (a.I)                             (/. cu)
        PS','                                                                         Cs-. c
        coIusY;t                      I"'                               'VP

        ,cJ                                                             .103
                                    lyis-?-                              o7
                        ns*
                                           IFthLE fi'i
              OflI%flt9                Re9resy oc PFHE)4LtH
              Recp-ess;or__nc\wIe 3re%br ard rsidence dm ttaviab)ec
                            J23q?-,o0o_______
                                       F                 ILJcot.,Cjooo  ___
                                                nest..,.             Ft
                        —
                            ,                                               I
                                                                                                 OSSO
    -     /.Lc              O05                  ôtO          :(     ,O03
                         —. OO                                     -O2 I                         o.o&
                     : .Oj/                                   I                             I    O.25
                                                                    ,O25                    I


     tUucAY____                                                                                  is           H
                            .00/                                   —,d03                I


                                                              r                         I


                                                                                        j        0,3
                                           1.
                                                                           —-       I
                                                                                                      —

                                           I     0,63                                            )O2
                                           I     ,33 -,Oq3 I                                    q,yo
                         .00/                   O,c:9/              ,Ot2                        ,3?
                                                              h                     I 295 1
                         ,00PZ                  c,L23              —,O07              ç9
I       A/C--7          -,OO r 6,7                                                  I           O,9?
I
          Aw-'          -p0/3   t993? T,ó/'
                         ,36 1 /55?                                                             0,63
                                                                                                          -

        sg6
                                                                                I

                                                                                I
                       -,0LO           J 5$                                     I               o,os
                                       I        OZO8                                            Oo8
                            /YS                                                                 O,c'O
    cc/Js77>:'T                                          I.        .o25         I                         —I
     1/                                                  V          ,03L
          F                        I
                                                                   .51OS I
          n                                                        /72?!
           OrcItra9 U&s+ Scysxye Re9resr3 o.c LU\3C
           Re9resstop5 \r\a\utk 3recpor ôyi. 4vstdenc aQmr ciyictb)e,s
        hJDC1EgDcur
H VflRlfl5L L71
    I       z"
                         I

                                            fcq4
                                         /,7 37
                                                        ___   ______               FCXCFc
                                                                                        Le 7/
              TEIIL     2JI2±
                      ____                                                ____
L                                       7I  I
    ' ',±1 c?±LL2±_tc?iL 3 :iH2lI±i1±/_ILItci
               1/3 O,u'      H 9/2 ) / C               AP2                         Y2

    R' iiJ               T   /
                                   T
                                      _
         26ss2t              )5 66 k2?3
                                 !.7?)L1?Li L Li
                                                              L7o                /C/7   ,Ha        Y/1
                  -               (O1 1c/ -),i5z /?/
                         t ———.———'——t—--——',——————4
                                                                         '/3 ,O/        1-3
                       __ LH/3O -, 5(;7 93/i-
                         -   ?5 H, SSJ 4O3 IC37 I )                                O3         L/Q /,6


                'fO i'557/ 31/ ,3!O                                     ?'/ I3__,2 J 92
                                                                    .7ThAT7TJ
         /1 -257' *Li HY /3,?i 3 o
           __          Ii1IJ'>J                                                    ___
                                 /. /   /<3J_______     cC;
                                             l,)O6cL3 ,ccH                    O/,/or;/,//
 I T±*&/*L                   :32J /, ?O •J. 7L'7. :H/ 01u?. I—, 22La,(/

        /!s7y•t/[        ! h]r               O,P -/' o!_5,L/
                                                      ___ HO, 2
                                                   22 22Y ____      t2t21
                                                                    t
                                                                      _______
                                                                                        IQi
                                                                                         ___
                                                                                            Q'.i

 i%';.                                                        __    'S3I                           ___
                                                       /IOi             ___              _____
           7?            H2;,2 f                  . Y/7 I                               Vi2.- I
              O-thnory l.eqs4           R9resorns o P. ioR#*T
              Recjression nc\ude 3res104 ô.rA hrsidence dm c1vIaLb)e,$
                                               I          FEfrIALES
     I V$R/fl 7E ¶17ooo
         —    7Wi/LJ E$.49 .A23 -s9Oø 4&D28' E9? ôoJ/,369H2YO I
                         ? 2S •3 i.iS              O3           —,a23    I


                       P Z! p±25T2c29{ cZc2I ![T9c+? O&'1 )333 f_ic
         /iL9O.t2i('/J H2?i I O#L 3I9/L 63 n'f% ô.i9
              i E71 jThoY
                                                                .
     [
     I
         /,CCJ7 -    / Yn 394 S oi "°°1L3
                         99?J/9?49HS'3bJ[:7±'_&R9 1-1SJ5Z
     -__P°aI zO7 iz 9I 1,/3 F1-'3I 1lj4V7.QOJ
     H FY/W -,6?7i o.i7 ¶-/.32XO,q r?.OO7!_)9 t-29/JIifl
               . iDS 3& ! O34QJ J i
                                                                -,
                      !Iq vo —/,        o;.o#'ft_i, £OI/L3PJ
          A/;/j                           /,O 3,,LQ3 JL
          /tL5itLJ      02317                            ——I
                                    iJJ4Z?SJ393[&j9j/1573!.83
          //c/tL5)' OD/                             fl:5&ki..
             ,'cWIL      'G2 6. J3 3.323.-I.3OcI-[j5lJ,/XL o.96
          /g/9E                           37I{-5,3i yf VFZ6,i "4'&.i
                        •9262VH3,324iOo_,)6O1O.DI 2Q3/ 4IS2L
         /JSE               I-,qoo F33i
                            DM6               a.O       OIO
                        97I, p.73+
             4tJ !',ql o.7j
         co/Ls7zz'rPz v                                         y3A22'
 I_______
                                      ,'2j_tj
                                                                    -



                                                          J
                                1



         Adj
—I

                                                            I   ISY3I
                                                   CI
                               ThNLE /*10
     Orthrory Lcsf Scujxyco Recreskns cc
                       'na\e

          //
    L''T          .3J LIO/ n3,,?R71     /,O '5S51 I &ã

          -i
                                                                                                 O,70


                      3)__ôo3 -2,22! bO/ j,_7Lf                Q              6)7

                  /
                          2,cL ,33              1 •O ____            I




LcYi                                                       LaLu
I
          —-—.
                      ' 33 H
               —-——-— —.——--_
     /L57T',522 ,i27 L"
                                        6 YY          i! .      un !—)v)

___        —
               i 2i                            4,—
                                                               O,3(, La..€27 cJ
                                                           O1o k!OI7i
                 r) )S//S8 23 O,3 '-,77 o.o                          ',O
                                                                     - _______________________


_____
  /K T                                                                                      a,oj
__               ___
    OP±VI S:± f?1!
                                   __                ir;r i;TTtTi
I A/c7'T -/,7'T/_hY73.
I -J 7±Ti
      Y/J9H
     __
           [777__
                         *32
                                :}& i   29                           i,J39_±J
                                                                                                 __


I TC,VL y//71            6c26I(2)/?_L5                     LLDLF                        6Y
L ,±/J' 3-y                                    -           7         -Y2o
     'E)/J dz?i___ ___ _____                                                                     __
       4
_________        _____ii: _________________________
                               Lo70 L                                IO7 I
                                                                                     ______

ITKIJ                  iIIJI;J7;Jij__
                                                       I



                                                                              __ __
                           1RLE j'fl\
    Ovdtnary \.eqs4 Suixves Re9resJbn.s          o4?
                                   r4 4'rrs,c{ence dLtmr'j yiab)e,
VAR/ABLE
—            I '7 :°p
/AJDtj3&DCAIr i±                ____________
                                                           T437oorj
                                                                   ______I

                                   I o,
                          '                        /y
                                                           Eip      iO
                   ss GQA'29


N'' P7- -' /;0z '              ka 1 2sV           o,v       1oao
i;woKFT h 32t71 /cQ.02SJ -.         1.9/ —,jg I ,YL         -,O93 O,93
 FEOCF7lc)1flJ -TT,zc , r
             .-                                            --
                  O33          ,O/5 O7/ O/ ;,J IO12 39
  2ESS2-öO33 I A i-,o/?! 59 Ho                      ,t2?   HO2nM7
 tTL4fLI 1069 32f.354oq;jg33
                                                la'o9
ao9i2oi.ioirfl,,w;
a4 ool3idf         TTflicT
                  '/59 1 /5/.O28;è.S/L2/S 512ATjjfl
 /lt                              .-__
                     i o9 kO !O.o2Okc2f6I
                               .oU ,O/ ,oj1 /.Jl337
                        YO3 .3&):3,38 .2 !*1V2
                     i /23 }-IO?OL.o/LHJLôO_L
                                                           H_263o.93,



                  ,789 4O/ L-9 jO,S8H ,/23 LLkJ I.b3
                                opkvs, //4f                 &O21O.j
%!sE6
s-/'4- LNa. 1A2? -oq?tt.Ofl '2 6,571 O9 OIST
 4LtJ JT.Xai O44 3,292/O.5)k0,29 !LL5
                                     !c55!

            jjr>, 7/SJ                                 j•J776 __
                        TRLE rL2
     Or4r'ary lj'qs'+ Su.fl.Ys RGresbs a9 P YkT.
     rss%on5 \ne\    -
                                 siaen  av vib)e
                                        --                 —
                     ,-?p ES     I
                                   -t
____             N
                             ___     { / 3 /,2/ 33) j,oS HO? Cwc]—

V2ri'       tIS  "3Jo
t/::;ri(J;- 4/1 O./ I
                      ,C?/i    LL±1t
                       T6 1/3 O22 I I3 f o,:


  sTTj7o3fl7
I_ __-
      ___-j_IOHOrLLO31OI9O%,IDTJL// H52k35'
                                                                                 ___ __
   __ ___                                                         I


                 ____ OI)) -O/ QL{5 i,y I o,/ h632
I /:/ F '/95              i-,o7!O13j1 'a' H ____
                     -'                                                                      __
__              F.
                r .c,236 /.O I,/c2c2o5 -2/'7 <55O3OII6
                                                  -.t—-———.--.----,--.-.-.-, -

__
                         i?_!/./2 I/O/ ô, ;mJ4/_.i,// I !!C)3ió,O3F
  ___                    7i 79 _'•7                                              ,(;- I(,Qc/
                -Ta
                               O,9J.//:
                                                      TTT:JT;aJ
                                                      29 I
_____ ___ .27 J,O2 Oo5 6,CDl                                                                      I



                             I 79 17? T 2LTh3-J C,
 s C//C
___ ___
ec/I ?2 '-' 1
                L±
                            TTTTJr
                         '50 LO ¶y3 cq -,ifo,;s J-I Ojci
                           _____

                               ___           __
                                                  -



                                                       __ __ __ ____
                                                                                 —
                                                                                     c2i7.


L4&±±tL1*.'V t/(4'LLipLLLt__
  7-
     I-                                                 <:1                      2
                                                                                             --
                                           FR.E i3
            Oana9 Lvas+ SctLu1Yes Re9reskvs cc IEcAtj
            Recressions ncik 3recpon cr4 4vrst4ence dt&mrtj tavkth!e
    'flEpE'Dcwr _________                                                              CMALE5 ________

            7w,'71 J. O.1I
                                                    I       IA/caM
                                                                                                 fl___
                                                                                                  c' ooo__J
                                                                                                     0.0?
        ,ry,'}C'.          051                                              -,c35 i3.O1              525
        o,ekfrr      'I
                           341 /0.2'S                                               /tIc             0.96
                          ,a9!                      ;-ov ou H                                  .o*3 ____
                     i-oaf &I77 Looa                                  o,o9 o8         s
      2EsSzC)
                    I!


                    tL"
                        2J          ___
                           5or%oo7 Iô.75
                                 I 1i2
                                                            ,O391_G9 IJTOo2'7]___

                                                                                                     O '93
    ___                                         I       ,   3* IU-,Of/ I                   I    __
      __                         ____                   ;Oi?          O1) H O39 I                      __

     p/[f;4 :c)
                                                                     2tJL4j,j2j?T
                                                                     . g; 17_,o7 jt&OQ_11oo!o
    LzJL—L I-_76l
        ____ •9 O2/
                                   °L-.fl
                         a.osi1o1slao4'F.o,7J,.
                    .;7J ).O C2 1ô3 I .i95
     __hN7      /y1.o9LLqs
                                            j




L .&%E Oq,o2J-,    L1L! LJ O,
                                 --——---—-j—--'——---



     sg6t4— 53 I IO7I 017O - '3 !±pP -.ôs'
    /,/e,( !;-9[399{-j &53           aW 0/
I    4zW        iit LiJ
                    I—,1O5i o
                          p299
                                                                 Ic2,O. t


                                                                         Li"
                                                                                    2'? hi 3g16o6
    Co/1S?/2/T1          ,50P3                                                        I
                    1±1                                 Y2
                                                                     _______
                                                                                I


                                                                                       r
                                                                                           33)9!.
       /)
                                          2':7i                          C?sa I
                                                     {PVLE
                            'LecsF Scysxve.s Re9res.sbns
            Recress;ors nc\ck restor\ onO4-rsi4encc                                         amr uvkrio)e
                                                           ___-—
                                                                                  L             ___
    - VAR/A at                                        I            ___
    r
                           L2? Lai J42R                                                     P2.L. L222±IJL
    __                      _____                                   Y__                      __       __
    IL             1-          L4L2i
                             mO7 S6 ,OO3 Lj -,OoS
    _____                                                                                           __
              ____                          h9 H0331 o.Y7 •°3 L3O_IojH1-
17*? :i- ':L1L& LkAkc c- Lti LL°ji i
        •




I
                           Li7 LWOO                         IL/3 62. •/74'-l+'4'H, ivi
     ,/QS r P,O// ),3 ii
                 —-——•——'-- -——'.'—-—t——-———--—---——--——


                                                                   ___    Ii                        Jots ii3 I
    // /                    OiO jj/                        ,O3-j              I         I


                              ./9! // IO5> I'? i!Tô6 I O'31 H O32 O.V7
    ?1I    TTTrI7TFLnsm:c1
I




LI  __

r21 '-
                       I     JLIIJTJ
•L I::L_ '(±±b_LPU 4z ?PL:1'Lic!
                                                      !mC'/(

                                           /j2 •O' I 6J? 4o I7R I
                            -,o'/71 / 2/;' oy &?c
                                              I ,5
                                                                                  ,O)/ O


                                                                                            o,7c
                                                                                                         I ILl

                                                                                                                 I



                                                                                      J75Ty !,z T3TH

_
__
___
                                  ____ __
                                  /3                                -
                                                                         I-
                                                                                                I
                                                                                                I

                                       p
                                                                   __
__                         1:::                             2-1                   32/           LZ305
                                                           y/? f
                                    REFERENCES


Ashenfelter,   Orley, and Mooney, Joseph I). "Graduate Education, Ability
           and Earnings." The Review of Economics and Statistics, 50,
           No. 1 (February 1968).

Averch, Harvey A., et at. How Effective is Schooling? A Critical Review
         and Synthesis of Research Findings. Santa Monica: The Rand
           Corporation,   1972.

Becker, Gary S. Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income:
        An Analytical Approach. W.S. Woytinsky Lecture No. 1.
           Ann   Arbor: University of   Michigan,   1967.
Becker, Gary S. "A Theory of Social Interactions." Journal of Political
         Economy, 82, No. 6 (November/December 1974).

Becker, Gary S., and Lewis, H. Gregg. "On the Interaction between the
         Quantity and Quality of Children." In New Economic Approaches
         to Fertility, edited by T.W. Schultz. Proceedings of a
         conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research
         and the Population Council. Journal of Political Economy, 81,
         No. 2, Part II (March/April 1973).

Becker, Gary  S., and Tomes, Nigel. "Child       Endowments and the Quantity and
           Quality of Children." Journal of      Political Economy, 84, No. 4,
           Part II (August 1976).

Ben—Porath, Yoram, and Welch, Finis. "Do Sex Preferences Really Matter?"
         The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, No. 2 (May 1976).

Berg,   Robert L.  Health Status Indexes. Proceedings of a conference con-
           ducted by Health Services Research, Tuscon, Arizona, October
           1972. Chicago: Hospital Research and Educational Trust, 1973.

Birch, Herbert C., and Gussow, Joan Dye. Disadvantaged Children: Health,
         Nutrition, and School Failure. New York: Harcourt, Brace and
         World, Inc., 1970.

Blinder, Alan S. "A Model of Inherited Wealth." The Quarterly Journal
         of Economics, 87, No. 4 (November 1973).

Bloom, Benjamin S. Stability and Change in Human            Characteristics.   New
         York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1964.

Broman, Sarah H.; Nichols, Paul I..; and Kennedy, Wallace A. Preschool IQ:
         Prenatal and Early Develoomental Correlates. Hillsdale, New
         Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers, 1975.
                                        R- 2



Carroll, John B. "Fitting a Model of School Learning to Aptitude and
         Achievement Data over Grade Levels." Research Bulletin
         No. RB—73—5l, Princeton, New Jersey: Educational Testing
         Service, 1973.

Edwards, Linda Nasif, and Grossman, Michael. "An Economic Analysis of
         Child Health and Intellectual Development." Presented at a
         Health Economics Research Organization session at the annual
         meetings of the Allied Social Science Associations, Atlantic
         City, New Jersey, September 1976.

Fisher, Irving. The Theory of Interest. New York: Augustus M. Kelley,
         1961. original edition, 1930.

Friedman,   Bernard, and Leibowitz, Arleen. "The Bequest Motive in Human
            Capitaland the Health Care of Children." Unpublished paper,
            1975.

Goldfield, S.M., and Quandt, R.E. "The Estimation of Structural Shifts
         by Switching Regressions." Annals of Economic and Social
         Measurement, 2, No. 4 (October 1973)
Gronau, Reuben. "Wage Comparisons — A       Selectivity Bias." Journal of
            Political    Economy, 82, No. 6 (November/December 1974).

Grossman,   Michael. "The Correlation Between Health and Schooling." In
            Household Production and Consumption, edited by Nestor E.
            Terleckyj.  New York: Columbia University Press for the
            National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.

Haggerty, Robert 3.; Roghmann, Klaus J.; and      Pless,    Ivan B. Child Health
         and the Community. New York: John        Wiley    and Sons, 1975.

Heckman,    James J. "Effects of Child—Care Programs on Women's Work Effort."
            In T.W. Schultz, ed., Marriage, Family Human Capital, and
            Fertility. Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the National
            Bureau of Economic Research and the Population Council. Journal
            of Political Economy, 82, No. 2, Part II (March/April 1974).
Hu, Teh—Wei. "Effectiveness of Child Health and Welfare Programs: A
         Simultaneous Equations Approach." Socio—Economic Planning
            Sciences, 7 (1973).

Inman, Robert P. "The Family Provision of Childrens         Health: An Economic
         Analysis." In The Role of Health Insurance         in the Health
         Services Sector, edited by Richard Rosett.         New York: Columbia
         University Press for the National Bureau of        Economic Research,
            1976.

Ishikawa, Tsuneo. "Family Structures and Family Values in the Theory of
        Income Distribution." Journal of Political Economy, 83, No. 5
            (October 1975).
                                      R- 3




Kamin,   Leon 3. The Science   and Politics of IC. New York: John Wiley
           and Sons, 1974.

Kaplan, Robert 5.; Lave, Lester B.; and Leinhardt, Samuel. "The Efficacy
         of a Corçrehensive Health Care Project: An flnpirical Analysis."
         American Journal of Public Health, 62, No. 7 (July 1972).
Kenny,   Lawrence W. "The Demand for Child Quality and for   Inputs, the
                                                             Its
                    of Child Quality and Related Topics." Ph.D. disser-
           Production
         tation, University of Chicago, 1977.
Kessner, David H. Assessment of Medical Care for Children. Contrasts in
         Health Status, Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Institute of Medicine,
           1974.
Lansing, John B., and Songuist, John. "A Cohort Analysis of Changes in
         the Distribution of Wealth." In Six Papers on the Size.
         tribution of Wealth and Income, edited by Lee Soltow.
         New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
           Economic Research, 1969.
Mechanic, David. "The Influence of Mothers on Their Children's Health,
        Attitudes and Behavior." Pediatrics, 33 (March 19M).
Mindlin, Rowland L., and Lobach, Katherin S.,   "Consistency and   Change in
           Choice of Medical Care for Preschool Children." Pediatrics, 48
           (September 1971).
National Center for Health Statistics. Anthropometric and Clinical
         ings. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public
           Health Service Publication No. ('iRA) 75—1229, April 1975.
National Center for Health Statistics. Binocular Visual Acuity of
           dren: Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics — United
           States. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
           Vital and Health Statistics — Series 11 — No. 112, 1972a.
National Center for Health Statistics. Evaluation of Psychological
           sures Used in the Health Examination Survey of Children Ages
           6—11. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
           Public Health Service Publication No. 1000 — Series 2 — No. 15,
           1966.
National Center for Health Statistics. Hearing Levels of Children by Age
         and Sex: United States. U.S. Department of Health, Education,
           and Welfare, Public Health Service Publication No. 1000 —
           Series 11 — No. 102, 1970a.
National Center for Health Statistics. Height and Weight of Childrent
         United States. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and —
         Welfare, Public Health Service Publication No. 1000 —
         Series 11 — No. 119, 1970b.

National Center for Health Statistics. Periodontal Disease and Oral
         Hygiene Among Children: United States. U.S. Department of
         Health, Education, and Welfare, Vital and Health Statistics —
         Series 11 — No. 117, 19721,.

National Center for Health Statistics. Plan, Oeration, and Resnonse
         Results of a Program of Children's Examinations. U.S.
         Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public Health
         Service Publication No. 1000 — Series 1 — No. 5, 1967a.
National   Center for Health Statistics. A Study of the Achievement Test
           Used in the Health Examination Survey of Persons Aced 6—17
           Years. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welare,
           Public Health Service Publication No. 1000 — Series 2 — No. 24,
           l967b.

Owen, George M. "The Assessment and    Recording   of Measurements of Growth
           of Children: Report of a Small Conference." Pediatrics, 51
           (March   1973).
Russell, A.L. "A System of Classification and Scoring for Prevalence
         Surveys of Periodontal Disease." Journal of Dental Research,
           35 (June 1956).

Seoane, Nicole, and Lathan, Michael C. "National Anthropometry in the
         Identification of Malnutrition in Childhood." Journal of
         Tropical Pediatric and Environmental Child Health (September
           1971).

Schack, Elisabeth, and Starfield, Barbara. "Acute Disability in Childhood:
         Examination of Agreement between Various Measures." Medical Care,
         11, No. 4 (July — August 1973).

Starfield, Barbara. "Health Needs of Children." Prepared for the Robert
         Wood Johnson Foundation, 1975.

Sullivan, Daniel F. "Conceotual Problems in Developing an Index of Health,"
         PHS Pub. No. 1000. Vital and Health Statistics Series 2, No. 17.
         Rockville, Maryland: National Center for Health Statistics, 1966.

Talbot,   Nathan B.; Kagan, Jerome; and Eisenberg,
                                                 Leon, editors. Behavioral
           Science in Pediatric Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
           Company, 1971.
                                         R- 5


Tomes, Nigel. "Intergenerational Transfers of Hian and Non—Htnnan Capital
          in a Model of Quality-Quantity Interaction." Ph.D. dissertation,
          University      of Chicago, 1977.

Wallace, Helen N. Health Services for Mothers and      Children.     Philadelphia:
         W.B. Saunders Company, 1962.

Ware, Jr. •   John   E.  "The Conceptualization and Measurement of   Health for
          Policy     Relevant Research in Medical Care Delivery."    Presented
          atthe annual meeting of the American Association for the
          Advancement of Science, Boston, Massachusetts, February 1976.
Willis, Robert. "A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility Be-
         havior." In New Economic Approaches to Fertility, edited by
         T.w. Schultz. Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the
         National Bureau of Economic Research and the Population Council.
         Journal of Political Economy, 81, No. 2, Part II (March/April
          1973).
