                                             NEEF                     L3ARY

                                           NA1t
                                                  2g.;   JLJ
                                                                     yr
                                                                     LVft
                                                  SJhF3RII, CAUFUR,1 843@5




          PRICE BEHAVIOR IN ThE LIGHT OF
           BALANCE OF PAYMENTS THEORIES

                 Irving B. Kravis
        NBER and University of Pennsylvania

                 Robert   E. Lipsdy
           NBER and Queens College, CUNY



              Working Paper No. 181




     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, Inc.
                261 Madison Avenue
               New York, N.Y. 10016




                     June 1977


            Preliminary; Not for Quotation

    NBER working papers are distributed informally and
in limited number for comments only. They should not
be quoted without written permission.
    This report has not undergone the review accorded
official NBER publications; in particular, it has not
yet been submitted for approval by the Board of Directors.
I


          Price Behavior in the Light of Balance of Payments Theories



                                      CONTENTS

                                                                             Page
    A. The Theories                                                             i

        1. Prices in the standard theory                                        2
        2. Prices in the monetary theory
        3. Comparisons of price behavior in the two theories.

    B. From Theory to Measurement: Some Questions                             10
        1. Price levels                                                       12
        2. Specialized subsets of goods                                       16
        3. Defining individual commodities                                    19
        4. Criterion of similarity of price movements                         21
        5. The identification of historical periods for the
            observation of price behavior                                .   .23

    C. Price Levels and Changes in Price Levels                               25
        1. There are substantial differences in absolute price
            levels for GDP                                                   .26
        2. Price relationships &'nong major industrial countries, as
            indicated by comparisons of absolute price levels, changed
            as much as 25 to 30 percent in some cases                         29
        3. Changes in price levels as measured by implicit deflators
            also show some substantial deviations from the PPP
            relationship                                                      32

       4. The comparisons of price levels at different times and of
           the movement of price indexes relative to exchange rates
           lead to the conclusion that while the price levels of
           different countries are indeed linked together, the
           links are looser than described in the monetary
           approach to the balance of payments                               ,.39

        5. During the period 1950-70, appreciations tended to be
            followed by relative price level increases and depre-
            ciations, with less uniformity, by relative price
            level decreases                                                   41

    D. The Behavior of Prices in Different Sectors                            49

        1. Price level differences for nontradables are larger
            than for GDP as a whole                                           49
        2. -   Price levels for tradables seem also to vary though
               not so widely                                                  50
    3. One of the problems in assessing the role of the non—
        tradables/tradables price ratio in balance of payme1ts
        adjustments is the secular tendency of ths ratio to rise .   . .52
    4.   There is some evidence in favor of the hypothesis
         that the nontradables/tradables price ratio rises
    -
         as a result of an appreciation and falls as a result
         of a depreciation                   .                         54
    5. In the one case in which we have both an exchange
        rate change and genuine measures of export and
        import prices, Germany, the commodity terms of
        trade have moved as expected by the elasticity
        approach                                                       55

E. The Behavior of Tradable Goods Prices                               57
   1.    There are reasons for believing that there may be sub-
         stantial deviations from the law of one price even for
         traded goods                                                  57
    2. Prices may differ substantially for competitive products
        exported by different countries                                60

    3. The.time to time movement of export prices of comparable
        goods from different countries sometimes differ
        substantially                                                  63

    4. A given seller may charge different prices for a given
        product to different destinations                              70

F. Summary and Conclusions                                             78
            PRICE BEHAVIOR IN THE LIGHT OF BALANCE OF PAYMENTS THEORIES
                                                                              *
                         Irving B. Kravis and Robert E. Lipsey



        The purpose of this paper is to describe the behavior of that subset of

prices    and price indexes that is relevant to the theory of balance of          payments
adjustment. The theoretical writings on the balance of payments may be viewed
at    this juncture as falling into two      main groups —— the "standard" theories
and   the more recent monetary theories. Each of these is examined to determine
the assumptions and predictions made about particular kinds of           prices, and the

empirical evidence regarding these prices is then set out. Although some assess-

ment of the theories ——     solely   from the price aspect ——   is   offered, the emphasis

is on the price structure and price behavior that ought to be captured in a

satisfactory theory of the mechanisms of international adjustment. For pragmatic

reasons, attention is placed mainly on the theory relating to exchange rate

changes rather than on the explanation of adjustment with fixed exchange rates.


                                       The   Theories
        The standard theories which held sway in the 1950's and 1960's consisted of

three major components ——    the   price elasticity, multiplier and absorption
              **
approaches.        Emphasis on one or the other of these approaches differed with

the time, the purpose and the analyst, but as time went on it was more and more

unusual to find reliance placed on one to the exclusion of the others.


*
 This   paper draws on earlier studies carried out with support from the National
Science Foundation and the U.S. Department of Commerce. The views     reported here
do   not necessarily reflect those of either agency.
**
  These approaches are set forth in the ell known contributions by Viner, Robinson,
Metzler, and Alexander. See J. Viner, Studies in the Theory of International
Trade (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1937), especially pp. 314—326; J. Robinson,
"The Foreign Exchanges," Essays in the Theory of Em,1ovmen, Second Edition,
reprinted in Readings in the Theory of International Trade (Philadelphia: Blakiston,
1949); L. Metzler, "The Theory of International Trade," in H. Ellis, ed., A Survey
of Conten',orarv Economics (Philadelphia: Uakiton, 1949); and S. Alexander,
"Effects of a Devaluation on a Trade Balance," American Economic Review, December
1952. For an effortto cope with all three of these strands of the "standard"
theory for didactic purposes, see C. Kindleberger, International Economics, 4th
edition (Homewood, Ill.: Irwin Publishing Co., 1968).
                                       —2—



     The monetary theories, much more cohesive but still varying in some important

details from one writer to another, were advanced largely by R. Mundell and H.G.

Johnson and their students, beginning in the late 1960s. These theories regard

the balance of payments as a monetary phenomenon, and in contrast to the standard

model tend to minimize the effects that balance of payments adjustments per se
                                                     *
can have on relative prices and quantities traded.


Prices &n the standard theory

     Prices, which concern us here, are viewed very differently in the two sets of

theories. Curiously enough, the standard theory, in which prices play an important

role, is silent on the nature of the world price structure. For its purposes,

prices (after due allowance for transfer costs) may or may not be the same for

identical goods in different countries, and there may or may not be discriminatory

pricing between domestic sales and exports or between exports to different destina-

tions.

     In the elasticity approach, the part of the standard package for which prices

play the most central role, the basic assumption is that exchange rate changes

can produce changes in the prices of one country's goods relative to those of

another country's, and that these price changes are the key factors in inducing

quantity   changes that adjust values of exports and imports and hence   the balance

*
 n early exposition was by H.G. Johnson, "The Monetary Approach to Balance of
Payments Theory" in his Further Essays in Monetary Economics (London: George
Allen & tjnwin, 1972). See also A. Collery, International Adjustment, Open
Economies, and the Quantity Theory of Money, Princeton Studies in International
Finance, No. 28 (Princeton, 1971); v.N. Whitman, "Global Monetarism and the
Monetary Approach to Balance of Payments," with comments by W.H. Branson, D.I.
Fand, L.B. Krause, and W.S. Salant in Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3:
1975; H.G. Johnson, "The Monetary Approach to Balance of Payments Theory: A
Diagrammatic Analysis," The Manchester School, September 1975; and J.A. Frenkel
and H.G. Johnson entitled The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments (Toronto
and Buffalo: University of Toronto Press, 1976). The last volume contains empirical
as well as theoretical essays; see also S.P. Magee, "The npirical Evidence on the
Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments and Exchange Rates," merican Economic
Review, May 1976.
                                         —3—




 of trade. The analysis is devoted to an account of the elasticity conditions

 which will lead to an improvement of the balance of payments following a depreci-

 ation of the currency.

       More specifically, the implications of the standard approach for the behavior

 for prices and for price-induced quantity changes following an exchange rate change

 may be set out as follows:

       1. The own—currency prices of both export— and import—type goods will rise

  in the depreciating country and/or fall in the appreciating country relative to

 nontraded goods prices.

        2. These price shifts induce increased net exports from the depreciating

 country. Also, the price changes should lead to an increaseln the ratio of exports

 to production and a decrease in the ratio of imports to domestic absorption.

        3. The terms of trade (the ratio of the export price index to the

 index) are likely to deteriorate for the depreciating country, although this is not

 inevitable. The outcome depends on the pattern of the elasticities, but since a

 country is apt to be more specialized in its exports than in its imports, the depre-

 ciation is more apt to lower the world prices of its exports than the world prices

 of its imports.

        4. The overall price level of the depreciating country adjusted or the

 exchange rate change will diminish relative to that of the appreciating country.

 This follows from #1 if the prices of tradables are the same everywhere or if

 their price changes are more closely linked than the price changes for nontradables

 in   different countries.
        5.    The price shifts will lead to changes in   the commodity composition of
 exports     and imports. Even uniform (in proportion to exchange rate changes)

• changes in all traded goods prices (as in a small price—taking country) would

 lead to different quantity changes for the various traded goods because of
                                                                                       L




                                     —4—




differences in the elasticities of substitution between traded and ncntraded

goods in both production and consumption.

     6. For a country which is sufficiently important in at least some com-

modities either as a buyer or seller, own—currency price changes following a

depreciation will not be uniform across all traded goods. The more important

the country is in a particular commodity market, the less, other things being

equal, will the own-currency price change as a result of the depreciation and

the more will the world price(s) alter. Thus both the price structure of the

depreciating country and that of the rest of the world should change when an

important country appreciates or depreciates.

     The possibility, left open in the elasticity approach, that prices of traded

goods need not be identical in different countries provides somewhat more scope

for terms of trade changes, particularly if there is incomplete specialization

(in the sense that each country produces some of the goods it imports).

     The price predictions of the standard approach to a devaluation may, con-

ceivably, not turn out to be correct either because there are important omitted

variables or because it is based on the wrong view of price behavior. By its

concentration on micro—prices, the elasticity approach neglects the macroeconomic

variables taken into account in the absorption and monetary approaches. Its predic-

tions may not come to pass if validating macroeconomic policies are not   followed,   and

if appropriate policies are followed it may be difficult to separate the effects
                                           —5—




of those policies from the effects of the balance of payments deficit or of the

devaluation. With respect to price behavior, the law of one price may operate

to make impossible some of the relative price changes (more on this point below).


Prices in the monetary theory

         The price behavior anticipated by the monetary theory is very different.

The general price level is given a central role since it determines the real
                                                                                  *
value of nominal assets including money and internationally traded debt.
Because there is assumed to be a perfect international market for assets, at

least for the advanced industrial countries, changes in price levels in domestic

currency have to be offset by changes in exchange rates --          that   is, the purchas-

ing power parity theory of exchange rates holds.
                                                                                          **
         Relative   prices are therefore assigned no role or a purely transitory one.

This           is accomplished by a fairly rigorous specification of the nature of the

world price structure. In its purest form the monetary theory holds all prices
-—     of   nontradables as wellas tradables --   to   be identical (after allowance for trans

 fer costs). When the theory is focussed on price changes it maintains that the price
 leve is
of the countries move together rigidly. This law of one price applies particular-

ly among the more industrialized countries which are viewed as constituting a

single well integrated market. Prices of traded goods are held together because

there is very high substitutability among the products of the industrial countries


 *
     Frenke]. and Johnson, op. cit., "Introductory Essay," p. 23.
**
     "... since the analysis is concerned largely with general price and level move-
     ments that restore the initial real equilibrium of the economy, there are no
     changes in the relative prices of nontraded goods to worry about (and changes
     can only be transitory, part of the mechanism of restoration of monetary equi-
     librium).t' H.G. Johnson in Frenkel and Johnson,           p. 263.
                                         —6-




and arbitrage or even the threat of arbitrage keeps prices uniform. The prices

of nontraded goods are kept in line by the substantial substitutability that

exists between traded and nontraded goods in consumption and among the inputs for
                                                *
traded     and nontraded goods in production.       This across the board application of

the law of one price enables the monetary theory to enjoy simultaneously the

virtues of great simplicity and of great power: if prices must be the same the

world over, any changes in the domestic supply of money not offset by changes

in the domestic demand for money can only find an outlet in the balance of pay-

ments; people will not hold more money than they want, and an excess supply, for

example, will be spent on foreign goods or foreign assets thus creating a balance

of payments deficit.

         For practical purposes, however, most writers of the monetary school apply

the law of one price only to tradables and take account of the possibility that

the prices of nontraded goods may differ between countries, although it is some-

times asserted and in other cases implied that these differences are transitory


*
    "... the monetary models almost invariably assume ... that a country's price level
    is pegged to the world price level and must move rigidly in line with it. One
    justification for this assumption is that, at least among the advanced industrial
    countries, industrial competition is so pervasive that elasticities of substitution
    among the industrial products approximate more closely to infinity than to the
    relatively low numbers implicit in the standard model." Johnson (1972), pp. 235-36.
    ••   even if goods cannot be traded, the factors used in producing them generally
    can be, in the sense that in the relevant run of time a barber has the alternative
    of being a machine tool operator producing machinery or consumers durable goods
    for export, or instead of imports, and the price of haircuts must be such as to
    give the barber labor earnings comparable to the wages paid in exporting (and
    import competing) industries. Secondly, even where there are no comprehensive
    direct links between costs of production of tradable and non-tradable goods,...
    the prices of non-traded goods will be linked to the prices of tradables through
    tastes, supply conditions, and the overall budget constraint, and fixed given the
    other factors and the relation between domestic expenditure and income." J.A.
    Frenkel and H. G. Johnson,    cit., "Introductory Essay," pp. 27-28.
                                         —7—


                                                         *
 and that tney will disappear in long run equilibrium.       In the short run or trans-

 ition    period depreciation lowers the price of nontraded goods at home and raises

 their price abroad and induces substitution just as in the elasticity approach.

 Indeed,

              ••• while   ...short run equilibrium is characterized by an
              exchange of traded goods for real balances and hence the ab-
              sorption effects of a devaluation are emphasized, the role
              of the relative price of home oods is nevertheless crucial
              in the adjustment mechanism.

         Traded goods are still subject to the law of one price, a specification that

 is not in the least essential to the standard theory but which is usually assumed

as a matter of course by elasticity theorists. A balance of payments disturbance

 arising out of thbnetary causes will not bring about any change in the terms of

trade in the new equilibrium as compared to the old          one; in the course of the

 adjustment process the, terms of trade for a depreciating country may either improve

or worsen.

Comparisons of price behavior in the two theories

        What then are the similarities and differences between the two sets of pre-


 *
     "The existence of non—traded goods does, however, become relevant in the empirical
     application of the theory, in both the static case when prices may differ from the
     prediction of simple purchasing power theory owing to differences in the money
     prices and expenditure weights of such goods between countries, and the dynamic
     case of growth of productivity at different rates in the traded and non-traded
     sectors, which implies different price trends in the two sectors when factor
     mobility equalizes factor prices between them." Frenkel and Johnson, ibid., p. 28.
     "To put the point more extremely than is necessary for present purposes, in a
     general equilibrium of prices the fixing of any one price by trade determines
     all the rest. The adjustment to the real equilibrium of relative prices, which
     must be achieved eventually, can be quick or slow. The monetary theory assumes
     that it is quick." D.N. McCloskey and J.R. Zecker, "How the Gold Standard Worked,
     1880—1913," in Frenkel and Johnson,       cit.,
                                                   p. 376.
**
     R. Dornbusch, "Devaluation, Money, and Nontraded Goods," rnerican Economic Review,
     December 1973, p. 880. This paper is reprinted in Frenkel and Johnson with the
     comment in the preface that it disposes "... conclusively of the criticism that
     the monetary approach is limited by its assumption that there is a world market
     price for all' goods produced." (9   cit., p. 11.)
                                            —8—




dictions? To a considerable degree, the two theories stress different aspects

of price (and quantity) behavior and are more like ships that pass each other

in the night than like ships that collide head on. The elasticity approach con-

centrates on the short run process of adjustment. It stresses the real changes

that are the consequences of exchange rate changes: there are shifts in the over-

all volume of traded goods, changes in the quantity composition of exports and

imports, and changes in price structures with respect to (a) traded versus non-

traded goods, (b) various traded goods both in own-currency and in foreign cur-

rency prices when a large country alters its exchange rate, and, possibly (c)

the terms of trade. There is nothing in the elasticity theory to suggest that

these changes are temporary.

     The monetary theory concentrates on the long run equilibrium position. it

anticipates that the law of one price will have wide application —— even to non-

traded goods after a lag. When exchange rates change, prices will adjust quick-

ly so as to maintain the world—wide equality of prices for individual
                                                                          products.
There is because of this quick adjustment little
                                                      opportunity for quantity changes,
and those that do occur are apt to be
                                            temporary. The monetary approach thus tends
to minimize the possibility of changes in the quantity composition of exports and

imports   or   in their price structure.

     Not all of the other changes anticipated by the elasticity approach would be

inconsistent with the monetary theory. Temporary changes in the relatIonship of

traded to nontraded goods prices are accepted. Even changes in price structure,

especially if they were identical inown currency and world prices, would appear

more to limit the sweeping simplicity of the theory than to challenge it on

grounds that are     fundamental   to it.
                                                  —9—



          Although the elasticity writers talk of the "short run" process of adjustment

  and the monetary writers of the "long run," this betokens a difference in the

  stages of the econoxtic process that are the focus of inquiry, rather than a dif-

  ference in the duration of the time periods under consideration. Most analysts

  using the elasticity approach would expect the adjustment process to work itself

  out in a period of say 2 to 5 years. As for the "long run" of the monetary school,

  one adherent, M. Mussa, writes that since "the horizon of the policy maker is

  typically much shorter than a decade" and also because o,.f problems of "sorting

  out empirical relationships which involve very long lags, "...                     the     advocacy of

  a monetary approach to the balance of payments necessarily involves the assertion

  that these 'longer-run consequences' materialize within a time horizon of two or
                    *
  three   years."       Hence there is not much difference between the calendar time

  periods dealt with by the two approaches, but the elasticity writers focus on

  the changes within the period while the monetary writers stress the equilibrium

  conditions that must emerge at the end of the period, given the controlling role

  of monetary factors in setting of f the adjustments.** Within the adjustment
 period, in the more realistic versions of the theory, there can be temporary

  deviations from the behavior of prices that characterise equilibrium situations.

  For xample, changes in the traded/nontraded price ratios in opposite directions

  in deficit and surplus countries may interfere with the close correlation between

 price level movements generally expected.



   M Mussa, "Tariffs and the Balance of Payments: A Monetary Approach," in Frenkel
   and Johnson,     cit., p. 193. R.T. Selden has suggested a 3 or 4 year period.
   R.T. Selden, "Monetary Growth and the Long-Run Rate of Inflation," ?inerican
   Economic Review, May 1975, p. 125.
 **
   A basic feature of the monetary approach, Mussa writes, is "a concentration on
   the longer-run consequences of policy and parametric changes for the behavior
   of the balance of payments, coupled with an eclectic view of the processes through
   which these longer-run consequences come about." 9                    cit.,     p. 193.
***
   Johnson (1975), p. 248.
                                                                                               V



                                              —10—



            We have not tried to set out all the contrasts between the two appraoches.

 Our focus on prices has led us to ignore some very important differences in pre-

 dictions --          as, for example, the anticipation of the standard theory that growth
 produces balance of payments deficits while the monetary approach reaches the

 opposite conclusion.

            A potentially important omission in both of the theories, already alluded to, is

 the lack of any attention to the possibility of price discrimination in international

 trade. In previous work, the present authors suggested there is in fact widespread

price discrimination and that this leads to a further price-related mechanism of
                  *
 adjustment.           A depreciation of the exchange rate will appear to a firm able to

price differently in home and foreign markets as a rise in foreign demand (in

terms of its home currency). This will enable the firm to raise its export price

 (still in home currency) relative to its domestic price, and the resulting jm-

provement in profit margins in export relative to domestic sales will lead it
                                            **
to     shift its sales towards exports.          An appreciation will have the opposite

effect of shifting sales away from the foreign to the home market. The balance

of payments consequences of these shifts can of course be readily assessed in

terms of the elasticities of supply and demand and the macroeconomic conditions

considered in the standard approach.


                         From Theory to Measurement: Some Questions

            It is evident that a testing of the alternative theories would take us far

beyond the realm of prices into the behavior of traded quantities and of macro


 *
     I.B. Kravis and R.E. Lipsey, "Export Prices and the Transmission of Inflation,"
     merican Economic Review, February 1977.

**
     For an absorption-type approach turning on profit margins, see W. Ethier, "An
     Allocational View of Devaluation," Discussion Paper #309, July 1975, Department
     of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.
                                         —11—




variables including domestic money stocks, international reserves and capital

movements.

       Our aim, as we said at the outset, is much more modest. It is to examine

the behavior of prices in the light of the assumptions and predictions made about

prices in the two sets of writings about the balance of payments. Some of these

views of prices are what might be called "end-product" or "final outcome" views
--   that   is, they are assumptions or predictions about price relationships that

should be observable since they refer to what is supposed to exist at any moment

of time; all the interdependencies are assumed to have worked themselves out to

produce the result that will always be found in the real world. The application

of the law of one price to traded goods, for example, falls in this category.

In other instances, the movements of prices or changes in price relationships

that are observable at a moment of time are not independent of other (non-balance

of payments) variables and an examination of such prices outside of an econometric

model which takes the interrelationships into account is of more limited value.

The predictions of the elasticity approach tend to fall in this category. They

depend on validating macroeconomic policies which may or may not be followed; if
validating policies are not pursued the effects may be offset and if they are followed
they may dominate the outcome.
      We nevertheless present the evidence on the behavior of the relevant price

variables. A main reason for this is that relative to the volume of theoretical

writings on the balance of payments —-    all   of which must make some hypotheses

and/or predictions about price behavior —-      there   has been remarkably little

empirical work on prices in connection with the mechanism of adjustment, and

much of the work that has been done has been based on unsatisfactory data. We

think it worth while therefore to set out the evidence —— some of which has not

been available before or if available not assembled for the purpose -- even
                                      —12—



though part of it requires analysis beyond what we attempt here before its bearing

on different theories can be fully assessed.

     More specifically, we shall concentrate on two aspects of the price behavior

discussed in     balance of payments literature --   the law of one price and the
behavior of relative prices. The "relative" prices that are found in the litera-

ture and that concern us are (a) prices in one country vis a vis those in another,

(b) export prices relative to import prices and (c) tradables prices relative to
nontradables prices.
     As is so often the case, difficulties are encountered in designing empirical

measurements that match the theoretical concepts. These difficulties, largely of

a definitional character are found at every level of aggregation that has come into

our discussion of the theories: the meaning of the general level of prices; the

definition of the various subsets of goods, particularly traded Sand nontraded

goods; and the definition of individual products or.product categories.


Price levels

     In the theoretical discussions of relative price movements, it is often

adequate to carry on the discussion in terms of a one-commodity model. For

empirical purposes it is natural to regard a general price index as the matching

measure, but this creates difficulties about some of the arguments about prices.

When the law of one price is involved in such models, for example, it is not

clear whether we should take the meaning to be that (a) the time to time move-

ment of the prices of identical commodities must be the same in all countries

after adjustment for exchange rate changes, or that (b) the exchange-rate-adjusted

movements in overall price levels in different countries must be identical (i.e.,

that the purchasing power theory of exchange rates is valid). Since the overall

price movement of any country has to be some kind of weighted average of the
                                       -13-



 movement of individual prices, both (a) and (b) cannot be true simultaneously

 unless the relative importance of corrunodjtjes is the same in each country

 or unless all commodities have identical price movements.

      If we are to compare price level changes, we must choose among three
 measures -- GDP
                 implicit deflators, wholesale prices and consumer prices.

 All suffer, for purposes of international comparisons of price movements, from

 the fact that the methods used in their Preparation,and sometimes the Constituent

 elements as wells differ from one country to another.

      Of the three, the GDP implicit deflator has the strongest claim to represent
                                               *
 a general measure of a country's price level.   It is based on a conceptual frame-

 work that assigns an appropriate weight to each good, whatever the classification
 chosen -- as for example, between tradables and nontradables. Wholesale
                                                                         price
 indexes, historically the most widely used in comparisons of price level changes,**

 have no clear conceptual framework, as their official producers are sometimes

 candid enough to say.     Because of this lack they are probably more subject to

 international differences in scope than either implicit deflators or consumer




 This seems to be the view also of Officer
                                           who has recently produced a compre-
 hensive review of the purchasing
                                  power parity literature, including parities
 based on Costs as well as on the several price indexes. See L.H. Officer,
 "The Purchasing Power Parity Theory of Exchange Rates: A Review Article," IMP
 Staff Papers, March 1976.                                                     —
**See Officer's survey of empirical studies, 2E cit., pp. 33—49. An important
 reason is of course that GDP deflators were not widely available before World
 War II.

 uThough general wholesale price indexes have been calculated by many countries
 for years there is no precise answer to the question of what such an index
 measures. This is so because the index cannot be associated with any adequately
 definable value aggregate." Statistics Canada, Prices and Price Indexes, July
 1975, p. 94.
                                             —14—


                     *
price     indexes.       However, the wholesale price indexes of the different countries

are similar in that they include a higher proportion of tradables --         concentrating
as they do on commodities ——         than either the implicit deflators or the consumer
price indexes. Since the time to time movements of tradables are presumably

more similar in different countries than are riontradables, wholesale price indexes

may be expected to be biased in the direction of uniformity of price movements.

Another source for such bias is that the indexes usually overweight primary products

and often completely omit highly differentiated products:

        Consumer price indexes are not subject to the same conceptual deficiencies

as wholesale price indexes but they provide partial rather than comprehensive
                                 **
measures of price level changes.    In 1970, for example, private consumption

represented only 51 percent of GD? in Japan and from 54 to 64 percent in Germany
                                               ***
 (F.R.),   France, U.K., Italy and the U.S.          Consumer price indexes do, of course,

include services as well as commodities, but since they typically exclude publicly

financed services, their scope varies from one country to another in accordance

with the division between household and public financing of certain services such



*
    For example, the French wholesale price index in the late 1960s did not include
    prices for machinery or equipment whereas these categories made up 28 percent of
    the weights in the German index of producers prices of industrial products.
    Neither the French index nor the German index included food or agricultural pro-
    ducts while in the Italian index of wholesale prices, 29 percent of the weights
    consisted of agricultural products and products of the food and related industries,
    and another 19 percent, products of agricultural manufacturing industries other
    than foodstuffs. The indexes of Japan, the United States, and the United Kingdom
    were more comprehensive in their commodity coverage. Practices also differed among
    the countries with respect to the inclusion of mining and quarrying, electricity,
    and in the treatment of complicated engineering goods ranging from transistors to
    ship building. See the brief descriptions of the indexes in the 1972 Supplement
    to the Statistical Yearbook and Monthly Bulletin of Statistics, United Nations,
    New York, 1974, (ST/ESA/STAT/SER.S/SUP?L. 1).
**
     However, see the case made by Professor Houthakker for the use of consumer prices
     in connection with the purchasing power parity theory. H. Houthakker, "Exchange
     Rate Adjustment," Factors Affecting the U.S. Balance of Payments, Joint Economic
     Committee, 87th Congress, 2nd Session, December 14, l962,pp. 289—304. See also
     P. Samuelson's comment on this in his "Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,"
     Review of Economics and Statistics, Nay 1964, pp. 150—152, and Officer's review,
     C.cit., p. 23—24.
     Calculated from IMP     Tnrl iacal Statistics. January 1976.
                                                —15—


                                 *
 as health and education.

         The scope of implicit deflators is more likely to be similar since they are

 pegged in the main to a common accounting framework (the U.N. System of National
             **
 Accounts         ).   Differences   are greater when it comes to practices for factoring

 the current value series into price and quantity changes.              With respect to

 consumption, however, the similarities are more striking than the differences. The

 virtually universal practice is to use appropriate component series of the consumer an

 wholesale price indexes to deflate expenditures at a relatively disaggregated level.

 Differences tend to be greatest in problem areas such as rents and in capital forrnatic

 and government final expenditures; in some of these areas quantity indicators are

 occasionally used to produce quantity indexes and the price indexes are then

 derived from the expenditure ratios. Where, as is more usual, price indexes are

 used, the nature of the price series upon which reliance is placed varies widely.

 The diversity is particularly great for construction where input prices are employed

 in some cases and a list of finished construction outputs in other cases, the list

 differing in composition from one country to another.

         All these individual price series are used to deflate disaggregated expenditure


 *
     There are also some important differences in weights. For many of the countries
     including France, Germany and Italy, around 45 percent of the weights are repre-
     sented by food, beverages, and tobacco. In the U.S. index, these categories
     account for less than a quarter of the weights. Rent and household operation
     made up 15 percent of the weights in Italy, 25 percent in Germany, and 33 percent
     in the U.S. U.N., Supplement....
**
     U.N., A System of National Accounts, Series F, No. 2, Rev. 3 (New York: United
     Nations, 1968). For most of the period under study, the data for most of the
     industrialized countries are based on the 1953 version of the SNA (System of
National Accounts).
     Report of the Secretary General, Country Practices in National Accounting at
     Constant Prices, U.N. Economic and Social Council, Statistical Commission
     (Geneva: United Nations, 24 Nay 1974 (E/cN.3/464) and a follow-up document with
     the same title by the Secretariat, 23 May 1975 (ST/ESA/STAT.79). The implicit
     deflators for GDP as a whole used in the following sections are, except when noted
     otherwise, the "correlative price indexes" reported in the U.N. yearbooks of
     national accounts statistics. (See note on p. 33.)
                                         —16—




 components. The resulting detailed constant price series are aggregated to ob-

tain GDP, and the implicit GDP deflator is then derived by the division of this

constant price series into the current price series. The effect is to produce

a current weighted (Paasche) price index for each period which is not in principle

comparable with the index for any other period except the base period. This is

a nicety with respect to which we shall follow a well beaten path in ignoring.

          From the standpoint of the monetary approach, the chief factor influencing

the choice among the three indexes would appear to be the one that is most

relevant to the demand for money. If the demand for money is conceived of mainly

in terms of households, the consumer price index, even with its differences in

coverage arising from differences in the financing of services such as health

and education, is the most appropriate index. It is perhaps for this reason
                                                       *
widely•used in the writings of the monetary school, but even from the standpoint
of the demand for money balances the GDP deflator has the advantage of taking at
                                                                **
least     some account of the non-household holders of money.


Specialized subsets of goods

          For empirical purposes it is necessary to have an operational definition of

traded and nontraded goods and of exports and imports. One easy solution for ex-

ports and imports is to assume that each country is completely specialized in a

particular set of exports. This assumption was embodied in Viner's interpretation

of the classical theory of the adjustment mechanism: "...            the role of variations


 *
     See, for example, the empirical essays in Frenkel and Johnson, op. cit.
**
     In the U.S. at the end of 1974 households held 63 percent of demand deposits
     and currency, and 77 percent of time and savings accounts of commercial banks.
      (Flow of Funds, Assets and Liabilities Outstanding: 1974, Board of Governors,
     Federal Reserve System, May 1975.)
                                               —17—



  in prices ...     ielates    not to relative variations in prices of identical commodities

 in different markets, but to relative variations in prices of different commodities

 in the same markets, and primarily to relative variations in prices as between
                                        *
 export      and import commodities."       Disturbances to international equilibrium thus

               in changes in the terms of trade which helped restore the equilibrium.

         This simple solution.is not satisfactory for major industrial countries like

 the U.S. or Germany because some goods may appear on both the export and import

 lists at different times or even at the same time; there are likely to be con-

 tinual changes in the lists of commodities that are exported or imported, both

 additions and deletions occurring each year.

         Also, there is a need to distinguish between traded and nontraded goods. Viner

 proposed to define a domestic commodity as one that does not ordinarily cross a

 national frontier and whose price is not tied so directly to the prices of similar

 products abroad that the differential between the domestic and the foreign price
                                                 **
 approximates the cost of transportation.             The implementation of this definition woul

 be very onerous since it would require a price comparison for each good before it

 could be categorized. Also, the definition has the disadvantage that it might lead

 to the classification as domestic goods of internationally traded commodities for

 *
     Viner
         (1937), p. 319. See also his Canada's Balance of International
  ness, 1900—1913 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1924), p. 206f. Collery
  regards this explanation as "implausible" and "silly". "Internationally it
  assumes that if, on an international gold standard, gold were redistributed from
  Guatemala to Colombia, the price of bananas would fall in Guatemala in proportion
  to the decrease in the money stock and the price of coffee would rise in Colombia
  in proportion to the increase in money there." (.          pp. 26-27). However,
  earlier Collery recognizes that a change in relative demand (e.g., following a
  transfer from one country to another) could alter the terms of trade if the mar-
  ginal preferences of the two countries were different and if supplies were not
  perfectly elastic in one of the countries. However, Collery denies that changes
  in the terms of trade would contribute to the restoration of equilibrium as Viner
  held.
**
  Viner      (1937), p. 326.
                                      —18—

which discriminating pricing prevails.

         Recently Aukrust has suggested that the appropriate distinction is between

"exposed" and "sheltered" industries, the former consisting of those that market

their products abroad or face foreign competition on domestic markets and the
                                                                                        *
latter     consisting of those that are relatively free of foreign price competition.

From the standpoint of tracing the transmission of price effects this puts the

emphasis where it belongs, although if one is concerned with production consequences

the distinctions between the absorption of home-produced and import goods and be-

tween production for the home and foreign markets may still be important.

         There are several devices for coping with these definitional problems in

empirical work. One way is to select certain categories of goods for which

separate price indexes are available and which clearly fall in one class or the

other. Services, for example, may be treated as archetypal nontraded goods and

manufactures as arthetypal traded goods. Within manufactures, producers durables

constitute a category which are apt to be more traded relative to their production

than most other manufactures. Agricultural products, which are also widely

traded, have the disadvantage that the industrial countries maintain substantial

market barriers.   Another possibility is to divide all of GDP into "commodities"
                                                                    possibly
consisting of the output of agriculture, manufacturing, mining, and/construction

on the one hand,and "services" consisting of the rest of GD? on the other hand;

commodities could ther be regarded as tradables and services as nontradables.


*
    0. Aukrust, "PRIM: A Model of the Price and Income Distribution Mechanism of an
    Open Economy," Review of Income and Wealth, Series 16, No. 1.
                                        —19—



          An alternative is to include all commodities and to weigh each individua.

     commodity by its relative importance in domestic shipments, exports and imports,

     respectively, in turn. This procedure would produce a different price index for

     each of the three classes. Its disadvantage is that it may not be sensitive

     enough to distinguish clearly the alternative price movements of the three groups

     of commodities; this failure is more likely to occur if the weights for the three

     classes are similar. Another disadvantage is that it assumes that

     the holesale prices are adequate indicators of the prices of imports and exports.

     We have reason to believe, as will be seen, that this assumption is unwarranted,

     but it still may be claimed that the domestic prices of those goods that are

     traded are more correlated with their own prices in international trade than are

     the domestic prices of nontraded goods with the prices of traded products.

          Another method, found in the literature, is to use the ratio of the GDP im-

     plicit deflator (or sometimes of the consumer price index) to the wholesale price

     index as an indicator of the movement of the nontradables/tradables price ratio

     on the ground that the wholesale price index is more heavily weighted with

     tradable goods.

          Finally, there are a few cases in which genuine export and import price in-
                           *
     dexes (not unit value ) indexes are available. It .s then possible to use the

     implicit deflator or the general wholesale price index, or the component of that

     index relating to domestic prices if available, to represent nontraded goods in

     comparison with the export and import price indexes.

     Defining individual commodities

          Although a recent interpretation of Hume holds that his view of the adjust-
                                                                                          **
     ment mechanism involved different prices for the same goods in different countries,



     For the defects of unit value indexes as measure of price movements, see I. Kravis
     and R. Lipsey, Price Competitiveness in World Trade (New York: National Bureau of
     Economic Research, 1971), pp. 4-5. Many studies dealing with the matters treated
     here are flawed by treating export and import unit value series as though they
     were price series.
**
     Collery,   o. cit., pp. 25—26.
                                       —20—



it is almost always taken for granted in discussions of balance of

payments theory that the law of one price applies to traded goods. This, as

previously noted, is an essential assumption for the monetary approach but not

for the elasticity approach even though writers using an elasticity framework

usually make the same assumption as a matter of course. Price differences

attributable to transfer costs (transport costs, duties, etc.) are, of course,

allowed for, but since these costs can usually be assumed to vary little relative

to the product price over a short span of years, identical traded goods are taken

to have the same price movements in all countries. The swift price adjustments

anticipated by the monetary theory imply that exchange rate changes should not

alter the price relationships among different countries of the world when prices

are converted to a common currency at the prevailing rates of exchange of each

day.

       As part of our investigation of the applicability of the law of one price,

we shall present evidence below pointing to substantial differences in price
                                                                               *
levels   and movements for goods in the same 4- or even 5—digit SITC categories

when exported by different countries or when sold at home and abroad by the same

country. For exam,1e, German export prices (in dollar

terms; i.e., adjusted for exchange rate changes) for "locks, padlocks and keys

therefor of miscellaneous metal" (SITC 698.1) rose by 104.9 percent between 1970

and 1974 while U.S. export prices rose by 23.3 percent. Is this evidence that

the law of one price does not apply here? One possibility is to answer this

question in the negative or at least to reserve judgment on the ground that the



 United Nations, Standard International Trade Classification, Revised, Statistical
 Papers, Series M, No. 34 (New York: United Nations, 1961).
                                         —21—



internal composition of the exports within the category may differ between Germany

and the U.S. One could go even further and define products or commodities in

such a way that any price difference between two items means that they are dif-

ferent goods. Such a decision would not be entirely unreasonable; differences

in the terms of sale -—   credit,   delivery dates, before and after sales service,
etc. -- may involve such different bundles of benefits in two purchases even of

physically identical goods that the prices would not be the same even under per-

fect competition.

     But this would be to make the law of one price prevail by assumption, and

would in any event salvage little for the monetary approach notion of speedy

price adjustments for traded goods. The composition of the exports of two

countries for the same 4-digit category may in actual fact differ, and this may

produce some differences in the price indexes for the category as between the

two countries. But even if the differences in price movements stem entirely from

differences in composition, the large differences such as the one cited above and thoE

found below for other 4-digit categories, including "pumps and centrifuges" and

"tractors other than road tractors" do not point to the high degree of substitut-

ability between the exports of major industrial countries that is assumed in the

monetary approach. At the disaggregated level, our decision to treat the things

falling within 4- or 5-digit SITC categories as like products would not appear

to bias the results against the monetary approach.


Criterion of similarity of price movements

     This discussion brings us to another thorny question that need not be

answered in theoretical discussions but for which a criterion is required in

empirical work. In theory, it is enough to say that price movements are or are
                                       —22—



not the same, but when we examine actual price series we find various degrees of

similarity. How alike do prices or price movements have to be so that we can say

they satisfy the law of one price?

     A number of studies directed at the empirical testing of the monetary theory of

the balance of payments answer this question by comparing the similarity of the be-

havior of prices in different nations with the similarity of price behavior for similar
                                 *
commodities in different regions; the inter—regional variation of prices in an economy

considered to be highly integrated such as that of the United States is used as a

standard against which international price variation may be measured. If it is found

that the similarity of price movements in different countries is as great as the

similarity of price movements within different regions of the country taken as the

standard, it is concluded that the international economy is as integrated as the

domestic economy of the standard country. This measure of the openness or the degree

of integration of national economies may have its uses (as, for example, in explain-

ing the relationship between commercial policy and economic growth), but it has its

limits as an empirical test of the monetary theory of the balance of payments. Where

the similarity of price movements is low, both, within the standard country and among

countries, the monetary theory may apply to neither type of situation. There is

ample scope not only for differential price movements but also for price-induced

changes in real variables such as flows of goods and unemployment.

     Indeed, even high coefficients of correlation may conceal shifts in relation-

ships that are economically important. For example, the r2 between annual changes

in German export prices and in German domestic prices for manufactured products




 See D. McCloskey and R. Zecher, "How the Gold Standard Worked, 1880-1913," J. Frankel
 and H.G. Johnson (edsj, The Monetary Approach to the Balance of Payments, (London:
 Allen and Unwin; Pacific Palisades, Calif.: Goodyear, 1975).
                                    -22a-



between 1954 and 1974 is 0.92. Despite the high correlation, however, the ratio

of export to domestic prices varied over an 8 percent range (taking the relation-

ship in 1963 as the base, the high was 105.8 in 1956 and the low 97.8 in 1973).

This seems small, but, as we have argued elsewhere, the variations were large

enough relative to profits/sales ratios to make substantial differences in the

relative profitability of exports and domestic sales and hence to produce signif i-

cant shifts in exports relative to domestic shipments.*

     This suggests that the criterion of the similarity or dissimilarity of price

movements might be an analytical one, based on the impact of the differences on quan-

tity changes. If the divergence in the price movements   of,   say, German and U.S.
exports were great




*
The German domestic prices in this comparison were re-aggregated from the most
detailed level available with the use of 1963 German export weights. Xravis and
Lipsey, 'Export Prices and the Transmission of Inflation," American Economic
Review, February 1977.
                                     —23—




enough to produce a shift in relative quantities, we could say that the price

movements could be regarded as different for practical purposes. We would still

be faced with the issue of how big the quantity change could be and still have

the price differences not violate the law of one price. Also, owing to product

to product differences in demand elasticities, we would be in the position of

judging differently the same percentage deviation between different pairs of (for

example) German and American export prices.

     In the empirical work which follows, we do not attempt to apply a fixed

criterion for assessing whether the data do or do not conform to the law of one

price. We offer our judgment in each case and cite the quantitative criteria

suggested by others where we have found some, but regard as our main contribution

a clear presentation of the differences so that each reader will be able to form

his own opinion.


The identification of historical periods for the observation of price behavior

     A study of price behavior during the adjustment process under fixed exchange

rates would be faced with the very difficult task of identifying historical periods

of exchange rate equilibria and interim periods when the adjustment mechanism was

supposed to be operating. We try to avoid this briar patch by concentrating on the

effects of exchange rate changes



     For the standard approach, the period following an exchange rate change is the

period when the expected price changes are supposed to occur. The behavior of the

terms of trade, the relationships of nontraded goods prices relative to traded

goods prices, and the behavior of real variables in the adjustment process can

all be studied as far as the elasticity approach is concerned for periods following

exchange rate changes.
I



                                          —24—




          Some attention is given in the literature also to the period before the ex-

    change rate change during which, it is often held, there will be a growing over-

    valuation of the currency. One would expect thefore to observe in the period pre-

    ceeding an exchange rate change, prices in the depreciating country rising rela-

    tive to prices in appreciating countries.

         Our criterion for identifying appreciations or depreciations was a change in

    the annual average exchange rate of at least 3 percent from one year to the next.

    Once a change this large was identified, years on either side were included in

    the period of change if the year-to-year changes were in the same direction and

    at least 1 percent. For the periods preceeding and following the period of change

    in the exchange rate we have chosen both 3- and 5-year periods for study. These

    choices are intended to constitute periods long enough to determine wheter the price

    effects produced by the exchange rate changes are offset quickly or at least

    after the adjustment process has worked itself out as the monetary approach pre-

    dicts. The 3-year period probably is the more appropriate measure of the "long

    run" from this standpoint, while the 5-year period may be regarded as the outer

    limit.

         Much of the price behavior anticipated in the more sweeping versions of

    the monetary theory of the balance of payments represents ongoing phenomena that

    should be observable both within and outside of periods of balance of payments

    adjustment. Prices are to move identically in different countries whether the

    balance of payments is in equilibrium or in the process of adjustment. In its

    more careful form, however, the monetary theory stresses the rapid adjustment of

    prices and confines its predictions about the similarity of price movements to

    equilibrium periods. Testing this version of the theory would require the identifica

    tion of periods of balance of payments equilibrium. The strategy we have adopted is
                                                                                                I


                                              —25—



     is   simply to compare price movements for a number of different arbitrarily

     chosen    intervals varying in duration from 2 to 10 years.




                         Price Levels and Changes in Price Levels
      We begin our empirical work at the most aggregative leve-l ——      dealing   with over-

all price levels —- and then go on to sectoral prices and prices for detailed corn-

Inodity categories. In each sector we assert our conclusions as headings and follow

with the argument.

      What we want to know about price levels or changes in them is whether they con-

form to the law of one price or whether it is possible for the price levels of dif-

ferent countries to alter in relation to one another for balance of payments reasons

or as a result of exchange rate changes.

       inquiries about the law of one price with respect to price levels have a long

history in the form of studies of purchasing power parity. We         venture   a fresh ex-

amination of the subject for three reasons:          (1) The results of past studies have
                                          *
been, as a recent reviewer has noted, contradictory; (2) most of the past studies

have used wholesale or consumer price indexes which are less appropriate measures

of price levels than GDP deflators, and (3) we can draw on some new data that throw

some      new light on the issue.


*
    Officer,   o. cit.
                                        —26-




 There are substantial differences in absolute price levels for GD?

        We need not dwell long on the fact that there are substantial international

 differencesin absolute price levels. This long familiar phenomenon was first
                                                                        *
documented in a GNP framework in the OEEC studies of the early 1950s and has
                                         **
been reaffirmed in a recent U.N. work.

        The U.N. materials are the ource of the data in Table 1. Price levels         and

real product per capita compared with those of the U.S. based on each country's own
weights are pre-
sented in the first four columns of the table and those based on U.S. weights in

the last four. The data are in index form with the U.S. = 100.       The countries

are arrayed in order of increasing real GD? per capita using own weights.

        A glance at the GD? quantity and price comparisons in either set of data

 (columns 1 and 2 or columns 5 and 6) shows that there are wide differences in

price levels. In terms of U.S.—weighted data,         the variation in price levels


*
    M. Gilbert and I. Kravis, An International Comparison of National Products and
    Purchasing Power of Currencies--A Study of the United States, the United Kingdom,
    France, Germany, and Italy (Paris: Organization for European Economic Cooperation,
    1954); 14. Gilbert and Associates, Comparative National Products and Private Levels:
    A Study of Western Europe and the United States (Paris: OEEC, 1958).
**The reference is to the United Nations International Comparison Project (ICP)
  carried on by the United Nations Statistical Office with the support of the World
  Bank. The report on the first phase of the work covering 10 countries with a 1970
  reference date is I. Kravis, Z. Kenessey, A. Heston and R. Summers, A System of
  International Comparisons of Gross Product and Purchasing Power (Baltimore: Johns
                                        -           -
  Hopkins University Press, 1975).




    The price level indexes are obtained by dividing purchasing power parities (number
    of units of foreign currency required to purchase what one dollar will buy) by
    the prevailing exchange rate (foreign currency per dollar).

 These have the advantage of coming closer to the comparison of prices for a basket
 of goods that is identical for all the pairs. However, they also have certain
 disadvantages for our purposes that will shortly be made clear. With respect to
 the point about variation in price levels, it is, in any case, grea€er in the own-
 weighted data.
                                          —27—



ranges from 48 in India to 100 in the U.S. with the next highest price level

country being Germany at 95. Even among       the   industrialized countries the range

is from 76 in Japan to 100 in the U.S., a difference of more than 30 percent.

        It should be mentioned that the positive association between price levels

and GDP per capita, which Ricardo anticipated and which Balassa recently showed
                                                                *
to   exist on the basis of data of industrialized countries, is confirmed here for

a sample of 10 countries that includes both industrialized and       developing   countries.
                                                                                           **
The relationship is summarized in the following eqiation (t-ratios in parentheses).


             (1)         in p    =   3.69 + 0.168   in GDP              —2
                             GDP
                                     (17.4) (2.9)
                                                                        r =


where        is the price level for GDP (column 6) and GDP refers to real GDP per

capita (column 5).




*
 "...theprices of home commodities, and those of great bulk though of compara-
tively small value, are, independently of other causes, higher in those countries
where manufactures flourish." D. Ricardo, The Principles of Economy and Taxation
(London: J.M. Dent & Sons, Ltd., 1911), p. 87. The passage appears in Chapter
VII, "On Foreign Trade," and is part of a more extended argument holding that
  • .the value of money is never the same in any two countries" (p. 88). For
Balassa's contribution, see B. Balassa, "The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine:
A Reappraisal," Journal of Political Economy, December 1964, pp. 584—596.
J. Viner, Studies in the Theory of International Trade (New York and London:
Harpers and Brothers, 1937), p. 315, and D. Usher, "The Transport Bias in
 Comparisons of National Income," Economica, May 1963, also contributed to this
line of reasoning. See I.  Kravis, A. Heston, and R. Summers, "Real GDP per
Capita for More than One Hundred Countries," Discussion Paper No. 391, Department
of Economics, University of Pennsylvania.

Matters are improved in this respect when the own—weighted data        are examined.
In the own-weighteddata the coefficient of real GDP is 0.341 and        the    is .85.
                                                          Table 1

                                   Real Per Capita GDP and Relative Price Levels, 1970

                                                        U.S.   = 100


                                      Own Weights                                         U.S. Weights
Country               Real GDP               Price Levels                Real GDP                Price levels
                     per capita      GDP     Traded     Nontraded       per capita       GDP     Traded     Nontraded
                                             goods        goods                                  goods        goods
                         (1)         (2)      (3)          (4)             (5)            (6)     (7)          (8)



 Kenya                   4.0        349       58.5         22.3            8.6           74.2     96.7        48.9

 India                   4.3        24.0      46.8         10.3            8.5           47.6     74.4        17.3

Colombia                11.0        31.8      57.6         21.0           22.0           62.0     91.6        28.6

                        33.0        44.7      62.7         30.7           48.0           66.0     95.0        33.0
 Hungary

                        43.0        66.2      84.0         50.4           54.0           82.9    107.0        55.5
 Italy

                        55.0        61.1      82.5         46.4           68.0           76.4     95.3        55.0
Japan

 United Kingdom         58.0        65.8      83.3         50.2           68.0            77.8    97.0        55.9

                        67.0        79.8      99.2         60.9           80.1)          95.4    114.5        73.5
 Germany, F.R.

 France                 68.0        73.8      83.4         63.4           82.0           89.1    105.9        70.4

 United States         100.0       100.0     100.0        100.0          100.0           100.0   100.0       100.0



    Source:   I.B. Kravis, Z. Kenessey, A. Ileston, and IL Summers, A System of International Comparisons of Gross
              Product and Purchasing Power, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1975.
                                            —29—



Price relationshios among major industrial countries, as indicated by comoarisons

of absolute price levels, changed as much as 25 to 30 percent in some cases

between 1950 and 1970.



        Given that there are differences in price levels, an important question is

what happens to these differences through time. If          they are altered, is it only
because    of changes in long run     structural   factors, such   as relative GDP per capita, or
do long run and short run balance of payments factors -- trade           flows and capital

movements -—    also   affect them? It is, of course, easier to answer the question
of whether they change than to say why they change.
        It is convenient to.discuss the changes against a framework of naive        pur-

chasing power parity (PPP) theory and then return to the assessment of the sig-

nificance• of the findings both for monetary theory, and, more incidentally,

purchasing power parity theory.

        In its naive form   the   PPP theory denies that relative price levels change;

when there are differential movements in the price levels of a pair of countries,
the rate of exchange will tend to adjust so as to maintain the PPP relationship
        = 1, where the Ps refer to price levels, A and B to countries and the
  A BO
subscripts t and 0 to a current period and a base period respectively. Note that
the Ps represent purchasing power parities (currency units per U.S. dollar) divided
                                                   *
by the exchange rate (currency units per U.S. dollar ). If the naive PPP theory
turns   out to be valid, the monetary theory is supported; if it is not, the matter
has   to be considered further.
       We can draw on careful price level      comparisons to test conformance to this

relationship    for the years 1950 and 1970. The


 cr per the currency of any other reference country that may be selected.
                                           —30—



    data for 1950 are from OEEC studies and those for 1970 from the U.N.

    work, both of which have already been referred to.

         The 1950 and 1970 comparisons are set out in Table 2       for six European

    countries vis a vis the U.S. The PPPs and the Ps for 1950 and 1970, and the ob-
                                                                                      *
    served 1970/1950 PPP relationship are given. Using the U.S. weighted data, we

    see that although European price levels were still below that of the U.S. in

    1970, they were in the main closer to the U.S. level than they had been in 1950

    (compare columns 9 and 11).   (But note that the 1950 price comparisons relate to

    the 1950 GNP basket, while those of 1970 relate to the 1970 GDP basket.) The

    relative change over the 20 year period, what we have called the PPP relationship,

    is set out in column 13. For 3 countries the numbers are close to 1.00 as the

    naive theory would predict. For others they deviate by at least 10 percent.

    Because the deviations are not always in the same direction, the PPP relationships

    for pairs not involving the U.S. ——   not   calculated in the table ——   are   sometimes

    far from 1.00; those for Netherland/Italy, Netherland/U.K. and Germany/Italy are
                                       **
    1.34, 1.26 and 1.22, respectively.

*
 As previously noted, these have the advantage of referring to a fixed basket of goods.
 However, it is not clear whether the balance of theoretical considerations favor U.S.-
 or own-weighted data. In the PPP literature, some writers have favored own-weights on
 the ground that price parity should be regarded as being based on parity of unit factor
 cost. See Officer, op. cit., p. 15. Even if this argument were accepted, the case for
 its application to the data in Table 2 would be weakened by the fact that they are
 based on price comparisons for final expenditures and thus on what the country absorbs
 rather than on what the country produces (as it would be if the comparisons were based
 on prices of the outputs of the industries of each country).

 For all countries except Belgium, the deviation from the purchasing power parity result
 is greater when the country's own basket of goods is used than with the U.S. basket
 (see column 14). ThIs may be attributable to the fact that the own-weighted GDPs
 shifted substantially towards the U.S. bundle of goods for which European prices were
 more expensive. The shift towards the U.S. bundle has been documented for France,
 Germany, Italy and the U.K. See I. Kravis, Z. Kenessey, A. Heston, and R. Summers,
. cit.,    p. 268.
                                                                            Table 2


                      Purchasing Power Parities, Exchange Rates, Price Levels, and Real Product Per Capita,
                                                Six Countries Relative to the U.S., 1950 and 1970



                                                                                          Purchasing power parities (Currency units per U.S.$)
                                          Exchange Rate                                      1950                  1970
               Currency
                 Unit              (Currency units per U.S.$)                           U.S.        Own       U.S.        Own
                                    1950    1970    1970/1950                         weights     weights   weights     weights
                (1)                     (2)       (3)         (4)                       (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)


Germany        D. Mark                  4.20      3.66            .871                  3.63       2.52       3.49         2.92
Netherlands    Guilder                  3.80      3.62            .953                  2.76       1.96       3.18         2.42
Belgium        .B.    Franc         50.2         50.0             .996                 45.0       37.0       46.8         36.8
Italy          Lira                625.         625.          1.000               •   577.       328.       518.      414.
U.K.                                     .357      .4167      1.167                      .288       .218       .324         .274

France          F.    Franc             3.50      5.554       1.587                   313.       223.         5.20         4.11

                                                                                                                                                 I-.'




                        Levels in Dollars (tJ.S.=lOO)
                     Price                                          PPP Relationship
                       1950               19Th                              1970/D50
                  U.S.      Own      U.S.      Own                         U.S.         Own
                weights weights    weights weights                       weights      weights
                      (9)        (10)            (11)      (12)            (13)         (14)


 Germany             86.4        60.0            95.4      79.9            1.10         1.33

 Netherlands         72.6        51.6            88.1      66.9            1.21         1.30

 Belgium             89.6        73.7            93.6      73.6            1.04         1.00

 Italy               92.3        52.5            82.8      66.2             .90         1.26

 U.K.                80.7        61.1            77.8      65.8             .96         1.08

 France              89.4        63.7            93.6      74.0            1.05         1.16

Sources:   Column    2        Gilbert and Kravis, Op. cit.; Gilbert and Associates, op. cit., Table 5.
           Column    3        International Comparison Project.                                                       .



           Column    4        Column 3   Column 2
           Columns                                                                                     Table 5.
                         5, 6 Gilbert and Kravis, op. cit., Table 4; Gilbert and Associates, op. cit.,
           Columns       7, 8 International Comparison Project
           Columns       9-12 Purchasing power parities divided by exchange rate.
                                                                        13 = col. 11   Col. 9; col. 14 = col. 12                     col. 10).
           Columns       13,14 1970 price levels divided by 1950 (col.
                                    —32—




Changes in price levels as measured by implicit deflators also show some substantial

deviations from the PPP relationship

    Another and somewhat more usual way of analyzing changes in exchange-rate-

adjusted price levels is to use time to time indexes to measure price changes

between periods. The greater abundance of such data gives us more freedom in

coverage of time periods and countries. As noted earlier, this wider coverage

comes at a cost since the methods used in different countries in making price

indexes and sometimes the scope of the indexes vary widely.
                                            —33—

           In Table 3, we draw on the wider availability of implicit deflators to add
                                                               *
 5 other countries to our     sample of developed countries.       The PPP relationships

 tend to be well above 1.00. For 1970/50 (column 16) they are over 1.30 in 3 out

 of 10 cases. For the countries that also appear in Table 2, the results are simi-
          **
 lar.
          The availability of the PPP relationships for the subperiods of the 1950s

 (column 15) and 1960s (column 14) provides an opportunity to examine a somewhat les

 less strict or naive version of PPP theory which holds that there are some devia-

 tions from a PPP of 1 but that these are soon reversed. In fact, the deviations

 from 1.00 in these two subperiods are substantial though not as great in most cases

 as for 1970/1950 or 1973/1970. As this implies, there is no consistent tendency

 for the deviations of the 1950s to reverse themselves in the 1960s; in 4 of the 9

 comparisons with the U.S. the deviation of the 1950's grew larger during the 1960's

and in the same direction. Matters are         little better when all possible pairs of

countries are considered; in 17 of the 45 pairs         the dviation of the 1950's

grew larger during the l960s (and in the same direction), in another 12 the devia-

tion was in the opposite direction but even larger and in 15 pairs the 1970/1960

index was closer to 1.00 than the 1960/1950 index; 29 of the cases, therefore, do

not support the PPP theory.

*
    All the industrialized countries were included for which trouble—free continuous
    series could be found in various issues of the U.N. Yearbook of National Accounts
    Statistics. Main reliance was placed on the 1957, 1966, 1970 and 1974 issues.
    However, the U.S. implicit deflators for GD? were taken from Table 7.15 of the
    official U.S. national accounts tables in order to utilize revised data that were
    not yet published in the U.N. source.

**The PPP relationships for 1970/50 tend to be more similar, as we might expect,
  to the own-weighted Table 2 indexes than to the U.S.-weighted indexes.

 There are 10 countries for which indexes are available both in the l950s and
 l960s; hence 45 pairs. For one pair, Denmark-Germany, the PPP relationship
 was .97 in both periods.
           •
                                                                                                                                                   U0S11 AUt4   t4
                                                   ueqt oo ueq; aii pu se3.1d s-n o avjai ujjv
                                                                                                           b3pd pnçpQ av a6uvq3xa uqs oo
                                                                                                                           uaq, oo s!cnb
                                                                                      fl
                                                                                                                      OAUq
                                                                  •SIUWqD 9?1 af.UrlI3xa Aq s;jc A1s3e.zt1  e uovjui
                                                                                  OUO 1OJ hUT6UqX h3u.2in3 e o BUfl ;o qumu
                                                     UUq SSj s                                                                     jo xapu3
                                                    dqsuo;va1 j4 JqJ lVflOp
                                                    u Aq pp*p $fl oq o A1te1aUimo q3u jo XpU1 od q.L p—j sio Aq pop*p £j-6 o3                                          '91-ti toa
                                                                                                                                    Sfl       o 9A1V11 9-5                       t°3
                                                                                                          ie
                                                    318TW4S UOO33 1PUOfl4 JO IOOq1QJA Nfl øtfl UT peioda. daO IOJ                         VXaPUT 0311d    j11O3           9—c    tO3
                                                                          ANt I1VIIOP .S•R id •un sl3Ulllna. Ub'FelOJ                            tuuv o aapu              'i—i   1103
                                                                                                                                                         000t                             .S.fl
   001                           001       0•00t   OOOr    000t           0001         $o(         6Lt         rctt          ecit   0001       0.001               0001
               001     001
                                                                                                                             gj                          rLII
   tn          err     L6        1t        91(1    LS11     Lt11          0601                                 ç•tçj                69t1
                                                                                                                                    root
                                                                                                                                               L66
                                                                                                                                               666
                                                                                                                                                                   9•L
                                                                                                                                                                   jp                   uapais
   LP1         Lrt     9t1       Pt        TLPI    99U      reit          POt          9OS          6t9t
                                                                                                     •v•U
                                                                                                               9•P5I
                                                                                                               ç•gj
                                                                                                                             L01t
                                                                                                                             eort   root       ooot
                                                                                                                                                         root
                                                                                                                                                         root      roe                  Lwc
    QU          1•U    91        61          1U      1•U                  UPOt             1•U
                                                                                                                             0011   6P6        066       656       69L             SPUVIIO'flaN
   tn                   e't                        B•90t    6U1           5011         9L11         t'Gtt      L(9t
                                 P$1
                                                                                                                                                                                         tI
                                           Lf2C1
   ..u
               on
               •c•u     tn       6t1         v•u     &•u                  P501           1•U          1•U      0t91          TUT    66         L66       S66       ØSL                   UVdV(
                                                            9tt           tL01         P0O          56U        9P51          £P11   P001       P66       0101      0(6
    L11        0t       sri      511       9Ltt    Ct01
                                                                                                                             0tt               66        L8        91L                  hUVUL
    t•j                                    coit             9S01          SPOt         t80t         6Ctt       90P1                 69B
               co•t
               901
                        re-i
                        t0t
                                 PPT
                                 on        i•tat
                                                   LP01
                                                    6Pt     F911          VPO1         0S61         606t       9PS1          SOU    6L5t ropt            9it       roe
    OFT                                                                                                                                                  eeot      roe
    sri                 re-i     sri       ret      P901    15r1          9901         6Pl          L9(t       66L1          091t   L901       666
               6o1
                                                            9001     •    FOOt         S9t          F9(t       OPU           9tt    9S6        V60       9L0T      9S6                  •p1U13
    C(t
    101
               6Ft
               L6
                        (6
                        901      tt
                                 S0t        ULOT
                                            9o01
                                                    P901
                                                    856     rcot
                                                            (ofl

                                                                          rtot
                                                                           (6)

                                                                                       SILI
                                                                                           (0)

                                                                                                    51C1
                                                                                                     CL)

                                                                                                               FOPT
                                                                                                                (9)

                                                                                                                             S611
                                                                                                                              (5)

                                                                                                                                    986
                                                                                                                                      (P)

                                                                                                                                               C66
                                                                                                                                                 (C)

                                                                                                                                                         966
                                                                                                                                                          (C)
                                                                                                                                                                   8L
                                                                                                                                                                    (1)
                                                                                                                                                                                        sTbtae
    (9t)        (Si)    (Vt)      (Ci)      (11)    (ii)
                                                                                                   05/0961 09/0L61 OL/tL61                     05/0961 09/0L61     OL/tL6t
                                                                                                                                             xpu ev
                                                                                                                                    OS/OL6T
                                           Oc/OL6T oS/o96T 09/OL6t       OL/CL61      OS/OL6t
   0c/0161     05/0961 09/0L61
               dTqsuoitaU dd.I
                                 OL/tL61
                                              Coot s-nT oViJaQ     Tt0d                          iOvJeG  T3Ttda1I dOD                                    bueq3xa
                                                                   0L61-0S61       'P°Td   PZS
                                                     11OVJGa ;1311d111      dOO   U UQ VOI       O6UVI(X    U IGbUU%p
9L/6C/L
                                     —35—



    However, the terminal yeats of the periods in Table 3 were selected for

reasons of statistical convenience and not to represent the equilibrium periods

between which the PPP relationship is expected to conform to unity in the monetary

and purchasing power parity writings.

    We have therefore examined the ?PP relationships vis a vis the U.S. of the

countries in Table 3 for all possible 2, 3, 4, 7, and 10 year periods between

1950 and 1970. The results are summarized in Table 4 in terms of the frequency

distribution of the deviations from the PPP relationship. It is evident that

the anticipated PPP relationship tends to hold for short time spans, though cases

of deviations of 10 percent or more can be found. Over longer periods of years,

relative price levels tend to drift farther apart. For the 2 year periods, for

example, exchange rate adjusted price levels deviated from the U.S. price level by

20 percent or more in.only 1% of the observations and    changed   by 5 percent or less

relative to the U.S. in three-quarters of the cases. At the other extreme, for the

10 year periods, only 14% of the relationships had changed by as little as 5% and

one-fifth had changed by 20% or more. The drift becomes more pronounced if the time

span is expanded past 1970.



    In Table 5 we compare the indexes of PPP relationships of Table 3 based on

GDP implicit deflators with corresponding indexes based on wholesale prices and

on consumer prices. Those based on wholesale prices tend to be closer to 1.00

than those based on implicit deflãtors or than those based on consumers prices.

Even in the wholesale—price—based series, however, large deviations can be found

particularly when relationships between pairs of countries, not including the U.S.,

are taken into account (36 percent in the 1950s for Norway—Italy and 18 percent in

the l960s for Sweden-Japan).

    Finally, we show in Table 6 the results of still another way of guaging the

similarity of price movements ——   correlation   analysis. The annual percentage
                                                                                       8/19/76
                                              —36—



                                           Table 4
                         Size   of absolute deviations of change in

                            GDP deflator from PPP relationship,

               1]. countriesa vis a vis the U.S., various periods, 1950-70


                                                          % of cases in which absolute
 Duration                Number of                               deviationd was
of period        Periodsb Observations'              >20%      10—19.9%     5-9.9%     <5%
   (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)       (5)          (6)       (7)

    2               19            202                 1          5            19        74
    3               18            191                 1         15            21        63
   4                17            180                 1         24           22         53
   7                14            147                10         32           32         27
  10                11            114                20         42           24         14




   a
         See Table 3 for list of countries.
   b
         The first period starts in all cases with 1950.
   C
         Would be 1]. times number of periods except for fact that available deflators
         for Japan start with 1955 and for Norway with 1952.
   d
         This is the deviation from the PPP relationship, described in the notes to
         Table 3, without regard to sign.
                                                                                        Table 5

                                                        PM' e1ationshiptDerived          front   Time to Time   Price   Indexes,
                                                                 Selected Periods, 12 Countries, 1950—1973



                             1973/70                              1970/60                                    1960/50
                 GDP        Wholesale   Consumer        GDP                                                                                         1970/50
                                                                 Wholesale   Consumer              GDP      Wholesale        Consumer     GDP      Wholesale   Consumer
               implicit       price      price        implicit     price      price              impLicit     price           price     implicit     price
               deflator       index      index        deflator     index      index                                                                             price
                                                                                                 deflator     index           index     deflator     index      index
Belgium          1.32         1.22        1.32          1.06       1.05       1.03                  .97          .95           .99        1.02       1.00       1.02
Canada           1.05         1.1.3      1.06             .93       .99           .93             1.19          1.06          1.13        1.12       1.05       1.05
Denmark          1.35         1.27       1.34                      1.06
                                                        1.24                  1.24                1.09          1.07          1.12        1.35       1.13       1.39
France           1.30         1.25       1.31           1.03       1.03       1.02                1.06          1.02          1.00        1.10       1.05       1.02
Germany          1.44         1.29       1.43           1.21       1.07                                         1.06
                                                                              1.12                1.05                         .98        1.27       1.13       1.11
Italy            1.15         1.11       1.15           1.15       1.10       1.11                1.02           .92          1.09        1.17       1.01       1.22
Japan            1.39         1.25       1.44           1.23.       .98       1.35                n.a.          1.22          1.20        n.a.       1.20       1.62
Netherlands      1.44         1.26       1.42           1.28       1.13       1.18                1.10          1.04          1.11        1.41       1.17       1.32
Norway           1.29         1.19       1.33                      1.10       1.18
                                                        1.18                                      n.a.          1.25          1.27        na         1.38       1.50
Sweden           1.24         1.18       1.27           1.16       1.16       1.13                1.27          1.22          1.28        1.47                  1.44
                                                                                                                                                     1.40
U.K.             1.12         1.03       1/15            .97        .99           .97                           1.15          1.22        1.13       1.14       1.18
U.S.             1.00         1.00       1.00           1.00       1.00       1.00                1.00          1.00          1.00        1.00       1.00       1.00




              The price index of each country relative to the U.S. divided by an index of the number
                                                                                                         units of its   of
              currency exchanging for one U.S. dollar. The PM' relationship equals 1.00 when relative inflation is
              precisely offset by exchange rate changes; it is less than 1.00 wheii exchange rate adjusted prices have
              fallen relative to U.S. prices and nre than 1.00 when they have risen.

                  Source:    GOP implicit deflators are the correlative price indexes reported in the U.N. Yearbook of National
                             Accounts   Statistics;other indexes are from IMF International Financial
                                                                                                      Statistics, except for U.S. data which
                             are t'rem Table 7.15 of time official 11.5. national accounts t.ah1e'.
                                                                                                         8/4fio

                                                        Table 6

                   Mean Coefficients of Correlation between Annual Percentage Price Changes,
                                                                             *
                                           Industrial   Countries, 1950-73

                           GDP Implicit                 Wholesale                   Consumer
                           Deflator (10)                Prices (12)                 Prices   (12)

                        unadj                       unadj         adj            unadj         adj

Belgium                  .75(9)     .75(9)          .86(11)       .89(11)        .74(11)     .78(11)
Canada                   .70(9)     .46(7)          .73(11)       .88(11)        .75(11)     .53(11)
Denmark                  .58(8)     .67(8)          .89(11)       .91(11)        .57(10)      .73(11)

France                   .49(7)     .65(9)          .77(11)       .88(11)        .49(8)       .72(11)

Germany                  .71(9)     .71(9)          .82(11)       .87(11)        .72(11)     .75(11)

Italy                    .56(8)     .67(8)          .78(11)       .85(11)        .67(11)       .73(11)

                        n.a.        n.a.            .83(11)       .88(11)        .58(10)       .75(11)
Japan
Netherlands              .67(9)     .72(9)          .86(11)       .90(11)        .64(10)       .76(11)

Norway                  n.a.        n.a.            .81(11)       .89(11)        .66(11)       .79(11)

Sweden                   .65(9)     .70(9)          .86(11)       .89(11)        .71(11)       .80(11)

U.K.                     .60(9)     .44(8)          .81(11)       .64(11)        .64(11)       .49(10)

U.S.                     .61(9)     .54(8)          .80(11)       .86(11)        .69(11)       .59(10)




*
    The price changes of each possible pair of countries were correlated. To save space, only the means of
    each country's coefficients of correlation with the others are presented. The numbers in parentheses in
    the captions are the numbers of countries included in the correlations.   The entries in the table represent
    the simple means of the n—i correlation coefficients with (in parentheses) the number of these coefficients
    that were large enough to meet a .05 level significance test.
                                                                                                          series
    The columns headed "unadj" contain the average coefficients of correlation between the original price
                                                                                for exchange rate changes (i.e.,
    of each country; in the columns headed "adj" the price series were adjusted
    converted to dollar terms) before correlation.
                                          —39—




price change for each country for 1950—73 was correlated with each of the other
             *
countries.       In order to economize on space we present for each country only

the average of its correlation coefficients with all the other countries and the

number of cases (in brackets) in which the coefficient was significant at the

 .05 level. Note that the correlations are higher and more often significant

for the exchange rate adjusted price changes than for price changes in local

currencies, higher for wholesale prices than for consumer prices and higher for
                                             **
consumer prices than for implicit deflators.    The average correlations for

adjusted implicit deflators vary from 0.44 to 0.75, high enough, as we further

suggest below, to indicate that there are links between national prices but not

high enough to suggest that they are "rigid".


The comparisons of price levels at different times and of the movement of price

indexes relative to exchange rates lead to the conclusion that while the price

levels of different countries are indeed linked together, the links are looser

than described in the monetary approach to the balance of payments.

     In assessing the significance of the data in Tables 2 to 6 for the PPP theory

and for the monetary approach to the balance of payments, two kinds of questions

arise. One is whether the deviations are big enough to damage or discredit the

theories and the other is whether-they can be explained away.

     Each analyst will have to decide in the light of his own purposes whether the




 All years, including those in which exchange rates were changed were included.
 Years of change should conceivably have been excluded on the ground that prices
 might have adjusted though not simultaneously. However, exclusion of years of
 change for either member of each pair would greatly reduce the number of observa-
 tions. From Table 7 below, which gives periods of exchange rate changes for in-
 dustrial countries, it can be seen that only 1953—55 and 1963-65 were years not
 involved in changes even as initial or terminal years.
**
  Data for 1950—70 produce the same conclusions though the r's are slightly lower.
                                             —40—




 PPP relationships fall close enough to 1.00 to satisfy the theories.* As a

 matter of general judgment we express our own opinion that the results do not

 support the notion of a tightly integrated international price structure. The

 record of exchange-rate-adjusted price changes after the end of the pegged exchange

 rate system in the early 1970s shows that price levels can move apart sharply

 without very rapid correction through arbitrage. The large German deviation

 from the PPP shown in Table 2 for 1970/50 did not, for example, reverse itself,
                                           **
 but grew larger in the ensuing     years.

           On the other hand, the data do suggest that the usual -- though not necessary
 --       situation   is one in which short period movements in GD? price levels are close

 together.

           Our findings appear to be less reconcilable with the monetary approach with

 its emphasis on the quick arbitrage of prices,than with the PPP theory, which from

 its beginnings in Cassel's writings made allowances for various short or long run

 factors that could cause a divergence from the PPP relationship. For example, the

 large differences observed since 1970 would appear to constitute strong evidence

 against              the quick adjustment hypothesis of the monetary approach, but could

 be explained away by PPP theorists on grounds of an unsatisfactory base year,

 brevity of the period, or real changes in one or another of the countries.


 *
     We have encountered comments by several authorities on the size of deviations from
     the PPP relationship that may be worth mentioning: H. Houthakker is reported
     recently to have offered the view that a deviation of 10 percent, as an example,
     told little about the probable movement of exchange rates, implying that larger
     ones would. (Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3: 1975, p. 552). Officer
     cites Haberler as expressing doubt that an equilibrium rate would differ by more
     than 15 to 20 percent from PPP "under normal circumstances" and H.G. Johnson as
     expressing the view that "...the exchange rates of the major countries do not
     depart very far (typically less than 20 percent) from purchasing power parity."
     (Op. cit., pp. 25 and 26).
**
     In terms of GNP deflators (available in the June 1976 issue of International
     Financial Statistics) the PPP relationship for Germany was as follows for each
     year taken relative to 1970:
     1969    .92      1971    1.08      1973    1.42      1975    1.50
     1970   1.00      1972    1.19      1974    1.43
                                        —41—




     Account must be taken too of the structural influence on relative price levels

f   income levels as indicated in equation 1 above.
                                                      *
                                                          It seems that this relationship

hould not provide any basic difficulties for the monetary approach though the idea

hat nontradables are brought into alignment in the long run would have to be given

ip in favor of the concept of a changing norm for nontraded/traded goods prices in

Lifferent countries. It would, however, be more difficult to incorporate this
                                   **
elationship   in the PPP theory.

uring the period 1950-70, appreciations tended to be followed by relative price level

ncreases and depreciations, with less uniformity, by relative price level decreases.

     If price levels can differ and can also change in different directions, what

ole do changes in the balance of payments situation play in influencing the degree

nd direction of price level movements? A firm answer to this question would require

 careful study of each country first to identify periods of deficit and surplus and

econdly to measure relative price level movements before, during and after the dis-

quilibrium period. Account would have to be taken of policies pursued at home and

broad that might tend to obscure the impact of the disequilibrium on the behavior

f prices, particularly the effects of domestic monetary and fiscal policies and of

he balance of payments position and price level changes of the country's main trading

artners.



If the main explanation for differences in price levels resides in differences in
per capita income, then the countries in Table 2 that went the farthest in diminish—
ing their income gap vis a vis the U.S. should also have experienced the greatest
reduction in the price difference. There is some evidence in support of this when
the changes in own-weighted price indexes (column 12 minus column 10) are plotted
against changes in the U.S.—weighted real income indexes; the relationship is less
clear cut in the scatter diagram involving U.S.-weighted price indexes and own—
weighted income indexes.

This is the judgment given by Officer although no one can say for sure where the
line should be drawn between additional variables that may legitimately be added
to PPP to explain exchange rates and those that so alter the character of the
relationship that it should no longer be regarded as a PPP theory. See Officer,
o. cit., pp. 3-4 and 22.
                                                —42—



         We   do not attempt such careful country studies here, but merely examine the

 behavior of prices in the cases of appreciations or depreciations by industrial
           *
 countries. A change in the exchange rate during the period 1950-70 may be taken
 as prima facie evidence of the prior existence of a disequilibrium. Was there, in

 view of the widely different circumstances and of the different policies followed

 after the exchange rate change,       any reasonably     consistent outcome with respect to

 relative price levels?

         Of course,, at the moment of depreciation the entire price level will appear to

 the rest of the -world to be lower than it was before by the amount of the deprecia-
                                                                 **
 tion,    and the opposite is the case in an appreciation.            The issue is how long this

 shift,in relative price levels lasts in the world as it actually works. If all

 prices, tradables and nontradables, adjust very quickly to the world price level,

 then the impact of depreciations and appreciations on relative price levels can

 only be very brief. Tradable goods can be expected to rise in terms of local


 *If one were looking at adjustments with exchange rates that remain fixed,
  price movements right be compared for countries with a
  great diversity of balance of payments experience over a long period of time.
  among the countries of Table 2, Germany and the U.K. are in this respect at
  opposite extremes, the former with persistent surpluses during the period 1950-70
  and the latter with constantly recurring deficits. The data in Table 2 (columns
 13 and 14) do show that the German price level rose substantially more than the U.K.
  price level, both taken after adjustment for exchange rate changes (i.e., in dollar
  terms). -Indeed Germany and the Netherlands, which like Germany found it necessary
  to appreciate during the period, had larger price rises than any other country in
  the table.
 These data do not, however, lend consistent support to the hypothesis that relative
 price levels tend to rise with persistent surpluses and to fall with persistent
 deficits. For one thing, they are not unequivocal in showing that U.K. prices rose
 less than those of Belgium and Italy which had favorable balance of payments historic
 What is worse is that when subperiods are examined (see Table 4), U.K. prices are
 seen to have risen more in the 1950's (though not in the 1960's) than those of
 Germany (and also of the Netherlands) despite the difference in balance of payments
 tendencies.
**
  Assuming     for the moment   that all   prices   including those of exports are   quoted in
  terms of the home currency.
                                               —43—




     currency more readily than nontradables; they will, perhaps sooner rather than

     later, conform to their world price levels or at least adjust towards those levels.

     However, to the extent that nontradable goods remain unchanged in price or adjust

     only partially, the average price level of a depreciating country will be reduced

     and that of an appreciating country will be increased (from the viewpoint of the

     outside world after taking account of the exchange rate change). Whatever these

     basic tendencies toward price adjustments are, price movements up or down may be

     abetted or hindered by monetary and fiscal policies followed after the exchange

     rate changes; these may be in a direction that reinforces the exchange rate change

     or they may be in the opposite direction.

         Account must be taken, also of the price changes that preceeded the exchange rate

 change    and presumably   played a part in bringing it about. The elasticity writers

 would ordinarily expect to observe a rise in relative price levels immediately pre-

 ceeding exchange rate depreciations and a fall in relative price levels immediately
                                           *
preceeding exchange rate appreciation.          These prior changes would be expected par-

 ticularly in the prices of tradables.

        In order to examine these questions, we have set out in Table 7     all   the cases in

which changes of 3 percent or more in annual average exchange rates that occurred for

the industrialized countries during the period 1950—70 and for which implicit deflators

could also be obtained from the tJ.N. Yearbook of National Account Statistics.

         Annual rates of change both j local currency prices (Part B) and in exchange-

 rate-adjusted prices (Part A) are shown for four periods:          (a) the 3 years preceeding
                                                              **
 the exchange rate change, (b) the period of the change,           (c) the period of change plus



     Hordinarilyu, because they would not rule out exchange rate changes brought about
     as a result of speculation.
**
     See page 24 for definition.
                                          —44—



the ensuing 3 years, and (d) the period of change plus the ensuing 5 years. The price

indexes are taken relative to "world" price indexes; the latter are calculated from

the prices of 16 industrial countries using as weights the relative importance of their

currencies   in the initial composition of IMP Special Drawing Rights (SDR's).
                                                                                 *



      Turning first to the years preceeding appreciations, the data in local currency

  (Part B, column 3) do not show any strong or consistent tendency for prices to decline

 relative to the world average prior to appreciations and to rise prior to depreciation

 Either shifts in relative price levels were not involved in the development of these

 balance of payments disequilibrjums or we should focus on some subset of prices, such

 as tradable goods. We return to the last point in the following section dealing with

 sectoral prices.

      Our main concern is in any case with the change in the GDP price level for the

 period of change and its sequels. For this purpose, we concentrate on the exchange—

 rate-adjusted price movements relative to the world (Part A).

      In four of the five appreciations where we have data on prices 3 and 5 years

 after the period of exchange rate change, the price level was higher relative to the

 world than at the initial year shown in the table (columns 5 and 6).




  IBRD Finance and Development, December 1974, p. 19.
                                                                                                   7
                                                                                           Table   ,
                          PriceChanges             in Connection with Appreciations and Depreciations of Industriilized Countries,                          1950—1970
                                                                                A.   In U.S. Dollars
                                                                                                                                                Exchange Rate Index
                                                          GOP Imo]icit Deflator                            Wholesale Price Index
                                                                                                                                        Appreciation (>1.0) or depreciation (<1.0
   Country      Period    Percent of           ( Beginning      Relative to beginning         /    beginning Relative to beginning       Beginning   Relative to beginning
                  of                                Period                                         of Period     of Period of Change     of Period
                          Appreciation                           of period of change                                                                       of period
                                                                                                    o 3 yrs. End of    3yrs.     5 yrs.             End of
                Change    (+) or                 to 3 yrs.     End of    3 yrs.  5 yrs.                                                  relative            3 yrs.   5yrs.
                                                 earlier       Period   after        after         earlier    Period  after      after                      after    after
                          Depreciation                                                                                                   to 3 yrs. Period
                                                                        end   of     end of                      .     end of    end of earlier              end of   end of
                          (—)
                                                                        period       period                           period    period                      period   period
                  (1)               (2)             (3)          (4)      (5)          (6)             (1)    (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)     (13)    (14)
Appreciations
                                                    —                                                                  0.98      0.99      —         1.11    1.10      1.14
Canada          1950—52         +11.1                           1.14     1.12         1.15                   1.01
Canada          1969—70         + 3.1              1.02         1.01     0.89         0.99         1.06      0.99      0.99      1.03      1.00      1.03    1.08

Germany         1960—61         + 3.7              1.04         1.05     1.07         1.06         1.02      1.04      1.04      1.03      1.01      1.04     1.05     1.04
                1968—70         + 9.4                                                                                  1.22       —        1.00
Germany                                            0.98         1.09    1.31                       0.94      1.07                                    1.09    1.51
Netherlands     1960—61         + 3.8              1.03         1.03     1.11         1.15         0.99      1.02      1.08      1.11      1.01      1.04     1.05     1.04


Depreciations
Canada          1960—62         —   9.2                                                                                0.91      1.04      0.99      0.91    0.90     0.90
                                                   0.99         0.88    0.85          0.86         1.01      0.93
Denmark         1966—68         —   7.7                                                                                          1.10      1.00      0.92    0.93
                                                   1.08         0.98    0.99          1.13         1.02      0.91      0.98                                            1.15
Prance          1956—59         —28.6              0.99         0.85    0.88          0.91         0.99      0.87      0.92      0.96      1.00      0.71    0.71     0.71
                                                                                       —                               1.08       —
France          1968—70         —10.3              1.00         0.92    0.99                       0.97      0.98                          0.99      0.90    0.90
U.K.            1966—68         —14.3              1.02         0.88    0.92          0.83         1.02      0.91      0.98      0.84     1.00       0.86    0.87      0.88


                                          .1
                                                             Table7 (cont'd.)


                                                    B.   In Local   Currencies

                                                         Implicit Deflator                      Wholesale Price Index
       Country    Period   Percent of      Beginning      Relative to beginning         beginning      Relative to beginning
                    of     Appreciation    of Period       of        of Change          of
                 Change    (+) or          O'4'.             of   3 yrs.                     Priod Endof Period of Change
                                                                           5 yrs.                      of   3 yrs.    5 yrs.
                           Depreciation    earlier       Period     after    after      earlier     Period   after      after
                           (—)                                      end of   end of                          end of     end of
                                                                    period   period                          period     period
                    (1)              (2)      (3)          (4)        (5)         (6)    (7)          (8)      (9)        (10)
ppreciations
Canada           1950—52         +11.1                    1.03       1.03        1.03               0.91      0.90       0.88
Canada           1969-70         +
                               3.1           1.00                    0.95
                                                          0.99                   1.01   1.04                  1.05       1.06
Germany          1960-61     + 3.7           1.00         1.02      1 .02        1.02   0.99        1 .01     0.99       0.98
Germany          1968-70     + 9.4           0.96         1.00                    —
                                                                    1.00                0.92        0.99      0.93
Netherlands      1960—61     + 3.8                        1.00       1.06        1.11               0.98      1.03       1.07    1

Depreciations
Canada           1960—62     —       9.2     0.98         097        0.95        0.96               1.02
                                                                                        1.00                  1.01       1.04
Denmark          1966—68     —       7.7     1.08         1.04      1.06     1.11       1.02                  1.06       1.08
France           1956—59     -28.6           1.00         1.16      1.20     1.24       0.99        1.20      1.27       1.31
France           1968—70     —10.3           1.00                                —
                                                         1.03       1.03                0.96        1.09     1.11
U.K.             1966—68     —14.3           1.02
                                      —47-.




Notes to Table 7

Part A

Col. 1: All periods were included in which there was a change in the average
         annual exchange rate of at least 3 percent from one year to the next.
         Once a change this large was identified, years on either side were
         included in the period of change if the year-to-year changes were in
         the same direction and at least 1 percent.

Col. 2: Exchange rates are annual average of daily dollar prices from IMP converted
         to an index of foreign currency units per dollar. Percent change is
         computed from the formula (I/I)-l, where 10 is the index at the be-
         ginning of the period and I is the index at the end of the period.

Col. 3 -   6:  (11/10), where I is an index of the GDP implicit deflator of the
           given country, divided by its exchange rate index referred to in note
           to col. 2, relative to a SDR (Special Drawing Rights)-weighted average
           of exchange-rate-adjusted GD? implicit deflators of 16 industrial countries,
           and the subscripts 0 and 1 refer to the initialand terminal years.

Col. 7 - 10:    As in col. 3 - 6, except that given country wholesale price indexes
           and SDR-weighted average of wholesale price indices are used.

Col. 11 — 14:  (I /11) where I is an index of exchange rates described in note
         to col. 9and subscripts 0 and 1 refer to initial and terminal years.



Part   B


Col.   2: Same as col. 2 in Part A.

Col. 3 -   6:  (li/b) where I is an index of the GDP implicit deflator of the given
           country, relative to a SDR weighted average of GDP implicit deflators of
           16 industrial countries and the subscripts 0 and 1 refer to the initial
           and terminal years.

Col. 7 - 10:    As in col. 3 - 6, except that given country and SDR weighted   -

           average of wholesale price indices are used.
                                           —48—




     The data on the 5 depreciations in Part A show a tendency for relative

price levels in terms of implicit deflators to be lower 3 and 5 years after the ex-

change rate change than before. In only one case —— Denmark after 5 years -- was

the relative price level-measured in this way higher than before, and in this instance

the reason was an exchange rate appreciation (see coluxnn 14).



    These findings are very different from the expectations of a simple monetary

model which would call for changes in local currency prices (Part B) exactly of f-

stting exchange rate changes arid for no changes in relative price levels in dollar

terms (i.e., columns 3 to 10 in Part A should have entries of 1.00). Again we see --

here in the context of exchange rate changes --     that   relative price levels can and some-

times do shift by substantial amounts that are not quickly arbitraged away. The directi

of these shifts over short periods     in the incidents we have examined tends to be

consistent with the direction that the reasoning of the standard model would lead us

to expect from the exchange rate changes, but we have not established any causal con-

nection. It seems unlikely, for example, that the 15 percent increase in the Dutch

implicit deflator (in dollars) relative to the appreciation of approximately 4 per-

cent could have been due in large   part   to the exchange rate change.
                                        — 49-.




                   The Behavior of Prices in Different Sectors

        We are concerned in this section with the price levels and price movements of

tradables relative to nontradables,and within tradables of exports relative to im-

ports. Almost all of the theories of the adjustment mechanism provide for shifts

in the tradable/nontradable price ratio, but the elasticity approach is more hos-

pitable to changes in the commodity terms of trade (export prices relative to import

prices) than the monetary approach. The differences between export and domestic

prices of the same goods, almost universally ignored, will be treated in the next

section dealing with the behavior of prices for individual kinds of commodities.

         We start with price level comparisons for nontradables and tradables, and then

move on to changes in prices for these two categories and in the terms of trade.

Price level differences for nontrada.bles are larger than for GD? as a whole.

       The main explanation for the association between price levels and per capita
                                                          *
incomes summarized in equation 1, it has been suggested ,     lies   in the differential

impact of high wages in high income (high productivity) countries upon the prices of

commodities and the prices of services. The tradability of commodities tends to pro-

duce international product price equalization; differences in productivity between

high and low income countries will simply lead to wage differences. For services,

however, productivity differentials tend to be smaller and the high wages of the

high productivity countries lead to higher prices for the purchasers; unlike the

commodity sector, there is little or no trade in services and country to country

differences in service prices are thus possible.

        If this explanation is valid we should expect to find that the price levels

for the nontradable components of final expenditures on GD? should vary according

to real GDP per capita while prices for the tradable components should be alike.

*                                                                            nd
                                                                              Usher, o. cit.
    The recent currency of this idea is attributable to Balassa, op. cit. ,See also
    P. Samuelson, "Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems," Review of Economics and
    Statistics, Vol. 46, May l964 pp. 145-154. However, Viner's interpretation of
    Ricardo's reasoning with respect to the passage cited in the footnote on p. 27
    and of certain other writings of Ricardo is essentially the same as Balassa's
    argument. Viner,            p. 315.
                                          —50—


       The expectations about the nontradables are met by the data for the 10 countries

listed in Table 1. When the sex-vice components of final expenditures (including such

things as barber shops and beauty parlors, governmental services and health services)
are    combined with construction to form a nontraded goods component,
                                                                         *
                                                                             price levels

 (using U.S. weights) range from 17 percent in India to 100 percent in the U.S. with

the next highest price level being found in Germany at 74 percent. It is true also

that the price levels for nontraded goods are positively correlated with GDP per
       **
capita:
             (2)          ln P            = 2.46 + 0.372 in GDP               =
                              non ra de
                                                  (2.7).



where the data are drawn from Table 1 (columns 8 and 5).

Price levels for tradables seem also to vary though not so widely.

       The expectations with respect to tradables are not however met. For the total

goods components, consisting of consumers commodities and producers durable goods,

the range of price indexes runs from 74 percent for Irdia to 114 percent

for Germany. The dispersion of the price levels is clearly smaller than irithe case

of the nontradables. Not only are traded goods prices in the other countries closer

to American prices of the same goods as compared to nontraded goods, but also the

dispersion of the price indexes among the 9 countries other than the U.S. is smaller

for the traded goods than for nontraded goods.        Nevertheless, the differences are

not trivial even among the industrial countries; traded goods prices are around 20

percent higher in Germany than in Japan and theU.K..


 There is some unavoidable arbitrariness in classifying all final expenditures into
 one or the other of these two classes of goods. Electricity, for example, has been
 treated as a traded good in the data in Table 1. Also, some service categories have
 cost structures that are 100 percent labor costs (domestic services) while others
 have important commodity components (public transportation).

 For   own-weighted indexes, the coefficient of real GDP per capita is 0.484 nd
 is .83.
                                              —51—




     Furthermore, even the tradable price levels tend to be correlated positively

with per capita income:


          (3)          in p
                              traded
                                       =   4.23+ 0.95 in GDP       r =
                                           (32.5) (2.7)

The slope is,however, smaller than for nontradables.*

     Thus, not only do price levels differ substantially when the whole aggregate of

goods entering into GDP is taken into account but the level of prices for the kinds

of goods that can enter international trade is also subject to a substantial variation.

Part of the reason may be that the prices we are comparing, prices to domestic final

purchasers, contain some local service elements even for tradable goods. For example,

wheat shipped to India and to Germany at identical prices from the U.S. would

probably cost the German consumer more than his Indian counterpart simply because

internal costs of distribution and transportation are higher in Germany; at least,

that would be the case if German wages were higher than Indian wages in a proportion

greater than the extent to which German productivity in distribution and transportation

exceeds Indian productivity. It is doubtful,howeve, that all the difference can

be explained in this way; German prices for traded goods were more than 50 percent

higher than Indian prices. It seems likely that some of the difference is caused

also by the local production of tradable goods at lower costs in India than in

Germany. There is also the possibility that wheat shipped to India may be invoiced

at a lower fob price than wheat shipped to Germany. This is clearly the case for

concessional wheat sales. Are there other commodities for which price discriminating



 For the own-weighted data, the coefficient of real GDP per capita is 0.191 and
 s.78.
                                          —52—



sellers find it advantageous to sell to poor countries at lower prices? We do not

knowthe answer to this question. The claims of the poor countries, mainly relating
to machinery prices, has been that the opposite is usually the case —- that is, that
they are charged higher prices than the industrial countries.
     another possible explanation nay be that many of the final product expenditure
categories we have included with      traded .goods, such as manufactured food products,

for    example, nay in some or most countries have a very small traded content. At
least some monetary theorists would, however, expect arbitrage or the possibility
of arbitrage to equalize prices in these cases (after allowance for transport costs).
     We -               accept the indication of equation 3 that even tradables
tend to be more expensive in higher income countries, a view that will be bolstered
by evidence in the       section on individual product groups that price levels can            differ
                                                                                           *
at even a more disaggregated level and even among industrialized countries.
e      of   the problems in assessing the role of the nontradables/tradables price ratio
in    balance of payments adjustxrnts is the        secular tendency    for the ratio to   rise.
        The cross section relationship between the ratio of nontradables to tradables

and    per capita income seems to apply also to intertenporal           relationships within

countries. The usual        explanation is   that the ratio    is   pushed up by the tendency

for more        rapid increases in productivity to occur in traded than in nontraded goods
while       at the same time competition in each national labor market imposes equal wage
                                               **
changes       in the two sets of industries.        The high labor   content of nontradables,

with    their    large service component, and    the   greater pressures of world competition

in    the tradables sector are among the       reasons often cited for the differential pro-

ductivity trends.

*
 For    a fuller treatment of the extent       of international price differences for both
 traded and nontraded goods and a discussion of the reasons for the differences,
 see I.B. Kravis, A. Hestori and R. Sunsners, "Real GDP
 Ouc Hundred Countries,                                 per Capita for More than
                                 Discussion Paper No. 391, Department of Economics,
 University of Pennsylvania.
**
  However,the explanation       of price trends in
                                             the two sets of industries nay not be
 so simple; Kendrick's productivity studies indicate that in the U.S. between 1948
 and 1966 at least, some components of nontraded goods including transportation and
 communication enjoyed higher rates of growth in real product per unit of labor than
 manufacturing (and even trade had a growth rate equal to that of manufacturing).
 Cf. LW. Kendrick, Postwar Productivity Trends in the U.S., 1948-1969, Table 5.2
  (New York: National Bureau of Economic Pesearch, 1973). For an adverse conclusion
 on    the extent to which differential trends in
                                               productivity explain relative mo'e-
 ments in exchange—rate—convert price levels, see L.H. Officer, "The Productivity
 Bias in Purchasing Power Parity: An Econometric Investigation," IMP Staff
 November 1976.                                                            Papers,
                                                —53—


                                             Table   8
                    Measures of Nontradables/Tradables Relative Price Changes


Ustra1ia                                                 1970/52 1970/60 1973/60 1973/70 1973/52

    Wholesale price index/import price index             l42-"    l05"
    Goods produced at home/goods principally imported l68-'       l09'
''orway

    Price   index for total consuxnption/export price    l66"     133"
                                            index
    Price index for total consumption/import price       159—    136—
                                            index

;erny                                                -
    Wholesale price index/export price index                      95      97      102
    Wholesale price index/import price index                     107     109      101
    Implicit deflators: services/commodities/            132     115     130      112     149
nited Kingdom
    Implicit   deflators: services/cornmodities/         137     .132    130       99     135

Tnited States

    Implicit deflators: services/commcdjtjes/            126     115     114       99     125




    1968/50
    1968/60
•   1969/49
•   1969/60
•   "Services" include the whole of GDP except the commodity producing sectors
    --
       agriculture, mining, construction and manufacturing.
                                         —54—



     Whatever the reasons, the secular tendency for the nontradables/tradables price

ratio to rise is evident in Table 8 for all five of the advanced countries for whih

we have been able to get some indication of this relationship over time.

 There is some evidence in favor of the hypothesis that the nontradables/tradables

price ratio rises as a result of an appreciation and falls as a result of a
                          -
 depreciation.

     As one means   of   examining the behavior of this ratio in connection with the

balance of payments, we may turn back to Table 7 where we included wholesale price

 indexes with this purpose in mind. Since wholesale price indexes are more narrowly

 focussed on tradable goods than the GDP deflators, we should be able to infer the

behavior of the nontradables/tradables price ratio from the relative movements of

the GDP deflators and the wholesale price indexes.

     After the appreciations, therise in the implicit deflators is larger in 4 out of

5 cases than the rise in the wholesale price indexes (compare in Part A columns

4 and 8, 5 and 9, and 6 and 10). The implication is that the nontradable-tradable

ratio rose, but since movements in this direction may be presumed to be the trend

we cannot be sure that it was the appreciation that produced this result. In a few

cases, the differences are large enough and the period brief enough (in the 1950-52

Canadian appreciation, for example) to hazard the inference that the appreciation was

resronsible but in other cases the difference was only a few percentage points and

such a view is not warranted.

    After the depreciations the decline in the implicit deflators is greater, again

in 4 out of 5 cases, than the decline in the wholesale prices. In these in-

stances the nontradables/tradables price ratio fell despite its underlying upward

trend.

     The data thus give a substantial measure of support to the expectations of

relative price changes following depreciations, and appear to be consistent with
                                         —55--




expectations about price changes following appreciations. Conformance in this

case may be more safely attributable to the exchange rate changes themselves

than in the case of the movements of the overall price levels considered in the

earlier discussion of Table 7.

     Another approach to the examination of the effect of exchange rate changes

on the nontradable/tradable price ratio is to concentrate on the period 1970-73,

when there were large changes in exchange rates. It is not implausible to believe

that within so short a period the effects of these exchange rate changes upon

price structure dominated the effects of different growth rates. When eight

countries for which sector implicit deflators were readily available are arrayed

as in Table 9 in order of diminishing appreciation of their currencies relative

to the U.S. dollar, there is a clear tendency for the relative prices of services

(nontradables) to rise the most in countries that appreciated most. The table

uses implicit deflators for various sectors to form two frteasures of service/

nonservice (nontradable/tradable) prices: (a) the ratio of the deflator for com-

munity services (i.e., health, education, etc. but not trade or public administra-

tion) to the deflator for manufacturing (column 6); and (b) the ratio of the

deflator for all services (i.e., noncottunodity sectors) to the deflator for the
                                           *
commodity producing sectors (column 9).          Germany and Belgium, with the largest

appreciations, had the largest increases in relative prices of services (non—

tradables) by either measure. On the other hand, the relative price movements

in the other 6 countries do not fall so neatly in line.


In the one case in which we have both an exchange rate change and genuine measures

of export and   import   prices, Germany, the ortimodity term3   of   trade have moved as

expected by the elasticity approach.



Agriculture, mining, manufacturing and         construction.
                                                                Table         9

                                             Changes in Exchange Rates and Implicit Deflators
                                       for Selected Economic Sectors, 8 Countries, 1970—73




                                                                                  1973/1970

                                                                                        Implicit Deflators
                   Exchange
                     rate          Community      Construction Agriculture            Manufac—     Services!     All        All      Services/
                     FC/$          Services                        &   Mining          turing     Manufact.    Services   Commodities Commodities
                      (1)              (2)            (3)               (4)             (5)      (2)(5)=(6)      (7)         (8)     (7)(8)=(9)

Germany              .726             110             101                98              94             1.17     107          95        1.13

Belgium              .782             104             106    102        102              92             1.13     104          95        1.09

Denmark              .804             102             101               110              94             1.09      98          98        1.00

Sweden               .841              96              93                93             101             0.95      99         101        0.98

Italy                .930             100             103               110              96             1.04     101         100        1.01

Canada               .958             103             103               119              96             1.07      99         102        0.97

U.K.                 .976              98             119               108              98             1.00     101         102        0.99

U.S.               1.000               101            107               134              94             1.07     101         102        0.99



         Sectoral deflators for each country have been normalized by dividing by the implicit deflator for total GDP.

         Based   on data    in the U.N. Yearbook of National Account Statistics,                1974.
                                                                                       F


                                       —'57.-




     The terms of trade of Germany, the ratio of the export price index to the

import price index, are shown for the period 1960—73 in Table 10.    The major move-

ments of the terms of trade were associated with the 1960—62 appreciation and with

the continuous appreciation of the mark beginning in 1969. In both episodes the

terms of trade increase, as anticipated by the standard theory. The fall in the

terms of trade in 1973 when the exchange rate appreciated further, which was

untoward, may reflect the rise in oil prices.


                                                            *
                  E.   The Behavior of Tradable Goods Prices


     It is almost always assumed that whatever may be true about the prices of

home goods, the prices for internationally traded commodities must be identical

in different markets. We have already shown that in fact the prices of tradables

vaiy substantially in countries with different per capita incomes. Here we

investigate the application of the law of one price to exports originating in

different countries of comparable stages of development and to goods originating

in a single country but sold both at home and abroad.


There are reasons for believing that there may be substantial deviations from the

law of one price even for traded goods.

     For the prices of internationally traded goods to be identical in different

markets   transport costs must be zero or egual for each given product from all
origins to each destination, or each traded good must have only one source of
supply.    If these conditions are not met, there must be some differences in prices

of internationally traded goods either at each destination for goods with different

origins or at the various points of origin for goods with a single destination.


 Some materials in this section have been taken from 'Export Prices and Exchange
 Rates," a paper prepared for the U.S. Department of State by Irving B. Kravis,
 Robert E. Lipsey and Eliot Kalter.
p                                                      —58-


                                                      Table 10

                             German Exchange Rate and Price Indexes, 1960—73


                                                                         Price Indexes
                 Exchange    Implicit        Producers
                rate index   deflator       price index       Exports          Imports       Exports/Imports
                    DM1 $
                                 (2)            (3)                (4)           (5)               (6)
                     (1)
    1960            114.4       71.7           91.6              87.3           98.2              88.9

       1            110.2       741            92.1              87.0           94.3              92.3

       2            109.7       77.2           93.9              87.1           93.5              93.2

       3            109.4       79.6           94.4              87.2           95.4              91.4
       4            109.0       81.8           95.4               89.3          97.0              92.1


    1965            109.6       84.7           97.6               91.3          99.4              91.9

       6            109.7       87.7           99.3               93.3         101.2              92.2

       7            109.4       88.8           98.5               93.2          99.0              94.1

       8            109.5       90.1           93.2               92.2          98.6              93.5
                                        .
       9            107.6       93.4           95.3               97.0         101.0               96.0


    1970            100.0      100.0          100.0              100.0         100.0             100.0

       1            95.4       107.8          104.3              103.4         100.4             103.0

       2            87.5       114.2          107.0              105.5          99.8             105.7

       3            72.6       121.0          114.1              112.3         112.6              99.7



    Following 3.7% appreciation in 1960—61:
             *
    1964/1960                  115.0          104.1              102.3           98.8            103.6
             **
    1966/1960                  123.3           108.4             106.9         103.1     •
                                                                                                 103.7


    Following 9.4% appreciation in 1968—70:
                *                                                121.8          114.2             106.6
    1973/1968                  134.3          122.4

    Entire period
                                170.2         124.6              128.6          114.7             112.1
    1973/1960



     Three years after end of period relative to beginning.
     Five years after end of period relative to beginning.
     Col 1: IMF annual average
     Col 7: U.N. Yearbooks of National Account Statistics
     Cols 3-6: Wirtsft und Statistik (1969—1973), Statistiches Jarbusch (1960-1969)
                                                                             1960-61 appreciation
     VThe percentages refer to the changes in yearly averages. Actually the
      in exchange was from 4.2 DM to 4.0 DM to the dollar, in March 1961.  This represents a 4.8
      percent appreciation using the formula given in the notes to Col. 2, Table 7.
                                            — 59 —

          There are, however, more weighty       reasons ——    both   static and dynamic ——   for
  expecting    departures from the law of one price. A static circumstance
 giving rise to price discrimination between destinations is that in at least some
 sectors there are oligopolistic firms facing different elasticities of demand at
 home and     in   each foreign market; profit maximizing behavior would lead such firms
 to    charge lower prices in the markets characterized by more elastic demand. The

 possibility of price differences among different exporters from the same or dif-

 ferent countries is abetted by the existence of product differentiation both in

 terms of physical characteristics relating to appearance and performance, and in

 terms    of various service elements such as before-and after-sale advice and service,
                                           *
 credit    terms and speed of delivery.        Oligopoly strategies aimed at maintaining
 a certain price position relative to rivals may produce price discrimination when
 the    constellation of rivals differs from market to market or when the exchange

 rates of different destination countries move differently with respect to the

 oligopolist's hone currency. Such behavior would be warranted if the oligopolist
                                           in a market as being
 regards    his long run   profit   utaximizatior/jeopardied by a loss of market share
 (a form of capital).
      In addition, dynamic factors associated with changes in comparative advantage
 and changing market      shares make it possible for one source of supply to be selling
 at lower prices over protracted periods of time. Selling at a low price is, after
 all, the traditional way of breaking into a market and expanding market shares.
 Shifts    in trade shares in individual product classes and broad groups of products are
 continually occurring. In the decade of the 1960s, for example, the share of Japan
 in "world" manufactured exports rose by more than        70   percent while that of the U.(.
                                                                                    **
 dropped by more than a fourth and that of the U.S. by more than a tenth.                If

 such   shifts are prolonged and frequent, disequilibrium situations in which

markets have not fully adjusted to changes in comparative advantage may be the norm

 rather than the exception. The files of the U.S. International Trade Cormnission

 (formerly the Tariff Cortmiss ion) and of like bodies in other countries are full of




*See     Kravis and Lipsey,
                        "Export Prices and the Transmission of
 Inflation," American Economic Review, February 1977 and Price
 Competitiveness in World Trade (New YOrk: National Bureau of
 Economic Research, 1971), p. 47f.

**The share comparisons are for the years 1960 and 1970; the "world"
  consists of the 14 major industrial countries. See U.S. Department
  of Commerce, International Economic Indicators and Cometitive
  Trends, June 1976, p. 57.
                                         —60—




claims that foreign sellers are undercutting domestic producers in home markets,

arid   such   claims are not infrequently accompanied by expanding foreign shares in

domestic markets.

       Lack of knowledge, uncertainty regarding the reliability of new suppliers,

the reluctance to give up a satisfactory relationship with customary suppliers

and commitments to a given type of equipment because of previous purchases or

stocks of spare parts may all explain the failureof buyers to respond immediately

to price differences. They may explain too why it may be necessary for price dif-

ferences of a substantial and/or prolonged character to exist if sellers hope to

overcome the inertia of buyers in patronizing customary sources.

        There are, therefore, reasons for believing that there will be notable

depar.tures from the uniformity of prices and also, since the causal conditions

alter through time, in the uniformity of price changes. The evidence on this

point is far from voluminous, but it tends to emerge from almost any careful set

of international price comparisons.



 Prices may differ substantially for comntetitive products exr'orted by different

 countries.

 •      Documentation of the existence of substantial differences in the exnort

 prices of different countries may be found in the previously cited National

 Bureau study by the present authors dealing with international price competitive—
                                                *
 ness for manufactured metals and metal products. While some.-             — -—



 *Kravis    and Lipsey, Price Corirnetitiveness in World Trade (New York: National
     Bureau of Economic Research, 1971). The price differences in the data cited
     are increased by the inclusion in some price comparisons of offer prices—— that
     is, the lowest prices offered by each country other than the one actually making
     the sale. These prices do not represent actual transaction prices. While we
     think they do belong in measures of international price competitiveness, we would
     exclude them for present purposes if we could. Such offer price data were most
     important in the electrical machinery category where such heavy equipment is
     customarily sold through bidding arrangements; they played but a small role in
     the price measurements for iron and steel.
                                             —61—


                                                        *
 differences     were found in all 6 of the 2—digit SITC categories included in the

 study, the largest differences were in iron and steel (SITC Division 67).

 In 1963, Japanese prices averaged 30 percent less than those of the U.S., German
                                                                   **
 prices     24 percent less and the U.K. prices 22 percent less.        Table 11 shows

 frequency distributions of price differences from the U.S. for individual 3— and

 4—digit. SITC categories falling within the iron and steel (SITC 67), non—electrical

 machinery (SITC 71) and electrical machinery (SITC 72) divisions. For iron and

 steel, the individual differences though clustered around the averages cited

 above, were as large as 43 percent for Japan in the case of iron and steel wire

 (SITC 677) and 40 percent for Germany in the cases of bars and rods (SITC 673.2)

 and tube and pipe fittings (SITC 678.5). These differences persisted more or

 less over the entire period covered by the study, 1953—64. The period was one

 in which the U.S. share in the iron and steel exports of the 21 OECD countries

 declined from 19 percent to 10 percent and that of the U.K. from 14 percent to

 9 percent, while the German share rose from 12 to 18 percent and the Japanese

 share from 5 to 14 percent. Similar, though less dramatic differences in prices

 and changes in shares were found in non—electrical machinery and electrical

machinery.         For this period, at least, notable and even substantial



     Standard International Trade Classification, Revised, Statistical Papers,
     Series , No. 34 (New York: United Nations, 1961).
**
     Relative prices of each iron and steel product in this comparison are weighted
     by the importance of each product in 1963 exports of OECD countries. The country
     composition of the OECD has varied; the statistics in the source cited refer to
     18 European countries and the U.S., Canada, and Japan.
***
   The data referred to in this and the two preceding sentences may be found in
   Kravis and Lipsey, Price Conmetitiveness in World Trade (New York: National
   Bureau of Economic Research, 1971), in Table 2.4 and Appendix Tables B—l, B—45,
      and E—l.
.-,
                                          —62—


                                         Table 11

          Frequency Distribution of Percentage Differences of Export Prices of
          U.K., Germany and Japan from U.S. Export Prices for 3- and 4-digit
                                   SITC Categories, 1963


      Percentage difference from
                                                 Number of 3- and 4-digit categories
              U.S. price                           U.K.        Germany        Japan
      67 Iron and   Steel
           —40 to —49.99                                                        2
           —30 to —39.99                              2            4            2
           —20 to —29.99                              5            5            3
           —10 to —19.99                              2            1
           -5 to -9.99...                             1
         Number of categories compared           10           10            7


      71 Machinery other than electric
           —30 to —39.99                              1
           —20 to —29.99                              5            4            2
           —10 to —19.99                              9            4
           —5 to —9.99                                5            7            1
           —0 to +4.99                                3            3            1
           +5 to +9.99                                3.           3.

           +10 to +19.99                                           3.

         Number of categories compared           27           24            4

      72 Electric   Machinery
           —30 to   —39.99                                                      3.

           —20 to   —29.99                                                      3
           —10 to   —19.99                            3            2            3
           —5 to —9.99                                             2
           —0.1 to —4.99                                           2            3.

           0   to +4.99                               1
           +5 to +9.99                                3            1
           +10 to +19.99                                           2
           +20 to +29.99                              2
         Number of categories compared           9            9             8




      N.B. In some instances overlapping 3- and 4-digit categories have both been
      included in the above frequency distributions.




      Source: Kravis and Lipsey, Price Competitiveness in World Tre (New York:
              National Bureau cf Econonic Research, 1971), Table 2.4 and Appendix E.
                                           —63—




 price   differences persisted while th low price sellers gradually expanded       their
 market shares and the high priced sellers saw their shares contract.


 The time to time movement of export prices of comparable goods from different

 countries sometimes differs substantially.
                                              *
      The dearth of data on export prices is slowly being
                                                          remedied, but long series

 of comparable export prices for two or more countries are still rare. Using a

 combination of data reoorted upon in our earlier work (1971) and official German

 and U.S. export price data, we are now able to compare German and U.S. export

prices for machinery and equipment (SITC 7) over the period 1954—75 (see Table 12).

From 1954 to 1969, when the D.M./dollar exchange rate was relatively stable

 (varying   within a 7   percent range), the annual ratios of German to U.S. export

prices, both taken in dollar terms, varied        within   a 10 percent range. Beginning
in 1969, however, the mark     began to   appreciate, and most of its rise was passed

through to German dollar export prices. The German/U.S. export price ratio was

45.5 percent higher in 1975 than in 1969; the German export price in DM increased

by 44.3 percent and the $/DM rate by 59.7 percent compared to a rise in U.S. export

prices of 58.4 percent. As this implies, there is very little similarity between

the changes in German and U.S. export prices when both are expressed in dollars.




No one should be misled about the abundance of export price indexes by the rather
irresponsible tendency of international agencies to collect unit value indexes from
different countries and to publish them under the heading of "price" indexes. The
IT has done this for years in its International Financial Statistics (see, for ex-
ample, pages 32-33 of the September 1975 issue). After representation by one of the
present authors, the relevant table in a recent issue (January 1977, pages 34-35)
uses the term "unit values" parenthetically once in a two page spread where the term
"prices" appears twice in major titles and 6 times in chart titles. A note at the
back of the issue (page 404) explains that virtually none of the series for the more
than 80 countries included is an export price or an import price series.
                                                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                    Table 12
                                                                          German   and   U.S. Domestic   and   Export    Price Indexes
                                                                            for Machinery     and Equipment (SITC 7), 1953—75


                                                                                                                                     Export/        Export/    U.S. price competitiveness
                                                                           Exchange
                                   — German prices                                                              u.s. prices         Domestic       Domestic                   From matched
                                                                             Rate           prices
                                                                                                           Domestic                  German          U.S.     From indexes    detailed data
-   Year                           Domestic Export             (DM)          $/DM          Export                          Export
                                                                                                                                          (7)        (8)          (9)             (10)
                                                                             (3)              (4)               (5)         (6)
                                     (1)                 (2)
                                                                             95.0                              85.7         85.3          NA         99.5        NA               97.7
    1953                             87.0               NA                                 : NA
                                                                             95.0            83.5              85.9         85.2         103.4       99.2        98.0             97.4
    1954                             85.0               87.9
                                     85.0               88.6                 94.8            84.0              86 • 0       85.1         104.2       99.0        98.7             99.4
    1955
                                                                                             86.0              89.5         88.0         103.9       98.3        97.7             97.6
    1956                             87.2               90.6                 94.9

                                                                                                                93.7        92.2         103.5       98.4        95.4             95.8
    1957                             89.6               92.7                 94.9            88.0
                                                                                             89.4               95.6        93.9         103.9       98.2        95.2             94.9
    1958                             90.5               94.0                 95.1
                                                                             95.4            89.8               97.9        95.9         104.7       98.0        93.6             93.2
    1959                             89.9               94.1          •                                                                                          93.7             92.7
                                                        95.4                 95.6            91.2               98.5        97.3         104.4       98.8
    1960                             91.4

                                                                             99.2            96.6               98.6        97.6         103.5       99.0        99.0             97.7        0'
    1961               .             94.1            97.4
                                                     99.2                    99.7            98.9               99.8        99.1         100.0       99.3        99.8             99.1
    1962                             99.2
                                                                                                               100.0       100.0         100.0      100.0       100.0            100.0
•   1963                            100.0           100.0                   100.0           100.0
                                                                                            101.7              101.5       101.4          99 • 7     99.9       100.3             99.0
    1964                            101.7           101.4                   100.3
             •                                                                                                                            99.6                  101.4            100.3
                                    104.8           104.4                    99.8           104.2              103.0       102.8                     99.8
    1965                                                                                                                                                                          99.2
                                                                                            106.9              106.5       104.1          99.3       97.7       102.7
    1966                            108.0           107.2                    99.7
                                                                            100.0           108.1              109.7       107.8         100.2       98.3       100.3             95.1
    1967                            107.9           108.1
                                                                                            107.6              113.3       110.6          99.8       97.6        97.3             92.0
    1968                            107.9           107.7                    99.9

                                                                                                               116 • 8     114.8         102.2       98.3        99.4             95.3
    1969                            109.8           112.2                   101.7           114.1
                                                                                            128.3              122.3       120.2          99.0       98.3       106.7            103.6
    1970                            118.5           117.3                   109.4
                                                                                                               127.4                      98.4       98.5       114.4            111.7
    1971                            127.3           125.2                   114.7           143.6                          125.5
                                                                                                               130 • 6     128.6          97.8       98.5       126.4            122.8
    1972                            133.0           130.1                   125.0           162.6

                                                    136.9                   150.5           206.0              134.4       133.5          97.9       99.3       154.3            148.0
    1973                            139.8
                                                    148.5                   154.1           228.8              150.4       154.7          96.5      102.9       147.9            143.2
    1974                            153.9
                                                                                                               175.1       181.8          97 •4     103.8       144.6             NA



           .7Extrapo1ated
           Cola. 1 52: NBER
           Col.   3:       IMF period        averages
           Col. 4: Cola. 2X3
           Cols. 5 & 6: NBER
           Col. 7: Cols. 2 1
           Cal. 8:         Cola. 6         5
           Col. 9:         Cols. 4       6
           Col. 10:         NBER    (aggrecjation   of    ratio of         German   to U.S. export price indexes at detailed levels)
                                            — 64a —                                        P


Notes to Table 12

Cols. 1 and 2: Indexes are aggregations from individual cotmnodity export and
          domestic price series. The individual price series are first put in
          the form P/P1 and then combined without weighting into indexes for
              SITC 4—digit subgroups. These 4—digit indexes are then weighted by
              1963 German exports for aggregation to higher levels. The discontinuity
              in the export price index at the time of the shift to the value—added
              tax was treated by assuming no change in price during the month of the
              shift in the tax system. The extrapolations to 1975      were based on
              combinations    of published group indexes as follows:
                      Domestic price is a weighted index of the following group indexes
                      of the "Index der Erzeugerpreise industrielle Produkte"
                           Maschinenbauerzeugniss e
                           Strassenfahrzeuge
                           Elektrotechriische Erzeugnisse
                      with weights -taken from the export price index.

                   Export price is a weighted index of the following group indexes
                   of the Index der Ausfuhrpreise"
                        Naschinenbauerzeugnisse (einschl. Lokomotiven und Ackerschlepper)
                        Strassenfahrzeuge (ohne Ackerschlepper)
                        Elektrotechriische Erzeugnisse
                   with weights of .50637, .29078, and .20286 respectively, based on
                   the weighting for the index on 1962100.


                   Price data are from the following sources, all published by Statis—
              tisches Bundesaxnt, Wiesbaden:

                   Preise, L3hne, Wirtschaftsrechnunen
                        Reihe 1, Preise und Preisiridizes fUr AussenhandelsgUter
                        Reihe 3, Preise und Preisindizes fUr industrielle Produkte,
                           Index der Erzeugerpreise
                        Reihe 8, Index der Grosshandelsverkaufspreise
                   Statistisches Jahrbuch fUr die Bundegrenublik Deutschland, 1971,
                        pp. 431, 432, 449; 1967, pp. 445, 446, 463.
                   Wirtschaft und Statistik , Nov. 1976.

Col.    3:   Annual average exchange rates, IMP.

Col.    4:   Col. 2   x Cal. 3.
Cols.    5 and  6: Domestic price data are BLS wholesale price indexes for specific
              commodities aggregated without weighting into 4—digit SITC classes.
              Export price data are BLS export price indexes for 4—digit SITC subgroups
              and 5—digit SITC items, extended back to 1953, where possible, by
              indexes from Irving B. Kravis and Robert. E. Lipsey, Price Comnetitiveness
              in World Trade, NBER, 1971, with interpolations for 1954—56 and 1958—60
             as described for Germany in Kravis and Lipsey, "International Trade
             Prices and Price Proxies," in The Role of the Cornnuter in Economic and
             Social Research in Latin America, NBER, .1974. The number of export
                                        — 64b —



             series ranges from 8 in 1953 to 22.in 1975 and only those domestic
             price series falling within the groups covered by the export price
             series are included in the domestic price index. We are indebted to
             Eliot Kalter for the selection and matching of export and domestic
             price data.

                  In calculating the 3—digit export and domestic price indexes, each
             4—digit subgroup was given its weight in U.S. exports in 1963. Each
             3—digit group was given its weight in U.S. exports in aggregating to
             2—digit classes except when the coverage of 4—digit subgroups was less
             than 40 per cent of the value of exports in the 3—digit group, in which
             case only the weight of the covered 4—digit subgroups was used. The
             same procedure was followed in aggregating from the 2—digit to the
             1—digit level (SITC 7 as a whole).

                  Two 4—digit export price indexes available in the original sources
             were omitted in this calculation, and the corresponding domestic price
             series were therefore also dropped. One was the BLS series for SITC
             729.3 and the other was the NBER series for 722.1. In the case of
             SITC 729.3 the BLS export price index is dominated by semiconductors
             while the wholesale price index is heavily weighted with television
             tubes. Therefore the two were considered to be not comparable. In
             the case of SITC 722.1, from 1953 to 1964, the NBER "international
             price index" is constructed from domestic transactions prices while the
             BLS domestic price index is apparently based on list prices, which
             differed greatly (see Kravis and Lipsey, Price Conmetitiveness,
             pp. 408—421). Thus the relationship between them is mainly that of
             transactions prices to list prices rather than of export to domestic
             prices.

Col.7: Col. 2 + Col. 1.

Col. 8: Col.     6 ÷ Col.    5.

Col., 9: Col. 4       Col.   6.

Col.   10:   Each German export price index in dollars at the 4—digit level is
             divided by the corresponding U.S. export price index and the
                                                                          resulting
             relative price indexes are aggregated up to 3—digit, 2—digit, and
             1—digit levels using as weights total OECD exports in 1963.
                                         —65—




     In   Table 13 the results of a comparison for 9 detailed (4—digit SITC)

component categories of SITC are presented. Because the categories for which
export price series are published in the official German and U.S. sources are

not always the same, these were the only components for which we were able to

match German and U.S. export price series quite closely over long periods

(10 to 21 years). The correlations between percentage changes in German and

U.S. export prices are low, and in only three subgroups (tractors, heating and

cooling equipment, and powered tools) is the slope coeffidient significant at

the 5% level or better. The ratio of the index of German export prices to the

index of U.S. export prices drifted far from 100 (see columns 3—6).

     The differences in prices in dollar terms, relative to 1970, were large in

the period preceding 1970 (see columns 8 and 9) but they became even larger

subsequently when the mark began to appreciate sharply. In 1974, German export

prices for the 9 categories ranged from 21 to 58 percent higher relative to

U.S. export prices than they had been in 1970. If this was an effect of the DM

appreciation,   it was not a fleeting one. Most of the 41 percent increase in

the dollar price of the mark that occurred between 1970 and 1974 had taken place

by 1973; between .1973   and 1974, the increase was only 2 percent.
     A question that arises for these and other comparisons of different price

series concerns the extent to which two series differ because (a) the prices of

identical products moved differently in different origins (or destinations) or

(b) the two   series,   though bearing the same descriptive title, are actually composed
                                                                  Table   13

                  Characteristics of U.S. Indexes of Price Competitiveness Relative to Germany,# 1954-1974


                                                                Entire period                                        1954-70
                                                   Number of annual indexes**
    SITC Category
                                                           Differing from 100        Highest   Lowest               Highest    Lowest
Code          Description                          Total                                                  —2
                                                              by more than.           index    index      r          index     index
                                                            5%           10%
                                         (1)        (2)     (3)                (4)     (5)      (6)      (7)          (8)       (9)

711.5        Internal Combusion
             Engines (exc. aircraft)     .09         21     20                 17      143       82      .08          100       82
712.5        Tractors (exc. road
             tractors for trac/                *                                                                *
             trail comb.)                .39         21       5                  2     129       96      .23          107       •96
715.1        Machine tools for
             working metals              .004        18     17                 16      143      70       .07         100        70
                                                                                                                                        0s
717.1        Textile machinery          —.03         10       9                 4      143      86                                      0'

719.1        Heating & cooling                 *
             equipment                   .20         21     20                 12      143      85       .08         100        85
719.2        Pumps & centrifuges         .01         21     20                 17      161      74      — .07        100        74
                                               *
719.5        Powered tools, n.e.s.       .29         10       9                  9     163      76
719.8        Machinery & mechanical
             appliances, n.e.s.         —.14         10       9                 6     148       88
722.1        Electric power machinery    .04         21     18                 14     132       51       .06         105        51


        #Index    of German export prices (in dollars) divided by index of U.S. export prices, both indexes with a
            1970 base, times 100. All columns refer to this index of price competitiveness, except columns 1 and 7
            which refer to correlations between German and U.S. export price indexes.
        *
            Slope coefficient significant   (in    one—tail test) at 5% level.
                                                                                                               Economic
        Source:     Kravis and Lipsey, Price Competitiveness in World Trade (New York: National Bureau of
                                                                                              American Economic Revfew,
                    Research, 1971) and "Export Prices and the Transmission of Inflation,
                                                                           releases on  1T..  export and tnrnort price
                    February 1977; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, press                    data
                                                                   issues.   For source  of       on last row, see note
                    indexes; and Wirtscbaft und Statistik, various
                    on page 69.
                                            —67—



of different sets of goods.        Recent work at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

throws some light on this question. Suomela and Perez-Lopex of the BLS staff drew

upon the export price series for individual commodities to match

the commodity composition of a selected number of categories for which German
                                        *
export   price series were available.        By weighting the U.S. individual series with

the German export weights, they produced more closely matching U.S. and German

export price series than previously available. Their results, presented as annual

 indexes of price competitiveness by taking the ratio of the German to the U.S.
                                   **
series, are reproduced in Table 14. Since the German and U.S. domestic price
movements for machinery generally (SITC 7) were very similar (see columns 1 and

5 of Table 12, the exchange rate changes are once again seen to dominate the large

shifts in relative German/U.S. export prices.)




   John W. Suomela and Jorge F. Perez—Lopez, "Measuring Changes in U.S. Price
   Competitiveness," presented at the Atlantic Economic Conference, Washington,
   D.C., September 12—13, 1975 (processed). U.S. series were apparently selected
   to represent each "subcategory" included in the category. The subcategories
   were defined in terms of 7—digit U.S. Schedule B or 6—digit Brussels Tariff
   Nomenclature (BTN) classes. The categories thentselves are approximately 4—
   digit BTN classes.
 It
**
      is reassuring to note that Suomela and Perez—Lopez, who based these relative
   changes on especially matched U.S. and German price series, obtain results
   which compare closely to the relative price changes based on the less perfectly
   matched published series. This is the case, at least, for the three categories
   (out of the six they used) for which we canfind roughly comparable published
   German and US, series:
            Indexes of U.S. Price Competitiveness Relative to Germany
                                                                  1969/65     1973/69
A. Internal combustion engines                                     101.8       167.6
B. Internal combustion engines other than aircraft (711.5)         103.3       166.6
A. Machine tools for working metals                                 95.9       174.6
B. Machine tools for working metals (715.1)                         99.4       179.0

A. Pumps and compressors                                            92.4       177.2
B. Pumps and centrifuges (719.2)                                    95.9       181.1
      Line A: from Suomela and Perez—Lopez
      Line B: from ppblished German and U.S. sources (SITC ategorj5
                                                                             in parentheses).
                                                                      Table 14
                                           Indexes   of U.S. Price Competitiveness Relative to Germany*
                                                          Selected Categories, June 1964—73

                                                                   (June 1967=100)



                                      Category
                                                                      1964    1965    1966    1967
                                                                                                     JUNE 1968    1969    1970    1971    19/2    1973
1.   Interta1 combustion engine               —                       96.7    97.2   100.3   100.0        98.5    98.4   107.5   113.2   128.2   164.9
2.   Agricultural machiner                                           103.9   104.3   102.0   100.0    107.0      106.3   114.8   132.2   147.7   190.0
3.   Machl:te   tools   for working metals                           101.5   100.9   100.5   100.0        94.1    97.3   114.9   127.5   137.9   169.9
     3a.   Zeta1 cutting machinery                                   103.8   102.1   101.6   100.0        94.2    98.4   114.5   128.5   141.9   174.7
     3b.   Metal working machinery                                   97.8     97.9    97.8   100.0        93.7    95.2   116.1   125.2   128.9   159.5
4.   F.arrhiovfng equipment                                       —102.9     103.4    99.9   100.0   103.5       105.7   111.7   128.2   131.1   159.9
5.   Mining equipment                                               102.4    101.5   100.3   100.0   100.5       100.3   109.8   115.0   127.2   153.6
6.   Furps and compressors                                          102.9    101.6   101.3   100.0    96.3        95.1   109.0   116.5   136.4   168.5   03
Exchange        rate    (index   of    U.S.   cents per   D.M.)    100.2     99.5    99.4 100.0      99.6 .99.5          109.6   114.4 125.6 154.4


     *
         Ratio of German export price indexes to U.S. export price indexes.                          (A    rise in the ratio
         betokens an increase in U.S. price competitiveness.)




     Source:      John W. Suomela and Jorge F. Perez—Lopez, "Measuring Changes in U.S. Price Competitiveness,"
                  Bureau of Labor Statistics, September 1975.
                                     —68a-




     The results from these closely matched price series confirm our earlier

findings that substantial relative price changes can and sometimes do occur.

From 1964 to 1967 relatively small differences are found in the index of price

competitiveness but between 1967 and 1968 half of the series reveal shifts of 5

percent or more and beginning in 1969, when exchange rates began to change sub-

stantially, year to year changes are common. Furthermore, the relative price

changes did not cancel out over time. From 1964 through 1969 they ranged up to

7.6 percent and all but one were over 2 percent.

     When exchange rates were moving rapidly, between 1969 and 1973, the relative

price movements were far greater, up to 29 percent in a year and cuiiulatin to

over 60 percent in most cases.
"p

                                                    —69—




     In the period .of stable exchange rates, prior to- 1970, the largest divergences

     from unity in the indexes of-price competitivenesswere 6 or 7 percent. For example,
     between 1967 and 1968 G)
     ,i1tuii              machinery   export prices rose by 7 percent relative to those of the U.S.).
             Of course, it is still possible that the individual product varieties differ

     between German and U.S. exports even after the improved matching by Suornela and

     Perez—Lopez. Our own view is that the comparisons are be€ween like products

     which are in competition with one another but that for reasons given earlier

     market arbitrage does not necessarily operate to prevent very           substantial   dif-

     ferences in export price movements between major competing countries. However,

     as we argued in an earlier section, any claim that substitutability between the

     exports of the advanced countries is high can hardly be maintained without ex-

     pecting that it will be high within such narrow product groups as are found in

     the previous text table. Whether the series we have cited are regarded as com-

     paring German and U.S. export prices for identical or for different products,

     they constitute strong evidence against the price assumptions of the monetary
                    *
     approach.


     *
         Attention may be called to an effort to compare export trends for all coimnodities
         which is not treated in the text because U.S. export prices had to be supplemented
         by wholesale price data. The quarterly indexes in the original source have been
         averaged to produce the following annual indexes of price competitiveness (ratios
         of export price indexes):
                                  U.S. with respect to           Germany with respect to
                                                                     -

                                  Germany        Japan                    Japan
             1970                     100           100                    100
             1973                     112           101                     90
             1974                     109           103                     95
             1975                     113            93                     83

         The data do not support the proposition that the price movements of different
         countries, especially of major competitors, must be the same. German competitive-
         ness fell with respect to both the U.S. and Japan, by 12 percent in 1975 compared
         with 1970 in the first case and 17 percent in the second:
         Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "The Measurement of Export Price Trends
                  from the Industrial Countries to OPEC," January 1976, (revised and up-
                  dated May 1976). A background paper prepared by the Bureau of Labor
                        Statistics for the
                                     meeting of experts on measuring OECD export prices
                  to OPEC, OECD, Paris, February. 5-6, 1976.
                                                                                            I
                                          —70—



 A given seller may charge different prices for a given product to different

 destinations.

          There is also persistent evidence that price discrimination by sellers to

 different markets is quite common in international trade. References to such

 discrimination      are continually appearing in the business and financial press, and
                                                                             *
 occasionally      there is an official finding of discriminatory pricing.

          Although we did not solicit information about domestic pricing policies in

 the National Bureau study referred to above, about half of the 121 U.S. sellers

 that    gave us   price information, nevertheless indicated what their pricing policies
                                                                                           **
were.      Of these, about half stated that their foreign and domestic prices differed.

The information obtained from these and other sellers and buyers, including some from

 abroad, suggested that price differentiation between various markets was more

widely. practiced by European suppliers than by U.S. firms and still more by

Japanese exporters.

         More systematic evidence about the existence of price discrimination for

traded goods may be obtained by comparing the German and U.S. export price series

with their corresponding wholesale price series.

        For machinery and transport equipment (SITC 7) as a whole we may compare the

German and U.S. export indexes set out earlier (Table 12) with domestic (wholesale)

price indexes constructed by combining the individual wholesale price series to an

 aggregate index with the aid of each country's export weights. Thus the effect of



     For example, it was recently reported that the Common Market fined a glass producer
     for selling insulating fiber glass in Germany at a price 40 percent higher than
     that charged in the Benelux countries and another firm for maintaining music record
     prices in Germany 50 percent higher than in France. It was also reported that a
     fruit company was selling bananas in rich Common Market countries at twice the price
     charged in poorer ones. New York Times, 17 January 1976.
**
     Differences in attributable to higher packaging expenses for preparing goods for
     overseas shipment were not counted as price differences.
.,   --V



                                                            —71—



           different goods composition in exports and in domestic sales has been sharply

           reduced, and the remaining (within 4-digit SITC category) room for compositional

           differences is subject to our remarks in the previous section about the implications

           of the existence or non—existence of substitutability of different bundles of goods

           falling within a. detailed (4—digit) category.

                  The range of variation in the export/domestic price ratio was 6.4 percent for

           the U.S. (see column 8fdTable percent
                                       nf2:))
                                                             of Germany (see column 7). Are         these   ranges

           of variation sufficiently small so that we may judge export and domestic prices to

           move identically? One way of answering this question that has often been followed is

           to regress one price series against the other and to demand for a judgment in favor

           of identity not only an r2 that is equal or close to ].               but   also a constant term that

           is insignificant]..y different from zero and a slope coefficient that is insignificantly

           different from one. The two sets of series do not pass these tests unequivocally.

           The      for the annual percentage changes in the U.S. wholesale price index and the

           percentage changes in the U.S. export price index is 0.95 and the                     for the correspon
                                  *
           ing German pair is 0.80 The latter is significantly different from 1 at the 5%
           level. Both the U.S. and German equations               satisfy the condition

           *
            The   equations, with t—values in parentheses, are:
                       = —.2432 + 1.1398 p                             —2
                                                                            =
                                               USD
                         (.08)      (20.1)                             D.W.= 2.10
                                                                       —2
                  USD = +.3620 + 0.8379 p                                  =
                         (1.5)   (20.1)                                D.W.=    2. I
                          = +.461l + 0.7662                            -2        80
                  GX(DM)                             (DM)
                            (1.2)      (8.9)                           D.W.— 2.13
                                                                       —2
                  GD(DM) = +.148]. + 1.0536 P                               = .80
                                                 GX(DN)
                            (0.3)      (8.9)                           D.W.= 2.43



           where the subscript G refers to Germany, US to the U.S., D to domestic (wholesale)
           prices, X to export prices, DN to deutschernarks, and $ to U.S. dollars.
                                      —72—



that the constant terra be insignificantly different from zero. However, the

slope coefficients in the U.S. equations are significantly different from one

(at the 5% level) and the same is true for Germany when export prices are taken

as the dependent variable though not in the opposite case.

     It is in any case questionable whether reliance should be placed on a

statistical test. The differences may not be large enough to be picked up by

a statistical test yet be economically important. Although variations of less

than 10 percent in the export/domestic price ratio over a 20 year period may

appear to be quite modest, when account is taken of profit/sales ratios ——

which for U.S. corporations producing SITC 7 products were around 4 percent

i 1970 —— such swings imply large shifts in the profitability of exports and

domestic sales. As we have pointed out elsewhere, both U.S. and German data

provide evidence of associated changes in exports relative to domestic shipments

(Kravis and Lipsey, 1977).   -
                                        -72 a-




        At a less aggregated leve], evidence about the existence of price discrimina-

tion between domestic arid export sales of traded goods may be obtained from corn-
                                                                         *
parisons     between export and domestic price series   an earlier paper in which

we compared changes in export prices for four countries (Germany, Japan, U.K.

and U.S.) with those in domestic prices over the one- and four—year spans calculated

in the Price Competitiveness book. It was found that in more than two-thirds of the

cases the difference between export and domestic price changes was 4½ percentage

points ox more, far from identical changes. The correlation between the two price

movements was also fairly low —— below .50 —— and it was low for each of the four

countries, each time period, and each SITC division included.

        For the U.S., we can now report on the results of a very detailed matching

of annual export and domestic price data for the period 1968-76 carried out in

the Bureau of Labor Statistics by Eliot Kalter. Sixteen 4- and 5-digit SITC

categories were included; all were within the SITC machinery divisions, 12 of

them in machinery other than electri (SITC 71) and the other 4 in electrical

machinery (SITC 72). The basic materials consisted of wholesale price series at

the 8-digit level in the classification used for the wholesale price index and of

unpublished export price series for 7-digit Schedule B categories. Within each 4-

digit category a wholesale price index was calculated as an unweighted average of

the 8-digit series assigned to that classification and an

export price index was correspondingly computed as an unweighted


*
    Irving B. Kravis and Robert E. Lipsey, "International Trade Prices and Price
    Proxies," in Nancy ID. Ruggles, Ed., The Role of-the Computer in Economic and
    Social Research in Latin america, NBER, 1974.
                                     —72b—



average of the indexes of the 7-digit categories that fell within the scope of the
                   *
4-digit   group.

     The index numbers were expressed as year to year price relatives (the index

for a given year being divided by the index for the previous year) and it was in

this form, yielding eight observations, that the export price series and wholesale

price series for each of 16 4— or 5-digit SITC categories were correlated.

     The coefficients of determination do not suggest identity between domestic

and export price changes: 12 of the 16 are .75 or below.   (See Table 15.) The

ratio of the export price index to the wholesale price index strayed over a

20 percent range or greater during the nine year period in over half the cate-

gories. Variations greater than 30 percent were found in many cases and the lowest

range was 7 percent.




     Kalter's careful matching of U.S. wholesale and export price series on a

detailed basis covers only a relatively short span of years. A less perfect set

f 10 matches, 9 of them among those studied by Kalter, extends over periods of 17


 Only 8—digit wholesale price series and 7-digit export price series which could
 be matched were included; wholesale price series for which matching export price
 series were unavailable were excluded even though the series belonged within the
 4- or 5-digit category and the same restriction was imposed on the export price
 series. This requirement produces more comparable wholesale arid export price indexes
 at the 4- and 5-digit level even though the measure of the movement of each type
 of price is probably less reliable than that which would be produced by the in-
 clusion of all of each type of series in the derivation of the 4— or 5—digit
 averages regardless of the ability to match. Kalter also tried restricting the
 4- and 5—digit price indexes to those 8—digit wholesale price categories and 7—
 digit export price categories for which data were available in every year during
 the period 1967—76. This eliminated a large number of the 8—digit wholesale price
 series and of the 7-digit export price series and thus tended to produce erratic
 results sometimes based on only one matched series, whereas there were usually
 from 5 to 12 series if series were included even if they were not available for
 every single year.
                                                            Table 15
               Comparisons of Year—to—Year Changes In U.S. Wholesale
                                                                     and Export Price Indexes
                                 for Selected Detailed
                                                       Categories, 1968—76
                                                  Number of years in which
    srxc Cateaory                                ratio of wholesale to export
Code        Description                                                         Ratio of wholesale to exoort price index
                                            —2   price L-dex differOd from
                                            r.   unity by umre than                                          Range
                                                                                Highest       Lowest   ,.
                                                     5%               10%        Ratio        Ratio    percen.tage points
                                           Cl)      (2)               (3)         (4)     .    (5)             (6)
711.5       Internal cotthustion
            engines (cxc. aircraft)        .89       0                 0         1.04          .96               8
712.1       Agricultural machinery
            for cultivating soil           .75       3                0          1.19          .95             24
712.2       Agricultural machinery
            for harvest, threshing,
            sorting                        .65       7                6          1.b9          .82             27
712.5       Tractors (cxc. road)           .64       3                0          1.08           93             15
715.1       MachIne tools for working
            metals                         .91       3                0          1.06          .97              9
718.2       Printing     & Eookbinding
            machinery                     —.01      7                 6          1.09          .82             27
718.42      Eccavating, levelling,
            boring,     etc.
                         rnachinery        .95      2                 0          1.02          .94              8
719.1       .ffeating     cooL.r.g                                                                                          I,,
            equipent           .           .50      7                 6          1.26          .93             33
719.2       Pus    &                       .50      8
                        centr±fges                                    8          1.51          .84             67
719.32 Fork lift trucks                    .67      7                                          .92             39
719.5  powered tools, n.a.s.               .50      3                 0          1.03          .91.            12
719.')2Taps, cocks, valves                .91.      4                 3          1.02          .81.            21
722.1       Electric Power
            machinery                     .75       6                 6          1.22          .81             41.
722.2       Electrical apparatus
            for making, hreahing
            elec. circuits                .60       4                 3          1.34          .93             41
725.0       toestic electrical
            equipnent                     .56       0                 0          1.03         .96               7
729.52      Other electrical                                                      -



            measuring &    co:ttrolling
            Instrunents &       aaratus   .30       6                 0          1.09         .94              15



  Sourcet     Eliot I(alter
                                         —74—



to 22 years ending in 1974. They are based on NBER indexes up to 1964 and on pub-

lished BLS indexes for the subsequent years.

     The results, presented in Table 16, are broadly consistent with the findings

based on the more detailed matchings. We would expect these data to show a weaker

relationship between wholesale and export prices both because the matchings are

crude and because they extend far past the period of sharp inflation when the

strong upward movements of most prices tended to increase the correlations. Con-

trary to our expectations, they show a stronger relationship and somewhat smaller

deviations of one from the other for the indexes that cover the post—1970 period:

                                                          2
                                                Average       Average range of ratio
                                                               (percentage points)
     Detailed corirnodities (Table 15)              .63                25

     4-digit subgroups (Table 16)
        All available years                         .72                20
        1953—1970                                   .39                11


The data that cover only the earlier period of more stable prices and exchange rates

show smaller deviations but also a much weaker relationship between the two. Thus,

whatever the period and no matter how carefully the export price series are matched

with the domestic price series, as far as we can go in that direction, export prices

and domestic prices do not generally reveal identical movements; although they

resemble each other, there are sometimes large discrepancies in year—to—year changes.

Furthermore, moving toward refinement of the comparisons does not appear to reduce

the discrepancies between the two types of prices.

     For the matching of German export and domestic price series for 4-digit SITC

categories, we had to rely on published export and wholesale price data. The 69

matches, which cover the whole range of manufactures, are too numerous to present

in detail and we merely summarize their behavior in Table 17. About 40 of the

series begin in the mid 1950's and the others in the early 1960's; the terminal

year is usually 1974 but in about a third of the cases it is a year or two earlier.
        6                                                            Table 16                                                      'I")
                     Comparisons of Year—to—Year Changes in U.S. Wholesale and Export Price Indexes
                                          for Selected 4—Digit SITC Categories


                                                 195374 or           MaxImum    Period Available                                     -_______
                                                       Number   of years          Ratio of 4holesa1e to           Ratio of wholesale to
                                                                                   export price index              export price index _______
                                                          difference                               Range                           Range
         SITC Category                                    in   more than*                     (percentage                        (percentage
                                        —2                                                                  —2
Code            Description              r    Total            57.     10%       High   Low     points)     r       high   Low    points)
                                        (1)    (2)             (3)     (4)        (5)   (6)         (7)     (8)      (9) (10)        (11)
711.5   Internal Combusion
        Engines (cxc. aircraft)         .86     23              0      .0        1.05   .97           8     .41     1.05   .97         8

712.1   Agricultural Machinery
        & appi. for cultivating         .74     23    .          2       1       1.19   .95          24     .38 1.04       .98         6

712.2   Agricultural. Machinery
        & appi. for harvest,
        thresh, sorting:                .69     23               9       3       1.10   .87          23     .15     1.10   .99       11

712.5   Tractors (cxc. road
        tractors for tractor/
        trailer combinations            .76     23              4        3       1.17   .95          22     .32 1.00       .95         5

715.1   Machine tools     for
        working metals                  .82    19                2       0       1.01   .94           7     .34 1.01       .95         6

719.1   Heating & cooling
        equipment                       .90     23               8       0       1.08   .95           9     .64 1.08       .99         9

719.2   Pumps   &   centrifuges         .86     23             18        5       1.17   .88          29     .65 1.17 1.00            17

722.2   Elec. apparatus for
        making,, breaking       cii?.   .64     19             14       10       1.33 1.00          33      .12 1.24 1.00            24

724.1   TV receivers                    .14     23             16        3       1.02    84         18      .20 1.02       .91       11

725.0   Domestic electrical
        equipment                       .82     24             14        9       1.07   .85          22     .44 1.00       .85       15


*Number of years in which the ratio of the export to the wholesale price index differed from unity by more than
                                                          Table 17

                              Summary of Comparisons of German Export and Domestic Prices
                                              for 69 4-digit SITC Categories

                                              Slope coefficient               -2                High/low ratio of
                                   No. of       8ignificant                   r             export to domestic index
                                 Categories     at .05 level         <.50   .50—.74   .75   <1.25   1.25—1.49


5   Chemicals                        3                1                2       1       0      2         1       0

6   Manufactures classified
    by material                     30               23              18      10        2     14        13       3

7   Machinery and transport
    equipment                       24               19               11     12        1     20         3       1

8   Miscellaneous manufactures      12                6                9       2       1      6         5       1
                                                                                                                       -.4
                                                                                                                       0\
           Total                    69               49              40       25       4     42        22       5
                                               — 77   —




        The correlations of year—to—year percentage changes in extort and domestic

prices were not often high. In only four of the matches was r2 over .75 and in

well over half of the comparisons it was under .50. The three columns on the

right of Table 17 show that the ratio of the wholesale to the export price index

often varied substantially. As previously noted, even a high correlation does

not preclude what may be economically significant variations between the two

indexes. For example, for worked copper and its alloys (SITC 682.2), which had

the highest r2 (.91), the ratio of the export to the domestic price index deviated

from 1.00 by as much as 24 percent in the thirteen year period for which the two

series could be matched.

        If attention is confined to the period terminating in 1970, the case for

identical movements of German domestic and export prices is still weaker. In

the   49 categories for which     at least ten year—to—year price changes were available

only    6 x2s were as high as . 50.
        Thus   it seems fairly clear from the data presented in this section that for
Germany, as for the United States, export         price   movements can and do differ sub-
stantially from domestic price movements for the same or similar commodities.


                                        Summary and Conclusions

        The   view of price   behavior that emerges from this survey does not    correspond
precisely to either of the two major paradigms about prices, the one set o.it by the
standard theory and the other by the monetary approach to the balance of payments.
        Partly because the specifications for price behavior of the monetary approach
are more demanding, the       picture   we have painted is more at variance with the
expectations    of   that approach. Using a GDP framework for measurement, we find that
price   levels differ sLgnificantly among countries and even price level movements

for industrial countries sometimes differ substantially over both short (3 to 10
                                             —78—



years) and long (20 years) periods of time. There also can be and sometimes are

substantial differences between the export prices of one country and those of others

for the same goods. Export prices for like goods from different countries often

change substantially relative to each other and for a given country ezport ar.d

domestic prices for the same kinds of goods differ and do not necessarily change

identically from year to year.

        Price   level movements following exchange rate changes did on the other hand
tend to conform    the expectations of the elasticity aproich, rising with appre-
                    to

ciations and falling with depreciations. In the one case in which terms of trade
could   be associated with     exchange iate changes (Germany),'the terms   of trade

improved with appreciations. The monetary approach tends to deny that such a
change will occur while the elasticity, approach generally expects this result

without requiring it.

        With respect to changes in the nontradables/tradables price ratio, expected

in   most versions of    the standard theory and in some versions of the monetary

approach,    our investigations uncovered some evidence    of changes in the predicted

direction,    but the data are muddied by the secular upward trend in the ratio
and it is difficult to separate out the influence of balance of payments causes on
the   ratio. We are inclined to the     view that the ratio does play the role cast
for   it, but our rather simple marshalling of the data does not give consistent

support to this view.              -



        Improved data and a better knowledge of the methods underlying the data we
have used ——     especially   for the implicit deflators of the different countries —— may

conceivably     lead to different conclusions on some points, but we think it    unlikely
that the high degree of national       and international commodity arbitrage that marty
versions    of the monetarist theory of the balance of payments contemplate is

typical of the real world. This is not to deny that the price structures of the
                                               — 79   —




advanced industrial countries are linked together, but it is to suggest that the

links are loose rather than       rigid.   The substantial price differences for like

products which we have found to exist may         be   subject to slow erosion as buyers

adjust to them,    but   new   disturbances   continuously appear. New sellers who seek

to enter markets or existing sellers whose costs are lowered and seek to expand

their shares may offer substintially lower prices. Changes in the alignment of

exchange rates among the major industrial exporting countries push sellers who

wish   to maintain acquired positions in different markets into discrIminatory
pricing.    Markets may work in the textbook fashion but slowly rather than

instantaneously    and new shifts     in comparative advantage prevent the achievement

of   an equilibrium that would      correspond to any given static set of supply and

demand   forces.
         Each theorist must decide how far to permit an impact of this real price
world on his model. It seems to us that, as far as commodities are concerned,
an adequate model has to take into account the leeway that each country ——           even

one that is highly integrated into the world economy — is given for independent
money and fiscal policies by the imperfections of markets and the complexlties
of   price behavior.
