                   NBER Working Paper Series




                  THE GOVERNMENT'S IMPACT ON THE LABOR
                    MARKET STATUS OF BLACK AMERICANS:
                            A CRITICAL REVIEW


                            Richard Butler
                           James J. Heckman*


                       Working Paper No. 183




       CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
                   AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
         National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
      204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                               June 1977




                    Preliminary; not for quotation.

    NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
    number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
    written permission of the author.

    This report has not undergone the review accorded official
    NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
    for approval by the Board of Directors.
This research was supported by an ASPER—DOL grant to NBER. Gary Becker,
Glen Cain, Victor Fuchs, and James Smith all provided useful comments. We
retain responsibility for any remaining errors. Chris Flinn provided highly
competent research assistance. Linda Budd provided valuable editorial
suggestions. (Previous draft, November 1976.)

*Universlty of Chicago; University of Chicago and NBER, respectively.
       This paper surveys recent evidence on the impact of government

programs on the measured labor market status of black Americans. The

mid—sixties witnessed an outpouring of civil rights legislation unprecedented

since the time of the Civil War. In view of popular concern with civil

rights, it is remarkable that so little analysis of these programs is

available. Even more remarkable is the diversity of opinions offered by

the few professional economists who have analyzed these programs. Some claim

that governmental activity has been instrumental in reducing observed black—

white income differentials, although they do not specify particular channels

of influence. Other economists who investigate the effects of particular

programs document only miniscule effects of government policy.

        These conflicting claims can be reconciled in part by examining

differences in data and methodology used by the dissenting analysts and in

part by taking a broader view of government policy than previous analysts

have considered. In this paper, we argue that previous studies neglect the

impact of recent government policy on the supply side of the labor market, and

that the supply side effects of recent policy play an important role in explaining

the recent measured increase in the ratio of the wages and incomes of blacks to
the 'ages and incomes of whites.
        Most studies of black—white differences in earnings and wage rates

are conducted within a demand—oriented framework suitable to the textbook

economic analysis of discrimination. Within this framework, the role of

governmental civil rights policy is to tax discriminatory firms and to

subsidize nondiscriminatory behavior in order to favorably shift the demand

curve for black labor relative to that for white labor. This framework is


                                    1
                                       2


not inappropriate. Indeed, specific laws such as those implemented in

Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act forbid both employment and wage

discrimination and hence act directly on the demand for black labor albeit

in potentially conflicting ways. Affirmative action programs instituted

by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC) are designed to affect

the demand for black labor.

           Even though a demand—oriented framework of analysis is not inappro-

priate, it is incomplete. Virtually coincident with recent civil rights

activity there has been an expansion of government welfare and transfer

programs. While these programs have not been explicitly oriented towards

specific racial groups, their criteria for participation have differentially

favored blacks by virtue of their lower position in the income distribution.

           Income transfer programs raise the minimum wage that potential

labor market participants will voluntarily accept for market work and hence

tend to reduce the labor force activity of groups with low market wages, a

phenomenon observed in the past decade. Since blacks are over—represented

in the population potentially eligible for these programs, the induced

decline in their labor force participation and employment serves to raise

measured wage rates and earnings for market participants for two distinct

reasons.

           First, even if all blacks are homogeneous in their ability to

perform market work, a reduction in the supply of blacks relative to whites

tends to raise the wage of working blacks relative to working whites as

long as blacks and whites are not perfect substitutes in the demand for labor
by firms. Second,
by removing the lowest wage blacks from the labor force, social transfer

programs can manufacture the illusion of relative wage growth by simply

subtracting the least productive blacks from the population base used to

measure wages and earnings.
                                    3

        These supply side effects of government activity are not

the whole story of the recent convergence in black—white wage ratios but

they are an important and neglected component that deserves more stress

than previous studies have accorded it. These supply effects serve

to explain the apparent anomaly that prime age black male participation

rates have declined in the face of narrowing racial wage differentials,

a fact that cannot be explained by analysts who argue that the government

has improved the market position of black labor by reducing discrimination.

        Despite our conviction that the scope of research on this question

should be broadened, we do not go far in performing that service here

although we do so in a companion paper. Rather, we confine our analysis

to a detailed review of previous evidence without restricting ourselves to

the view of the labor market maintained in previous studies.

        The paper proceeds in the following way. We first review the basic

set of facts that any study of government impact should be able to explain.

We then review key features of recent antidiscrimination legislation. Then

we discuss problems in measuring the impact of such legislation and review

the findings of previous work. In an Appendix, we offer some evidence that

casts a new light on some of the previous evidence.


                     I. The Facts to be Explained

        Before turning to an analysis of the impact of antidiscrimination

programs, it is useful to review the basic set of facts on the recent black

labor market experience with which any study of the impact of government

policy must contend. These facts are extracted from two principle sources

of data: aggregate time series data from the Current Population Surveys

(CPS) and information from cross sections removed in time, such as the 1960
                                    4


and 1970 U.S. Census. The latter data have been extensively analyzed and

are rich in information about personal characteristics. The aggregate time

series data, while crude, are especially useful for examining broad trends

in black economic progress, and for determining the timing of the changes

in trends. For these reasons we turn to this data first.


A. The Time Series Data

        Some graphs from a more extensive analysis (Butler and Heckman, 1976)

are reproduced below. The time series data display the following features.

        (1) Chart 1 reveals that the ratio of the median earnings of black

males to the median earnings of white males was roughly constant until the

mid—sixties at which point in time it began to grow at a rate which only

recently decelerated. The same ratio for women shows a steady upward growth

which accelerates in the mid—sixties——at about the same time that black male

relative earnings began to grow. For both sex groups, the growth in relative

earnings occurred at the same time that real earnings grew for all groups.

In the 1974 business cycle, all demographic groups suffered a decline in

real income but black relative status continued to grow.

        Essentially the same story can be told for alternative measures of

income. The median earnings of full time workers (not shown here) display

the same pattern a that of the median earnings of all workers just discussed.

The rate of growth of relative income for full time workers is lower, suggest-

ing that part of the growth in relative black status recorded in Chart 1 is

due to a growth in relative hours worked by blacks.

        Chart 2 presents relative median income, a measure that is defined

for the entire civilian population, and not just for wage earners, as is

the case for median earnings. This measure includes capital and transfer
                                                     5



 I   ,O

                                                                     elative total



                                                            1•
                                                          male LFPR
                                                                         1




                                                          Relative   female     ,'

                                                          wage

                                                                                         —


                                            —-—. '...                    Relative male
                                                                         wage
                             p.                  I
                           /'     .'....—




0.25




 0                        ci. c ç cc        si       4C                7 j. q i, ii
       Chart   1 ——   Relative    nonwhite to white median wage/salary income (dotted
          lines) and relative total labor force participation rates; by sex.
                                                                                                                              .
                                              6




                                                                                                 Relative total
                                                                                                 female LFPR
/ 25
                                                                                                      'Si,




                                                                       Relative total
1,00                                                                   male LFPR \



                                                                                                 —


                                                                                         ,• —
                                                                                     /
0:75                                                                       ,'' Relative                  female income




                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                             -——         —;__
                                                                                --
            " ,
             'S          I
                             , S.   —-
                                                            ——   —   ,' '../
                                                                       -
                                                                                                Relative        male income
                                          S
                                              .4




L. 25




O.o     i         S' c ç ;t 5S 44 c7               .   Ci   '    U         '5   '.       U           1 7i 7Z 7$ i*


            Chart 2 ——   Relative    median income and relative total labor force
              participation rates; by sex.
                                    7


income in addition to earnings, and so provides a clearer picture of the

relative monetary welfare of the entire black population. The relative

median income data display the same pattern shown by the median earnings

data. The two measures differ only in that the relative income data

exhibit a lower rate of growth. To the extent that black economic welfare

has been raised by income transfer programs that reduce work effort, it is

expected that measured income defined for the entire black population would

exhibit a slower growth rate than the earnings of workers since it is

possible for a transfer program recipient to have lower money income and

fewer hours of work and still be better off than if he did not participate

in such a program.

        (2) Chart 1 also reveals that the ratio of black male labor force

participation to white male participation exhibits a near stability until

the mid—sixties at which point it begins a rather steady decline. (From "1"

in 1965 to ".91" in 1975.) This decline is a result of a greater decline

in the aggregate black male participation rate than in the white rate, which

also fell. By no means is this decline confined to older males. As Chart 3

reveals, the labor force participation rate for prime age blacks has declined

relative to the rate for prime age whites which exhibits only a slight tendency

to drop over the post—war period. Indeed, as Chart 4 reveals, the recent

decline in the aggregate relative male rate is not due to a decline in the

relative participation rates of older workers.

        From these charts, it is clear that there has been a narrowing in

racial wage and income differentials which began in the mid—sixties——coincident

with the emergence of federal antidiscrimination programs. It is precisely

this coincidence that has led Freeman (1973) and others to infer a significant
                                            8




                                                                 Relative prime
                                                                                                  .
                                                                 age female LFPR




                                                         Relative prime
                                                         age male LFPR
I Cc

                                                                                           PS-'
                                                                                    .1
                                                                                       /
                                                    Relative
(2' 7                                               female wages ,'
                                                                        —




                                                           /—


                                                                                                  .
                /                                                           Relative
                      sS_ — ——
                                                    —
                                                        _.7'                               male
                                                                            wages
                                        ,p.. .5——
 .50
                                        /
                         S       _———




 C      :      S ci               aiic          f23C           C(. '7        0 7Q(I 2- 13 7 75

        Chart 3 —— Relative nonwhite to white median wage/salary income and
            relative prime—age (35—44 years old) labor force participation;
            by sex.




                                                                                                  .
                                          9




                                              Relative LFPR for




II


                                              Relative LFPR for males
                                              65 and older
     I




 co




.2.'




         0                      g               .*      c ç7 -b ic / 12. 13 iVif

             Chart 4 ——   Relative   nonwhite to white labor force participation
               rates for the civilian labor force 65 years and older; by sex.
                                   10

role for government antidiscrimination policy. However, it is reasonable

to seek some explanation for the relative reduction of black workers in

the labor force that has been particularly pronounced among prime—age males.
                          increase
A simple demand induced /      in black wages and income should increase black
labor force participation relative to white labor force participation give

market opportunities for blacks have expanded. Yet, a decrease is observed.

        The story for women is different. Although the relative female

participation rates (displayed in Chart 1) decline over the post—war period,

the relative decline accelerates in the mid—sixties. The decline in the

black female participation rate relative to the white rate reflects a slower

growth rate in the black rate and not a downturn. In fact, the black female labor

force participation rate has remained constant in the past eight years while

the white rate has continued to grow.

        (3) Data on family income are displayed in Chart 5. The growth in

relative family income occurs in a brief period in the mid—sixties, and

there is little evidence of relative growth since then. This lack of growth

in relative family income is largely due to the growth in female headed

households among blacks recorded in Chart 6. One possible reason for the

growth in female headship rates among black families is the AFDC program which

provides incentives for the formation of female—headed households. The

average real payment per AFDC recipient rose in the mid—sixties at the same

time female headhsip rose among blacks.1 (See Chart 11, p. 56.) Even though

        1Some caution Is required in interpreting this result, since greater
AFDC participation by unwed mothers may mechanically raise the measured pay-
ment per recipient. A cross sectional study by Honig (in Lerman, 1974)
documents a real effect of AFDC payments on headship rates so that the causal
correlation apparent in the time series has some support from independent
evidence. But, as pointed out to us by Glen Cain, Honig's AFDC inducement
variable——AFDC payments per family——potentially suffers from the same bias
as the AFDC per recipient variable, and may be as much a consequence as a
cause of increasing female headship rates.
                                               11




    '3000



                                                                         White family
                                                                           Income

    1000




     é000




     cc                                                Black
                                                       family
0                                                      Income
                                                                \2




     ; coc


      2600


        I

                                              Relative Black /white family income
                           —————                    ——          ______
      Os



            0—
                 t1               3 'f          54 o        'i ' 6 7       7c ii i 73   75


                      Chart 5 —— Median real income for black and white families
                        and relative black/white family income (dotted line).
                                  12

                                                                                    .
                               Nonwhite female—
                               headed families



,2-5




I


                                                                                    O
                                        White female—
'I




,05




         ç.;   5.   ,1S   5ç               Z. $             q lo •71 7Z. -15 1 7$



       Chart 6 ——   Proportiorisof


                                                                                    .
                                       female—headed families;by race.
                                   13

black female relative income has been increasing, the level of female

income is lower than the level of male income, and given the increasing

fraction of female headed black families, this compositional effect serves

to retard the relative growth of black family incomes.

        (4) The U.S. aggregate data confound distinct regional patterns

displayed in Charts 7, 8, 9 and 10. The key feature of these charts is

that the growth in relative median income that occurred for both males

and females in the aggregate data in the mid—sixties did not occur in

the West or the Northeast. The data for the South reveal that the growth

in the relative incomes of blacks began long before any of the recent

civil rights legislation was passed. Only the graph for the North Central

region displays any tendency for a jump in relative median income in the

mid—sixties, and this occurs only for males, and virtually disappears by

1975. The acceleration in the aggregate male ratio that appears in the

mid—sixties stems from the jump in the North Central ratio reinforced by

a preexisting steady upward Southern trend.
                                        14




    g.ço
                                                                                   .

(,2c

                                                       Relative female


I   OO




                                                          Relative male




                                                                                   .
                                                          income

co




.ic-




    0-                     c.5. ' ci c: ci   '   '   (c " '         -z --   - i-
           Chart 7 — Northeast relative nonwhite/white median incomes
                                                                      by sex.




                                                                                   .
                                 15




t,So




1.34


                                          Relative   female incomes


                         A


1
                                                     Relative   male incomes




0                      $ 56 -7 cf cl c        c           g     71     -, 15
       Chart 8 —— North Central relative nonwhite/white incoues by sex.
                          16



                                                                      .

I2
                                        Relative female income



/00




.1.;



                                         Relative male income




 C                                                                -
                  ( ç7 r s c    4Z çj        C 1 i lo 7/ 12. 73

       Chart 9 —— Western relative nonwhite/white incomes by sex.




                                                                      .
                              17




 30




(.2-c




f.Oo




  iS
                               Relative female income




                                                Relative male income




                    # 6 ç   ç cq 'c   z.                ic v 7L   1+ 75



        Chart 10 —— Southern Region: relative nonwhite/white incomes;
          by sex.
                                   18

B. Findings from the Disagregated Studies

        A detailed review of all the disaggregated evidence on the determi-

nants of racial wage differentials is beyond the scope of this paper. Yet,

a discussion of the broad conclusions that emerge from these studies helps

to clarify the interpretation of time series evidence and affords a more

complete understanding of the aggregate trends.

        The best available studies compare male earnings by race from large

cross sections of data calculated in different time periods. Welch (1973)

utilizes data from the 1960 Census and data from the 1967 Survey of Economic

Opportunity. Smith and Welch (1976) and Haworth, Gwartney and Haworth (1975)

use 1960 and 1970 Census data. The advantage of these studies is that they

present a richer analysis of the determinants of earnings than is possible

using aggregate data.
        In his 1973 paper, Welch finds that black—white earnings differen—.

tials have been narrowed primarily through a reduction in wage differentials

among younger workers. Not only are younger blacks more educated than older

blacks, but the reward to their education is greater. And, racial differences

in schooling levels and market payment to schooling have narrowed for younger

workers. He utilizes this finding, and other evidence on increases in school

expenditure for blacks, to conclude that increasing quality of schooling by

cohort explains the reduction in aggregate racial wage differentials. By no

means does this evidence exclude competing hypotheses. To the extent that

affirmative action programs create a premium for blacks in the labor market,

the effect os such programs would be greatest for the youngest blacks because

firms are more likely to invest in younger workers (to harvest returns from

workers with longer expected working lives) and because young workers, with

long lifetime horizons, are more likely to invest in themselves and respond

to increased labor market incentives.
                                  19

       In a later paper, Smith and Welch (1976) find less evidence for a

young—cohort effect and more evidence for across—cohort improvements in

earnings in explaining 1960—1970 changes in earnings. This contrast with

Welch's previous findings may be due, in part, to differences in treatment

of nonworking blacks in the two studies. Smith and Welch eliminate non—

working blacks from their 1970 sample while Welch (1973) did not eliminate

this group in 1967. As noted in Chart 3, the labor force participation rate

of prime age black males has been declining in the decade 1960—1970. It is

plausible to assume that it is lowest wage blacks who became the non—

participants. If this is so, Smith and Welch manufacture an apparent

relative wage growth for older black workers which may not, in fact, exist.

This bias induced by sample selection procedures accounts for the discrep-

ancy between the findings of these two studies, and leads us to conclude

that most of the measured relative wage gains have accrued to younger, more

educated black workers. Evidence by Freeman (1977) supports this view.

        A study by Haworth, Gwartney and Haworth (1975) corroborates the

Welch (1973) view. These authors find that an important component of measured

black wage gain is the retirement of older black workers from the labor

foráe. This effect arises not because the black retirement rate exceeds the

white rate, but because of the relatively lower quality of older workers

relative to younger workers in the black population than is the case in the

white population.

        There is broad agreement on the other findings.

         (1) Relative wage gains have been greatest in the South.

         (2) Migration contributes little to measured relative wage growth

 in the sense that while regional racial wage differentials exist, the volume
                                        20

 of migration weighted by the regional differentials is a negligible
                                                                     component of
aggregate racial relative wage growth.

         (3) The contribution of federal
                                             government employment to the reduction

in black—white wage differences is minor.      While the black—white wage ratio is
higher in the government than in the private
                                                 sector, federal government employ-
ment has been relatively stabej. over the past decade. In addition, black—white

wage ratios inside and outside of government have come closer together because

of a greater narrowing in private sector racial differentials.

        (4) The conventional wisdom that black—white income ratios decrease

for more educated workers no longer applies and there is some evidence that

ratios increase by education class.

        (5) Growth in the average level of schooling among blacks is an

important source of the observed decline in racial earnings differentials.

        (6) Controlling for industry, age, education, and location variables,

and for shifts in coefficients on these variables
                                                      in earnings equations
(interpreted as shifts in payments for productive attributes), more than half

of the observed reduction in the black—white earnings differential remains

unexplained. Haworth, Gwartney and Haworth allocate the residual to government

activity aid the like, but it is important to note that no direct evidence on

this question exists in any of these micro studies, nor is there any information

as to the timing of the observed changes within the period 1960—1970.


       II. Key Features of Principal Antidiscrimjnatjon Programs

        The main pillars of federal antidiscrimination policy in the private

sector have been the Office of Federal Contract Complaince (OFCC) and Title

VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act which created the Equal Employment Opportunity

Commission (EEOC). Many   interesting   institutional facts about these programs

are recorded more fully elsewhere in this volume and need not be repeated here.
                                   21

       Until recently (1972), the EEOC has had limited enforcement powers

and has acted primarily as a fact finding agency, investigating employee—

initiated reports of wage and employment discrimination; and acting as a

conciliation agency, seeking to reach out—of—court settlements between

aggrieved workers and firms. With the exception of firms with fewer than

25 employees, firms not engaged in interstate commerce, the self—employed,

and state and local governments, most employers were covered by the EEOC.

By law, the EEOC was required to refer cases to state fair—employment

practices commissions (where they existed), although the record shows that

most cases so referred returned to the EEOC (Beller, 1974, p. 23). In the

event of unsuccessful arbitration, workers could use the courts to bring

individual suits against firms, with the EEOC serving as a friend of the

court. In principle, the EEOC could invite the Justice Department to

present cases, although rio information is available as to how often this

avenue was used.     Since 1972, the EEOC has had the power to initiate

litigation and has met with some success. However, official reports suggest

that delays in litigation are rather lengthy.

        The view of informed observers of the EEOC, best represented in the

paper by Phyllis Wallace (1973), suggests that the agency is understaffed,

limited in political status and legal power, and slow to process claims.

These first—hand observations suggest that the EEOC is unlikely to have had

a major impact—a view widely held in policy circles.

        The OFCC was established in 1965 to administer an executive order

forbidding discrimination by government contractors in any of their

operations. This agency is responsible for the affirmative action time

tables required of many firms and unions. Unlike the EEOC, the OFCC has
                                       22

always had enforcement powers, although it has rarely used them. These

powers include the right to cancel government contracts and to prevent

firms from bidding on future contracts. Unlike the coverage of EEOC, the

coverage of OFCC is restricted to firms that voluntarily agree to sell goods

to the government; so, in principle, OFCC is not a compulsory program.

Knowledgeable observers such as J. Jones (1976) and G. Ahert (1976) report

on the ineffectiveness of the OFCC compliance machinery and foster suspicion

of its contribution to eliminating measured black—white wage differentials

even before any data are considered.

        The principal vehicles for state antidiscrimination efforts have

been the state fair—employment practices commissions. (For a complete

description, see Landes, 1966.) These commissions have worked in cooperation

with the EEOC and deserve consideration in their own right, if only because

they have been studied more carefully than most federal programs. These

analyses have served as prototypes for the analysis of federal programs.

        The anecdotal evidence available on all of these programs and agencies

leads one to suspect that they have had negligible effects on improving

minority status. This sort of evidence has led some to dismiss the possi-

bilIty that these agencies have had         important effect on minority status.


        III. Measures of Program Impact and Their Interpretation

        Before turning to the detailed evidence on the programs just discussed,

it is helpful to consider what might be expected from them, the merits of

various measures of their impact, and the limitations of the data and empirical

techniques used to measure this impact.

        First consider the expected consequences of these programs. As

Merton (1936) noted long ago, the consequences of legislation often differ
                                  23

from the stated intentions of legislators. Antidiscrimination programs

may provide an example of this principle. Some economists have argued that

affirmative action programs lead to an inefficient use of economic resources

because they interfere with a preexisting optimum allocation of resources.

If this is so, the real wages of all workers——black and white——may be

reduced even though the relative wages of blacks increase.

        As another example of Merton's principle, Landes (1966) and Belier

(1974) both note that antidiscrimination programs such as EEOC and state

fair—employment laws often contain conflicting provisions. Laws that lead

to equality in wage rates by race may cause firms to substitute white labor

for black labor, working counter to the employment provisions of laws that

enjoin firms to hire proportionately more minorities in occupations in which

they are under—represented. To insist that       wage and employment provisions

be enforced may be to insist on an economically inefficient use of resources.

        There are several possible consequences of this inefficiency. Affected

entrepreneurs may shut down their operations, or curtail investment in their

plaxitsor relocate to areas not covered by the regulations. The higher costs

of operation necessarily imply higher prices for goods in affected indus-

tries and a smaller quantity of output demanded. This leads to lower total

employment in sectors covered by the legislation although not necessarily

lower minority employment. If a smaller minority employment occurs, the

legislation enhances the status of blacks in surviving firms but may cause

an exodus of other blacks from the covered sector. If all firms in the

economy are covered, the black exodus is from the mainstream economy into

a variety of nonmarket pursuits. Micro data on surviving firms which record

improvement in the relative position of blacks is not inconsistent with macro

data which record a reduction in black status relative to white status.
                                   24

        There are other examples of possible unintended effects of anti—

discrimirtation legislation. Occupational racial quotas imposed in an attempt

to move the black job distribution closer to the white job distribution

may lead to a reduction in the employment of low skill blacks. Having

too many blacks in low—skill occupations is just as much a violation of

affirmative action as having too few blacks in high skill occupations.

If quotas are met by firing unskilled blacks or adopting a preferential

hiring pattern for low—skilled whites, the effect of such quotas will be

to reduce both the wages and employment of unskilled black labor.

        If, as Johnson and Welch (1976) suggest, firms meet the requirement for

skilled black labor by promoting unskilled (and unqualified) blacks to

skilled jobs, productive inefficiency may result. Moreover, if unskilled

blacks are hired merely to "meet the quota", the long term consequence of

such a policy may be to retard black incentives to acquire skills. Thus,

such programs may result in a long run widening in the average level of

acquired skills held by each race group.
        The upshot of this discussion is that the evaluation of the conse-

quences of a program should be separated from the evaluation of program

effectiveness. The most effective program may have the worst consequences

from the point of view of elevating the real income of blacks. Moreover,

this discussion suggests that a variety of measures of program impact may

be useful in order to assess both good and bad consequences of legislation.


        Closely related to the analysis of program impact is the question of

devising appropriate measures for evaluating programs. Most analysts who

proceed within the demand—oriented framework of the economics of discrimina-

tion assume that relative wage rates or relative incomes are key policy

goals. While wage ratios are important, they measure only one aspect of
                                   25

the effect of laws on black status. Presumably the goal of any antidis—

crimination program is to improve black economic welfare in both the short

rtin and the long run. For either time frame, wage ratios may be a poor

measure of black welfare.

        This is an empirically important problem because the data from the

last decade show that racial differences in real wage rates have widened

while ratios have declined. A widening in the level of wage rates may lead

to a widening in racial schooling and training differentials, and hence to

a widening in long run earnings differentials. If the real return to

schooling has increased for blacks, it has increased more for whites if the

direct costs of schooling are the same for both race groups.

        A fixation on the wage rates or the incomes of full time workers

neglects the impact of legislation on employment, labor force participation

and stability of employment for blacks. Surely one goal of policy is to

increase black incomes and to integrate blacks into the main stream economy.

Measurements of higher wage rates paid to working blacks confound intra—

occupational narrowing of racial differentials with interoccupational advances.

Measurements of both components are required in order to determine the sources

of black improvement and.the probability of permanence of the improvement.

Patterns of unemployment differentials, labor force participation, school

attendance and the like all yield information about the degree to which

blacks are integtated into the economy.

        Most studies surveyed below focus on the relative wage rates of

blacks and exclude many important nonwage dimensions. Accordingly, these

studies yield an incomplete picture of total government impact. In particular,

all focus on short run effects, so that estimates of long run consequences of

antidiscrimination legislation are not available.
                                     26

        In addition to the problem of the limited number of measures of black

status that have been studied, there is also an important problem that arises

from the fact that most of the antidiscriminatjon programs considered below

do not cover all firms in the economy. The existence of a residual uncovered

sector has important implications for the measurement of program impacts. Laws

elevating black wages in a covered sector may depress wages in the uncovered

sector because covered—sector firms tend to hire fewer blacks at the higher

wages and release blacks to the uncovered sector, driving down wage rates there.

Comparisons of the relative wages of blacks in covered and uncovered sectors at

a given point in time of the sort utilized in many studies reported below lead

to an overstatement of the economy—wide impact of such a program. One must resort

to aggregate time series data to estimate true program impacts. On the other hand,

if legislation causes the employment and wages of blacks to rise in the

covered sector, wages also rise in the uncovered sector. In this case,

cross sectional comparisons understate the contribution of legislation to

relative minority status. Again, resort to time series evidence is required

in order to assess the impact of legislation. Cross sectional evidence

need not be consistent with the time series evidence.

        Finally, it is important to note that the presence of laws, contract

compliance reviews or government contract awards is not independent of the

environment in which they occur. Yet most studies surveyed below ignore

this point.. Accordingly, estimated program impacts from these studies con-

found a pure policy effect with preexisting conditions that cause the policy

to be effected.

        OFCC provides a case in point. In this program, the government seeks

to impose antidiscrimination provisions on its contractors. If the govern-

ment also seeks to purchase its goods at the lowest price (say through the

process of competitive bidding) it tends to select the least discriminating

firms with higher proportions of black workers. Studies comparing !covered1?
                                   27

and "uncovered" firms may record a successful selection process by the

government but convey no information on the real impact of the program on

black status. In this case, measured OFCC effects overstate actual effects

(Hecknian and Wolpin, 1976).

   The direction of this bias may be reversed.PP05e that all firms are

alike and that the government runs a lottery to determine which firms are

to be its contractors. All contractors must comply with the provisions of

OFCC and are fully compensated for their increased costs. If, as much

theory and evidence suggest, it is costly to hire and fire labor, all firms
           roughly
would have/the same racial composition in their work force. A cross sectional

comparison of contractors with noncontractors, or a time series study of

firms classified by contract status would reveal little or no program effect. Only

an aggregate time series analysis would record shifts in black status induced

by the contract compliance program.

        This analysis also applies to macro studies. Antidiscrimination

programs like EEOC and OFCC may well be the consequence and not the cause of

reduced discrimination against blacks. If this is so, aggregate evidence on

the effect of policy overstates the true impact of the policy.

        The upshot of this discussion is that any analysis of policy impact

is incomplete and purely descriptive until some account is made of how the

policy came into existence. Virtually none of the estimates of program

impact reported below can be used to estimate the expected impact of programs

initiated without regard to the factors that cause policy to be effected.
                                      28


     IV.      A Review and Reconsideration of the Evidence From
               Aggregate Time Series on the Impact of Government Policy

A. Introduction

           The work of Freeman (1973) is the most influential analysis of the

impact of government policy on the status of blacks in the aggregate. In

his paper, Freeman utilizes a time series of annual observations on relative

black status to conclude that cumulative EEOC expenditure, interpreted as a

proxy measure for the entire package of federal antidiscrimination programs

passed in the mid—sixties, raised the relative wages and earnings of blacks

(as well as raising other indices that record relative racial occupational

position). The shift in economic status due to government activity is

proportionately greater for black women relative to white women than it is

for black men relative to white men (Freeman, 1973, Table 6). Freeman's

study has been widely cited as evidence for the success of recent government

policy.

           In this section, we examine Freeman's findings and argue that his

conclusions are refuted when a properly specified model is estimated. Our

analysis rests on the observation that if the demand for labor has shifted

favorably toward blacks one would expect that the market participation of

blacks relative to the market participation of whites would not have decreased.

But, Chart   1 of Section I shows that it did decrease. And, as noted in Chart

3 of that section, the decrease is quite pronounced among prime age males,

so that the aggregate decline is not solely a phenomenon of declines among

peripheral workers.

          There are important consequences of this decrease in participation.

A general reduction in the relative quantity of black labor relative to white
                                      29

labor should raise black relative wage rates. This is so as long as the

two types of labor are not perfect substitutes in demand. There are several

reasons advanced in the economics literature why blacks and whites need

not be perfect substitutes in demand. The first reason, proposed by Gary

Becker (1957) arises from employer tastes for discrimination. The greater

the proportion of blacks in a population, the more likely it is that blacks must
          the
deal with/more bigoted employers and accordingly must settle for lower wages.

The second reason, advanced by Finis Welch (1967) is that blacks and whites

are imperfect substitutes because they possess different average skill

levels and because workers of different skill are not perfect substitutes

(Griliches, 1968). The third reason, due to Kenneth Wolpin (1974), arises

from a model of firm uncertainty about worker quality. Even if the average

black had the same quality at work as the average white, if the dispersion

of quality in the black population differs from the dispersion of quality

in the white population, blacks and whites are imperfect substitutes in

demand.

  The situation of less than perfect substitutibility in demand is depected in the

Figure (next page)      which displays the relative wage of blacks as a function

of their relative quantities. A reduction in the realtive quantity of blacks

from A to A' should raise their relative wage from R to R'.

          The cause of the reduction in the relative quantities of black labor

may   have   additional consequences for the measured relative wage of working

blacks. If, as is surely the case, there is some distribution of skills in

the black population, it is important to know which blacks exit      the labor

force. In a companion paper, we present evidence that the reduction in the

black work force came from the low wage black population which is a larger

fraction of the total black population of workers than the low wage white
                                                                                   .
                                       30




                        D'




Relative Wage
  of Blacks
                R
 Black Wage]
 White Wage)



                                                      D'

                    0                 A'    A
                                Relative Quantities

                                   Figure


  population is of the white population. Given the expansion of social welfare

  programs in the mid—sixties, coincident with EEOC and OFCC activity, propor-
                                                                                   .
  tionately more blacks participated in these programs than did whites——a result

  which is entirely consistent with the view that blacks and whites of identical

  demographic characteristics have the same propensity to participate in work

  reducing income transfer programs but that blacks occupy a lower position

  in the income distribution.

          These transfer program induced changes in-the composition of the

  black work force tend to raise measured average (and median) wage rates for

 working blacks relative to comparable masures for working whites. Such

  changes create the illusion of black progress as measured. Further, the

  increases in real transfer program benefits that occurred in the mid—sixties,

  help to explain the relative decrease in labor force participation for blacks.
                                                                                   O
                                   31

B. Freeman's Analysis

        Using regression analysis, Freeman estimates relative demand curve

DD' under the assumption that it is horizontal, i.e., that blacks and whites

are perfect substitutes in demand This is a strong assumption which turns

out to be counterfactual. The determinants of relative wage rates for both

men and women that are considered by Freeman are (1) a time trend, ref lect—

ing productivity growth and a shift in attitudes towards blacks (2) deviations

from trend real GNP——a variable designed to capture the idea that tight labor
markets are favorable for minorites (3) cumulative EEOC to the
date of the observation on relative wage rates——a variable designed to

 capture the cumulative effect of all federal antidiscrimination activity on
 relative wages,
/and (4) relative mean education levels—a variable designed to capture the

effect of improvements in the quality of the black labor force relative to

the white labor force. His empirical results show (1) that there has been
                                         for both sexes
a smooth upward trend in relative status/that is more pronounced for black

women (2) that there is evidence that black relative status is procyclical

 (3) that federal activity has been instrumental in eliminating black—white

wage differences and (4) that relative education has an important positive

effect on relative minority status.

        Flanagan (1976) was the first to systematically criticize the Freeman

analysis. He noted that when relative education is introduced into Freeman's

equation for males, the measured impact of federal activity vanishes although

 it does not vanish in the female equation. He conjectures that Freeman's

        1 alternative interpretation of Freeman's procedure is that he
follows A.shenfelter (1970) in assuming that relative quantities are fixed
for males. While this assumption is appropriate for Ashenfelter's sample
period (1948—1966), it is not appropriate for a post—1966 analysis. Yet
another interpretation of Freeman's equation is possible. Under this view,
Freeman's relative wage equation is a function of the determinants of both
the supply curve and the demand curve. If this interpretation is adopted,
Freeman omits determinants of supply behavior. For a more extensive discus-
sion of this issue, see Butler and Heckman (1977) or Appendix A.
                                   32

finding that federal impact is weaker on the relative wages of full—time

workers, as compared with its much stronger effect on relative median

earnings of all workers, may reflect the fact that EEOC expenditure grew

rapidly during a period of sustained low aggregate unemployment rates so

that Freeman's measure of federal activity is nothing more than a proxy for

unusually favorable macroeconomic conditions. To support this conjecture,

Flanagan notes that In Freeman's work there is no evidence of a federal

impact on relative full—time female earnings.

        In an effort to examine these and other claims, we reworked the

time series data, updating Freeman's analysis through 1974, experimenting

with alternative models, and disaggregating by region. Because the last

few years are ones of high unemployment, they provide a test of Flanagan's

conjecture that Freeman's measure of federal activity is a proxy variable

for the unusually low unemployment rates of the late sixties. The results

of our empirical analysis, reported more fully elsewhere (Butler and Hecknian,

1976) and briefly summarized in Appendix A to this paper, are as follows.

        (1) Expansion of the data base to include years of high unemployment

does not alter the conclusions to be drawn from Freeman's specification.

Experimentation with the specification of unemployment variables results in

little change in Freeman's original conclusions. From our analysis, we

conclude that Freeman's federal activity variable does not proxy labor market

tightness.

        (2) When relative education variables are included in equations with

relative median earnings as the dependent variable, measured EEOC effects

remain for both sex groups, so that Flanagan's criticism is inappropriate.

        (3) When a relative labor force participation variable is added to

the basic Freeman model augmented to include a relative education variable,
                                    33

and appropriate statistical methods are used to estimate the relative

 demand equation, there is noimpact of measured federal antidiscrimination policy on
 relative
/wage rates for men or for women.   Relative labor force participation

levels are sensitive to demographic variables, education, and benefit

levels per recipient in federal transfer programs.

         (4) An analysis of regional data on relative median incomes utiliz-

ing Freeman's own specification of the relative demand curve (i.e., assuming

 that this curve is perfectly elastic) reveals no impact of his measure of

 federal activity in any region but the South, although there is a weak effect

 on North Central region male relative median income. Given differential

 enforcement of antidiscrimination laws in the South in the mid—sixties, this

 finding appears to be prima facie evidence in support of Freeman's analysis.

Yet an examination of Chart 10 reveals that the upward trend in relative

 black status in the South began in the late fifties——long before any federal

 antidiscrimination legislation was passed.2 Indeed, when only the most

 recent 14 years of Southern data are used to fit the Freeman model, there is

 no measured impact of federal activity on the relative incomes of blacks.

         The last two findings lead us to conclude that there has been some

 government effect on the status of blacks. But it is not the effect that

 Freeman sought to measure. In our view, the expansion of income transfer

 programs that occurred during the War on Poverty removed blacks from the

 labor force at a greater rate than it removed whites. This transfer program

 induced withdrawal of blacks lead to growth in the measured relative wage of


         1By "appropriate statistical methods" we mean a standard two stage
 least squares procedure in which the quantity of black labor relative to
 the quantity of white labor is regressed on appropriate instrumental variables.
 For a list of instrumental variables see Butler and Heckman (1977) or Appendix A.
         2King and Marshall (1974), using different data also note this
 phenomenon.
                                    34

working blacks relative to working whites, and accounts for the measured

decline in relative labor force participation rates that is quite pronounced

among prime age black males. This hypothesis also accounts for the

observed slower growth in relative full—time wage rates since full—time

workers are likely to be high—wage workers, and hence their measured wage

rates are less likely to be affected by the compositional effect of transfer

programs in elminiriating low wage workers from the statistics.


C. A Brief Discussion of Vroman's Analysis

        The work of Vroman (1973) has been interpreted as evidence in support

of Freeman's work. Vroman analyzes a time series of cross sectional observa-

tions on workers (with positiveearnings) registered with the Social Security

Administration. His empirical results show a shift in the earnings of black

earners relative to white earners for both sexes. The most pronounced shift

occurs among southern workers although there is some evidence of a shift in

relative male earnings in the North Central region as well. He does not

trace the source of the shift to any particular agency. These findings

appear to complement Freeman's analysis since the South was the locus of

the greatest antidiscrimination efforts.

        Before this conclusion is drawn, there are several points to note in

Vroman's study. (1) His analysis is conducted only for workers, is not a

panel study, and is thus subject to the same wage growth inducing selection

bias arising from labor force withdrawal that plagues the Freeman (1973) and Smith

and Welch (1975) studies.   (2) While there is evidence of structural shift
                                                          in an earnings regression
in southern earnings (based on a significant coefficient/on a duimny variable

that is "one" for blacks after 1965), Vroman does not test the hypothesis

that the shift occurred before 1965, as Chart 10 strongly suggests is the
                                   35

case.1 Indeed, if there has been steady improvement in black status in the

South, one would expect Vroman's empirical result precisely because later

earnings are higher than earlier earnings, and not because of any dramatic

change in the condition of blacks in the South in 1965.


                V. A Review of the Disaggregated Studies

A. Evidence from the Analysis of State Fair—
   Employment Practice (FEP) Commissions

        In its original charter, the EEOC was instructed to cooperate with

state fair—employment practices commissions and to refer cases to them when

appropriate. Accordingly, it is of some interest to document the impact of

these commissions on black labor market status. Studies of state fair employ-

ment practices commissions provide examples of some of the best available

work that measures the impact of government programs.

        The best work on this topic is a study by Landes (1968), who examined

the impact of the wage and employment provisions of fair—employment practices

laws. His analysis is conducted within the framework of the economics of

discrimination developed by Becker (1957). State fair—employment laws are

assumed to shift the demand curve for black labor relative to the demand for

white labor (DD' in Figure 1 of Section IV). A crucial assumption in his

empirical work is that both black and white workers are immobile across

states, so that supplies of each type of labor are inelasticly supplied to

the market within each state.2 A regression model is developed in which

        11965 was the year that the EEOC commenced operation.
        2Landes follows Becker (1957) in this assumption. It is as crucial
to Becker's theoretical argument as it is to Landes' empirical analysis. If
there is free migration across state lines, black—white wage differentials
will be the same in each state if racial differences in psychic income are
negligible. And, in the presence of migration there could be no measured
effect of fair—employment legislationon the status of blacks measured in a
cross section, even if fair—employment laws as a group raise black status in
the aggregate.
                                       36

alternative indices of black status are regressed on a dummy variable

(which assumes the value of 1 when a state has a fair—employment law, and

is zero otherwise) and on other control variables. The regression coef-

ficient on the dummy variable is interpreted as a measure of the effect

of the law on black status in states with such laws relative to black

status in states without such laws.

        Utilizing 1960 aggregates for the 48 contiguous states, Landes finds

a quantitatively small (3 to 4 percent), weakly statistically significant

improvement in the relative earnings of black males due to the enforcement

of equal pay provisions of fair—employment laws. This effect is partly

offset by the increased unemployment of blacks relative to whites which

results from the enforcement of wage provisions of the laws. In regressions

utilizing income and occupational position as dependent variables, Landes

finds no effect of the legislation. This work provides evidence for con—

flicting effects of fair—employment practices legislation which cancel Out

in the aggregate and   yield   no measured effect.

        In a later study, Ligget (1969) claims to find a strong effect of

fair—employment practice commissions on black status. In our judgment, his

evidence is too crude to be taken seriously. His analysis consists of

a single rank correlation between an index of change in black occupational

distributions relative to white occupational distributions (measured from

the 1950 and 1960 Censuses) and an index of the strength of fair—employment
                                    in his sample.
commissions governing each location! The data base is a scattered sample of

cities and states. Both of his indices are suspect. The first index is

defined to include only selected skilled occupations (those with average

education exceeding 12 years) and thus excludes many black employees. The

second index is derived from an ad hoc weighting of enforcement authority

and budgets derived from the work of Norgren and Hill (1964).
                                          37

            Heckman (1976) reanalyzes the Landes data to determine whether or
•   not the incidence of fair—employment practices laws by state can be

    related to economic variables, and if so, whether a more careful treatment

    of laws as socially determined events affects Landes' estimate of the

    impact of fair—employment laws on black status. He presents evidence that
                                                                of the work force
    higher levels of education and a greater percent of unionism/in a given

    state favor passage of fair—employment legislation. Using a new statistical

    technique, he doubles Landes' estimate of the effect of fair—employment
                                                                         of laws
    laws on earnings (to 7.5 percent) and finds that the measured effect/becomes

    strongly statistically significant. Unfortunately, Heckman does not present

    estimates for the other indices of black status employed by Landes, so that

    it is not possible to determine whether or not Landes' conclusions on the

    total effect of the law would be sustained in a more careful econometric

    analysis. Nonetheless, these new findings suggest that there may have been a greater

    impact of FEP   legislation   than previous analysts have measured.


    B. Micro Studies of EEOC

            Because the coverage of EEOC is so extensive, all micro studies of

    the impact of EEOC rely on a comparison between firms or states that are
                          amounts of
    subject to different / treatment!I of EEOC activity. To the best of our

    knowledge, there is no study that compares the progress of blacks in EEOC—

    covered firms with black progress in uncovred firms.

            Adams (1972) presents one of the first attempts to measure the direct

    impact of the EEOC on the relative employment of minorities in the period

    1966 to 1971. During this period, the EEOC did not have the power to initiate

    any direct civil or criminal action in the courts——and so was limited to

    seeking compliance with Title Vllthrough its conciliation efforts in cases
                                     38

in which racial discrimination was alleged. In both the case studies and

statistical analysis he presents, Adams confirms popular folk wisdom about

the inefficacy of the EEOC's conciliation process. He tests for a direct

effect of conciliation by pairing 26 "respondent" firms (those who signed

a"successfuj. conciliation"involving race as an issue in 1967 and 1968) with

peer firms in the same two—digit industry and SMSA (Standard Metropolitan

Statistical Area). He finds no significant improvement in the respondent

group (relative to the peer group) in measures of relative employment or

occupational position. In a regression analysis, Adams finds that the

intensity of conciliation activity in an SMSA is an insignificant determi-

nant of either change in SNSA minority share of employment or SNSA change

in relative occupational position.

        Adams' tests may not be conclusive for two reasons. First, he

implicitly assumes that during the period of his study the EEOC focused on

the enforcement of the employment provisions of Title VII. If, instead, the

EEOC concentrated on enforcing the wage provision of the legislation and

succeeded in improving the relative wages of blacks while not lowering

relative black employment, (a question not examined by Adams), its impact would,

in fact, have been substantial. Second, even if the EEOC were more concerned

with discrimination in employment than with discrimination in wage rates

during the period of his analysis, it is still possible that firms with a

"successful conciliation" were initially the least discriminatory firms.

Even          though the conciliation process may induce recalcitrant firms

to hire more blacks, if the EEOC chose to focus its conciliation efforts on

firms already upgrading minority employees, the EEOC procedure for selecting firms

would serve to explain why in 16 of the 26 pairs, "respondent" firms had a
                                   39

higher proportion of minority employees in 1966 than did their peers and

also why (in 11 of the 26 pairs) they had superior 1966 relative occupa-

tional indices. Thus, without a clearer notion of how respondent firms

are chosen, it is not possible to make any inference about the impact of

EEOC from Adams' analysis.

        Utilizing the case study method, Wolkinson (1973) and Marshall (1976)
                               conclusions
reinforce Adams' pessimistic /        regarding the impact of EEOC's concilia-
tion and minority litigation efforts. Examining 75 instances of alleged

union discrimination, Wolkinson finds that, after settlements are reached,

they often provide inadequate relief to the workers involved, or are not

adhered to by the unions involved. These cases arose prior to the 1972

law permitting the EEOC to initiate litigation proceedings, and the author

attributes the lack of measured impact to the absence of any EEOC enforce-

ment power. For the construction industry, Marshall (1976) finds that

Title VII suits are always long and costly in terms of lawyer years, and

that the effects of the court proceedings are empirically difficult to dis-

tinguish from the effects of concurrent civil rights activity. While litiga-

tion appears to have had a minimal direct impact, Marshall asserts that the

court cases had a substantial impact in furthering the "hometown" plans in

areas involved in litigation.

        Kidder (1972) analyzes data from the textile industry in North and

South Carolina in an attempt to determine whether it was federal antidis—

crimination programs or a tightening of the labor market that was responsible

for the observed increase in black employment in that industry in the 1960's.

Like Adams, Kidder assumes that the EEOC concentrated on enforcement of the

employment provision of Title VII. She finds a negative correlation between
                                               40

EEOC charges and subsequent increases in black employment, and estimates

that the presence of a government contract in a firm insignificantly affects

black employment.




        The principle thrust of her analysis is directed toward disproving

the tight labor market hypothesis. She finds, for instance, that the major

black employment breakthrough in the textile industry came in 1963—65, before

the industry's overall unemployment rate dropped in 1966 (and before EEOC

was established). However, as Waisgiass (1972) notes, the relevant unemploy-

ment rate is not the textile industry's rate, but that of the labor markets
•           .             •                                     1
in the Carolinas, which started falling in 1962.

        The most sophisticated of all of the micro EEOC studies is the

unpublished Ph.D. thesis of Andrea Belier (1974). This work explores the

effect of charges filed on both the relative employment and relative wages

of black males. Beller's study is the first to disentangle conflicting wage

and employment effects of Title VII legislation and is a clear improvement

on previous work. Using State data drawn from the 1970 Census matched with

EEO-1 data assembled by Ashenfelter and Heckman (1976), she finds a net

negative impact of charges filed with the EEOC on the employment of blacks

        1
                    ____              ____   OVERALL UNELOYI€NT_RATES                   ____ ____
                    59                 61    62   63   64  65   66 1 67           68     69    70
                              [60 ]
North Carolina      4.1       4.4      5.5   3.7    3.6   3.3   2.5   1.8   2.1   1.7    1.5   2.4

South Carolina      3.4       3.5      4.5   3.1    3.2   2.8   2.2   1.6   2.3   1.8    1.6   2.7

     SOURCE: Statistical Abstract (various issues)


                                                                                                     .
                                  41

relative to whites. A strong negative effect on employment that results

from enforcement of Title VII wage equality provisions (measured by the

number of charges filed with wage inequality as an issue) swamps a weak

positive employment effect that results from enforcement of Title VII

employment provisions (measured by the number of charges filed with employ-

ment discrimination as the principle issue).

        Belier also estimates the impact of charges filed on black relative

wage rates. Her estimates display the same kind of offsetting behavior

found in the relative employment regressions; a greater number of wage

charges filed results in an increase in measured relative wages while a

greater number of employment charges filed results in a measured decrease

in wages. The two effects cancel. In both studies, she explicitly recognizes

the problem of mutual causation between charges and outcomes and presents
                                                                     1
methods for removing the bias that results from reverse causation.       The

conclusion from both analyses is that total charges filed with the EEOC,

interpreted as proxies for the enforcement of the wage and employment provisions

of Title VII, had a slight negative impact on relative black employment and

a negligible (and possibly perverse) impact on black relative wages. Her
                                    the
work thus provides some support for/notion that the cure of antidiscrimination

legislation may be worse than the disease, and that the consequences of con-

flicting provisions in legislation may be quite perverse.


C. Micro Studies of OFCC

        In contrast with the diversity of approaches and data used to measure

the impact of EEOC, most micro studies of the impact of OFCC use the same

        1
         However, her solution to this problem is based on the somewhat
questionable assumption that the presence of a regional EEOC office in a
state affects the volume of charges filed in the state.
                                   42

methodology and the same source of data: the annual EEO—l tapes. These

tapes contain information on employment and occupational distributions for

all major race—sex groups in firms covered by EEOC. No information is

available on wages or salaries, but whether the firm has a government

contract (and hence is covered by OFCC) is given, although the size of

the contract and its contribution to a firm's total sales is not. Due to

the absence of any measure of wages, analysts of OFCC have focused on the

impact of the presence of a government contract (measured by a dummy variable)

on the employment and occupational position of minorities within firms.

        Table 1 presents a summary of the principal empirical results from

the four principle studies of OFCC. The authors and sample period for each

study are given in Column 1.1 Control variables used in the regression

analysis performed in these studies are given in Column 2, and estimates

for the index of minority status indicated at the top of each column are

recorded in the final three columns. The key to the right of the table

defines the variables.

        All authors claim to estimate demand equations for firms, although

Burman supplements his model with supply variables that contribute nothing

to the fit of his equations. Ashenfelter and Heckman, and Heckman and

Wolpin interpret their estimates within a dynamic adjustment framework and

claim to estimate both long—run and short—run effects.2

        1With the exception of the sample used in the Heckman—Wolpin (1976)
study, all samples are national. (Heckinan and Wolpin use data from the
Chicago consolidated SMSA.) The Ashenfelter—Heckman (1976) paper and the
Burman (1973) paper use samples from the late sixties when OFCC was newly
established, while the Goldstein—Smith (1976) and Heckman—Wolpin studies
cover a later period.
        2Long—run effects are measured under the implicit assumption that
current prices and wages prevail in the future, and hence are inaccurate
to the extent that the stationarity hypothesis is invalid.
                                    43

        The first three papers treat the presence of a government contract

as an exogenous event, beyond the control of the firm (or the government);

the Iieckman—Wôlpin paper presents evidence that contract status is determined

by firm (and government) policy, and methods are devised to circumvent the

bias that results from mutual causation between receipt of a contract and a
firm's policy toward minorities.1
        As recorded in the Table, Ashenfelter and Heckman find that in the

short run government contractors raise the employment of black males

relative to white males 3.3 percent more than nongoverument contractors do,

while in the long run this effect is estimated to be 12.9 percent. These

numbers bracket Burman's estimate (which should be interpreted as an average

of short—run and long—run effects), and are itt   rough   agreement with the

estimates of Heckman and   Wolpin for a later period. The only discordant
estimate in this table is that of Goldstein and    Smith,   who find evidence

for a statistically insignificant decline in black status among government

contractors

        Unlike the authors of the other papers, Ashenfelter and Heckman

attempt to measure the economy—wide impact of OFCC on the relative employ-

ment of blacks. (See the second pair of numbers in Row 1, Columns 3—5.)

These estimates are obtained from the first pair of numbers by weighting

each number by the proportion of workers covered by OFCC (50 percent in

their sample). These estimates have meaning only if the measured relative

impact is directly related to the absolute (economy—wide) impact, and it

clearly need not be.


        1The Reckman—Wolpin paper is also the only paper in this group to
account for serial correlation in the presence of lags in firms' adjustment
to long—run equilibrium.
              may be due to their inclusion of a compliance review variable
along with a government contract variable. Even if the former variable
belongs in the equation, the estimated impact of contract status, holding
compliance reviews constant, would be expected to be less than if a compliance
review variable were excluded.
                                                          TABLE




                                                             Relative                          Relative Occupa—
         Study               Independent   Variable        Employment                          tional Position                      Key

Ashenfelter—Heckman (1976)   Presence of contract          Black males                              .2% +        SR           P    wageln
                             plus region dummy,                only                                 .4% 4        LR                 occupation    j
40,445 firms from EEOC—i     size of firm, log                                                                                B4    blacks in
  Data, 1966—1970 males                                                                                          SR
                             employment changes,           3.3% 4 SR                                .1% +                           occupation    j
  only                       SHSA, total firm             12.9% 4 LR                                .2% 4        LR                 whites   in
                             employment, lagged                                                                                     occupation    I
                             value of dependent            1.7% 4 SR                               /B—AW. 1w]                 B     blacks
                                                                                               [An1
                                                                                                                      in P1
                             variable                      6.4% 4 LR       A   in B/W                                         W     All whites
Burman (1973)                Presence of gov't.
                             contract plus
7,154 firms from EEOC—i
                             compliance contract,          5.6% t                                  2.5% +        black males
   Data, 1967—1970
                             change S1SA empi.,           black nales                              9.2% +        black females
                             change SMSA popula.,
                             change estabi. empi.,        12.9%       t                             EP.(B /B)
                             change estabi. skill—         black females
                             mix, change relative                                                      (W/W)
                             black education,             A    in B/W
                             change SMSA prop. black
                             change in percent union

Goldstein—Smith (1976)       Presence of gov't.
                             contract plus region             .27.4    males                        .427.4       males
74,563 firms in 1970—72
                             dummy, size of firm,
  from EEOC—l data
                             log employment changes,       3.6%+ females                           3.9% 4        females
                             SMSA, total firm empi.,                                                         B
                             compliance review             A in B/W                            A

Heckman—Wolpin (1976)        Cov't. contract pius          LR    SR
                             white collar,increase        10.4Z+ 8.97.4        black males
3,677 Chicago area firms     in firm empl., SIC one—
  from EEOC—i data for
                             digit code, previous          1.77.9 1.77.4       black females
  1970—73
                             year empi., by occupa.
                             group, interaction of        A    in B/W
                             contract:  with white
                             collar, with inc. in empl.




     .
                                   45

       Cross sectional comparisons between contractor and noncontractor

firms are intrinsically uninformative on the question of OFCC's economy—

wide impact on the position of blacks. The best one can hope to measure is

the differential between contractor and noncontractor firms. Without more

information on the structure of labor markets than is available from any of

these studies, these estimates yield no information on the true impact of

OFCC on the relative position of blacks in the economy. A 3.3 percent

differential can arise either because blacks are reshuf fled among firms or

because of an influx of blacks into the labor market. In presenting their

calculation of economy—wide impacts, Ashenfelter and Heckman implicitly

assume the latter interpretation, although their estimated relative impact

is consistent with either interpretation.

        The results for black female employment relative to white female

employment, and the results for relative occupational position for both

sexes suggest either small favorable or negligible negative impacts.1 The
                                        male
same criticism levied against the black/employment indices also applies to

measurements of these indices. Cross sectional estimates are intrinsically

ambiguous and are neither evidence for nor evidence against the role of OFCC

in promoting the status of blacks. From these studies, we can conclude that

OFCC has altered the behavior of firms or at least has sorted out firms by

their treatment of minorities. We cannot conclude from these studies that

the OFCC has served to elevate black status, nor can we (as do Smith and

Welch, 1976) conclude that it has not.

        Other pieces of evidence suggest that the OFCC may have had some

effect on the behavior of firms. Ashenfelter and Heckman note that segregated

        en a coefficient is negative, it is usually statistically
insignificant.
                                        46

white contractors were more likely to integrate than were segregated non-

white contractors. Heckman and Wolpin note that government contracts were

awarded to less discriminatory firms. But none of those studies provides

a reliable quantitative measurement of the direct impact of OFCC on black

status.

          Another shred of evidence on this issue is contributed by Smith

and Welch (1976) in their analysis of 1960 and 1970 Census data. In their

excellent analysis of male wages, they find evidence of a differentially

greater increase in black—white wage differentials in industries more depend-

ent on the government, and hence more liable to intervention by OFCC.1 This

is so because both black and white wages are higher in the covered sector

than in the noncovered sector, but white wages are proportionately higher than

black wages.

          An increase in black real wages in the covered sector may boost black

real wages in the uncovered sector more than white real wages if the mobility

of blacks to the covered sector is greater than the mobility of whites to the

covered sector, and hence (perversely) understated.2

                             Summary and Conclusions

          In this paper, we review recent evidence on the impact of anti—

discrimination legislation on the labor market status of black Americans.

Two   types   of evidence are considered: analyses of aggregate time series of

relative black status and microeconomic analyses of the impact of particular

programs.

          Freeman's influential time series evidence on governmental impact on

black status is shown to be less convincing than is generally assumed in

popular discussions. Macro relative wage and income data are quite sensitive

        1The measure of dependency is the fraction of industry sales to the
federal government.
               conclusion assumes that minority employment in covered sectors
increases. If it decreases, cross sectional estimates overstate the true
policy impact.
                                  47

to the relative number of blacks in the labor force, and the composition

of the black work force. As the relative number of blacks in the work

force declines, and as low wage blacks are siphoned out of the labor force

by transfer programs, measured relative wages of blacks tend to rise. Such

growth in relative black status has nothing to do with a lessening of dis-

crimination against blacks. We present some evidence (in Appendix A) that

part of the observed decline in black labor force participation is due to

increased benefit levels of government transfer programs. This analysis

suggests that Freeman's measured impact of government programs on black

status confuses supply shifts related to federal transfer program activity

with demand shifts related to federal antidiscriminatjon activity. Govern-

ment impact on the supply of labor explains the rise in the relative wage

rates of blacks that occurred at precisely the same timethat relative

labor force participation rates for prime age black makes declined, and

labor force participation rates for black women became stationary, after

a long period of growth.

        The best available micro studies document considerable evidence of

governmental antidiscrimination activity at the firm level but are silent

on the question of governmental impact on black status. Some studies show

weekly perverse effects of legislation. For example, enforcement of both

wage equality and employment provisions of Title VII legislation appears to

result in lower relative employment for blacks (Belier, 1974). Other studies

that appear to show favorable impacts of government activity are shown, on

closer scrutiny, to be inherently ambiguous as to their true interpretation.

        Having stated essentially negative conclusions, it is important to

note that there is evidence that the labor market for young black Americans
                                     48

has dramatically improved in recent years (Freeman (1977), Smith and Welch

(1976)). If antidiscrimination programs are effective at all, they are

likely to have their largest impact on young workers. This is so because

firms prefer to train younger workers——with longer expected working lives——

and younger workers are able to more fully adjust to revised expectations

of labor market opportunity than are older workers, who would find retrain-

ing less profitable. The analysis of Freeman and Smith and Welch, as well

as the sharp rise in black school enrollment rates in the mid—sixties,

suggests that antidiscrimination legislation may have had a real impact.

          But the data are too crude to support this conclusion, especially

for the aggregate of black workers. At our current level of understanding,

the   most honest summary of existing knowledge of government impact on the

status of blacks is to say that there is no evidence that government

antidiscrimination policy has had any impact on elevating black—white wage

differentials.




                                                                              S
                                  49




                               APPENDIX A


            A Brief Discussion of the Time Series Evidence

       In this appendix, we present a brief account of an extensive

analysis of the time series of black—white income differences reported

more fully elsewhere (Butler and Heckman, 1976). This work does not claim

to offer a complete explanation of the aggregate data but does present some

new results, and causes us to discard some old results, due to Freeman, that

have gained widespread currency in popular discussions.

        The data discussed here are a sample of annual observations from

the Current Population Survey for the period 1948—1974. We thus use three

more observations than Freeman (for the years 1972—1974). The expansion

of the data base does not alter the conclusions to be drawn from his model.

Rather, the specification of the relative demand curve is the important

point. In order to focus on essential issues, we are faithful to Freeman's

functional forms and definitions of variables except for some inessential

changes noted in Appendix B. That appendix also gives a complete descrip-

tion of data sources and methods used to construct variables.

        Table A—i reports our regression results for males while Table A—2

reports regression results for women. The key before these tables defines

the variables used in the regression analysis. The numbers reported in each

column are the regression estimates of the effect of the variable listed at

the top of the column on the dependent variable listed in the appropriate

row. "t" statistics are recorded below each regression coefficient.

        To understand these results, consider the first row of Table A—i

which reports empirical estimates of one of Freeman's models (1973). Reading
                                     50

across the columns, the effect of an additional year is to raise relative

income by 1/2 percent; a one percent deviation from the trend of real GNP

raises relative income by .72 percent, while an additional 10 percent of

accumulated real EEOC expenditures per nonwhite worker (this represents

about 21.5 million dollars in 1975) increases relative median income by

.34 percent.




                                                                            .



                                                                            S
                                     51




                         Key to Tables A—i and A—2

        (For a more precise definition of variables, see Appendix B.)


Ralative Median Income           —   the   logarithm of the ratio of the median
                                     income of all black males to the median
                                     income of all white males. This measure
                                     includes earnings and transfer payments.

Relative Median Earnings         — a similar measure for the earnings of

                                     workers


Relative Median Wage/Salary      —   self   explanatory
Income for Year Round Full—
Time Workers


             C                   — an intercept term

         TIME                    —   is   a linear time variable initialized at
                                     1 in 1947
                                                    the log of
         DGNP                    —   deviation   of/real GNP from a fitted trend
                                     line (measured in 100 billion dollar units)

        RLFMT                    —   the   ratio of the labor force participation
                                     rate of blacks to the labor force partici-
                                     pation rate for whites (defined separately
                                     for each sex)

           ED                    —   the ratio of the median education of nonwhites
                                     to the median education of whites (defined
                                     separately for each sex)

          AID                    —   the average real monthly payment per recipient
                                     to individuals participating in the aid to
                                     families with dependent children (AFDC)

       IJNCOMF                   —   the average real monthly unemployment
                                     compensation per beneficiary (units: dollars)
                                                           TABLE A—i

                                    RELATIVE WAGE/INCOME REGRESSIONS FOR MALES
                                          (t—statistics in parentheses)

                                                                         Independent Variable
   Dependent Variable                     C       TIME      DGNP     EEOC         RLFMT        ED        AID     UNCOMP      R2   D.W.
   Relative
 l.Nealan income, 1948—74              —.689      .005       .726     .034    . . .                                        .694   2.13
                                       (30.6)    (3.07)     (2.63)   (2.76)
   Relative
 2.Median Income, 1948—74              —.629     —.003       .614  —.018   —4.12                                           2SLS   2.05
                                       (15.95)   (—.689)    (2.30) (—.577) (—1.75)
   Relative
 3.Median Income, 1948—74              —.380     —.003       .563   .032          .924      .662                           2SLS   2.51
                                       (1.44)    (—.494)    (1.94) (.506)     (.160)       (.954)
   Relative                                                                                                                                  Ui
 4.Meaian income, 1948—74              2.49       .016      .243 —.003        . .      .   .    .   .    .522    —.858     .820   2.60
                                       (1.05)    (2.17)    (.934) (—.247)                               (2.73)   (—2.86)
    Relative
 5. Median Wage/Salary                 —.585    .004        .438      .044                                                 .734   2.37
      Income, 1948—74                  (—27.26)(2.84)      (1.66)    (3.81)
    Relative
 6. Median Wage/Salary                 —.539     —.002      .348      .003    —3.28                                        2SLS   1.94
      Income, 1948—74                  (—13.2)   (—.451)   (1.26)    (.088)   (1.35)
    Relative
 7. Median Wage/Salary                 —.594     —.002      .359     —.ü8    —4.41   —.148                                 2SLS   1.77
      Income, 1948—74                  (—2.17)   (—.447)   (1.20)    (—.128) (—.728) (—.206)
    Relative
 8. Median Wage/Salary                 4.16       .019      .038      .020    . . .             .   .    .218    —.833     .804   2.52
      Income, 1948—74                  (1.66)    (2.51)    (.139)    (1.33)                             (1.07)   (—2.61)
    Relative
 9.Median Wage/Salary    Income        —.527    .006       —.257      .015    . . .                                        .823   2.27
      Year round, full   time, 1955—74 (—21.69)(4.22)      (1.57)    (2.06)
    Relative
lO.Median Wage/Salary    Income        —.498      .003 —.274   .002           —1.18                                        2SLS   2.15
      Year round, full   time, 1955—74 (—10.5) (.681) (—1.57) (.133)          (—.748)
    Relative
1l.Median Wage/Salary    Income        —.168     —.012   —.483   .034             2.03     1.16                            2SLS   2.69
      Year round, full   time, 1955—74 (.288)    (—1.17) (—2.24)(1.28)        (.81)        (1.63)
   Relative
l2.Median Wage/Salary Income        —.101         .006     —.392     .006     .    .   .   . . .         .289  —.285   .850       2.59
     Year round, full time, 1955—74                                                                     (1.40) (—1.05)
                                    (—.051)      (.920)
                                                           (2.l21ç                                                                       S
       .                                                TABLE A—2

                                  RELATIVE WAGE/INCOME REGRESSIONS FOR FEMALES
                                         (t—statistics in parentheses)



                                                                   Independent Variable                                    2
      Dependent Variable               C      TIME       DGNP        EEOC RLFFT      ED                 AID    UNCOMP     R     D.W.
      Relative                                                                                                            941 2.05
 1.   Median .Lncome,1948—74        —.921    .032    —.278   —.002   . .              .    . . .
                                     (—28.70)(14.65) (—.705) (—.100)
      Relative
 2.   Median Income, 1948—74        —1.47      .044       .015       .028    1.43          . . .                         2SLS   2.23
                                    (—3.29) (4.51)       (.031)     (.911)   (1.22)
      Relative
 3.   Median Income, 1948—74        —3.75      .114        .673      .052    4q43         —2.29                           SLS   2.40
                                     (—1.27) (1.27)      (.633)     (1.02) (1.08)         (—.790)
      Relative
 4.   Median Income, 1948—74        —4.37      .010        .058      .009    •   . .       . • .       .159    .899      .950 2.41
                                     (—2.25) (.799)      (.128)     (.393)                            (.481) (1.74)
      Relative                                                                                                                          Ui
 5.   Median Wage/Salary            —1.05    .030     .532           .073                                                .953   1.67
        Income, 1948—74              (—32.99)(13.57) (1.36)         (4.25)
      Relative
 6.   Median Wage/Salary            —1.13      .031       .574       .077        .206                                    2SLS   1.73
        Income, 1948—74              (2.72)   (3.46)     (1.25)     (2.67)   (.189)
      Relative
 7.   Median Wage/Salary             3.19     —.100     —.   668     .032    —5.46         4.32                          2SLS   1.92
        Income, 1948—74              (1.40)   (—1.46)    (—.816)    (.815)   (—1.73) (1.94)
      Relative
 8.   Median Wage/Salary             1.04      .038     —.164        .013    •    .   .    . • .       1.00 —1.09        .978 2.01
        Income, 1948—74              (.352)   (4.24)    (—.505)     (.742)                            (4.20)   (—2.91)
      Relative                       —.775    .023                   .022                         .                       947
 9.   ieaian wage/Salary Income                      —.478                   .    . .      . .                                  1.64
       Year round, full time, l955—74(-l9.63)(10.06) (—1.79)        (1.87)
      Relative
10.   Median Wage/Salary Income      —.448    .017   —.536           .002    —.876                                       2SLS   1.39
       Year round, full time, 1955—74(—l.21) (2.10)  (—1.87)        (.073) (—.887)
      Relative
11.   Median Wage/Salary Income      1.08    —.029   —. 783         —.016   —2.97   1.42                                 2SLS    1.36
       Year round, full time, l955—74(.709) (—.656)  (—1.92)        (—.458)(—l.29) (1.05)
      Relative
12.   Median Wage/Salary Income     —2.79     .013   —.767           .001                    •    .     .824 —.368      .966     2.22
                                             (1.57)  (—2.98)        (.055)                             (2. 86) (—. 968)
       Year round, full time,
                                  54

       The models that correspond to those reported in Freeman's original

analysis are reported in rows 1, 5 and 9 in each table. With the exception

of the equation for the relative median income of females (row 1 of Table

A—2), our empirical results support Freeman's contention that cumulated

EEOC expenditure, interpreted as a proxy for federal antidiscrimination

activity, elevated the labor market status of blacks.

        Suppose, however, that the assumption that blacks and whites are

perfect substitutes in demand is relaxed. This can be done by adding a

relative quantity variable (the ratio of blacks to whites) to the list of

variables in the relative demand curve. This modification permits the

demand equation to resemble DD' in Figure 1. If relative quantities are

added to the model, certain technical difficulties in estimation arise.

These are resolved by use of standard statistical methods)

        There are dramatic empirical consequences of relaxing Freeman's

assumption about factor substitution. To see this, look at rows 2, 6 and

10 in each table. In all but one case, in the modified relative demand

equations the measured impact of federal activity becomes quantitatively

negligible and statistically insignificant. Moreover, in the one aberrant

case (row 6 of Table A—2), the measured impact of EEOC become statistically

insignificant when relative education level (ED) is added to the equation

(row 7 of Table A-2). There are strong prior reasons for including this

variable in the relative demand function to adjust•for racial changes in skill

endowment.

        The empirical results for the male equations show that there is

reasonably strong evidence that the relative male demand curve is downward


        1The technique is two stage least squares. The instrumental variables
are EEOC, DGNP, AID, UNE and ED.
                                      55

sloping.                        When relative education is added to the female

equation (rows 3, 7 and 11 of Table A—2), the same conclusion carries over

to the female results.1

          An alternative way of telling the same story is given in lines

4, 8 and 12 of each table. The empirical results reported there are estimates

of the dependence of measured relative wages and incomes on all the factors

that determine both relative demand and relative supply in the system (i.e.,

in the econometric jargon, these are "reduced form" estimates). When

account is taken of the real value of transfer payments per recipient, there

is no measured effect of federal antidiscrimination activity on relative

wages and incomes.

          In results not reported here (see Butler arid Heckman 1976), we

discuss the relationship between relative labor force participation rates

and transfer program benefits. Rising levels of AFDC payments help to

explain the observed decline in black male headship rates (see Chart 6, p. 12

and   Chart   11, p. 56). As black male participation in family life declines,

so does their labor market participation——married males of any race are more

likely to participate in the market than single or unattached males. Black

female participation in AFDC programs serves to retard growth in their labor

force participation. More generally, the AID variable used in our analysis

may be viewed as a proxy for the entire package of social welfare programs,

including A.FDC, that favored low income workers, and hence blacks, and

resulted in declines (or decelerations) in black labor force participation

rates. Even without a marital disruption effect, income transfer programs

raise the minimum wage that recipients will voluntarily accept in order to

work, and hence an expansion of the benefit levels in social programs leads

to a reduction in work activity, and an increase in relative black wage rates

         1Trecisely the same results arise if relative employment, relative
      29OO                                    56

                                        Chart 1J




                           Average Annual real unemployment
                                  compensation payment




       I   i4


           ço



cJ,


.-1
'—I
 0
                                                                                            .
           (000




           750




           coo




                                                                                            .
                  11   '               ci   cc-   i o Cl 62   6 i 6 6 70 •11 12. 73 i4 7S
                                   57

if blacks and whites are imperfect substitutes in demand. To the extent

that social programs selectively eliminate low income blacks from the

labor force, and hence the measured statistics, they accentuate the effect

of movement up the relative demand curve induced by a reduction in the

number of blacks relative to the number of whites.

        In contrast with the effect of most income transfer programs,

increases in the real level of unemployment compensation benefits (UNCOMP)

are expected to raise the minimum acceptable wage required to perform

market work more for whites as a group than for blacks. This is so because

proportionately more whites work in sectors covered by unemployment insurance

than do blacks. Tables A—3, A—4 and A—5 provide evidence in support of this

argument.

        Table A—3 records the importance of income, by type, as a fraction

of the total income received by persons 14 years and older. For both sexes,

the proportion of total income due to welfare (WEL) is at least five times

larger for nonwhites than it is for whites. Table A—4 shows the same

pattern with respect to the distribution of aid in 1968. For example, only

1.5 percent of white males over 14 received welfare while 5.6 percent of

black males did. The interesting fact that emerges from this table is that

a greater proportion of white women receive unemployment compensation than

do nonwhite women (the COMPEN variable includes unemployment and workmen's

compensation, government employee pensions, and veterans payments), and

unemployment compensation represents a larger fraction of their income.

While unemployment compensation Is roughly the same proportion of Income for

males of both races, a higher proportion of white males receive unemployment

compensation than do black males. Finally, note the overall pattern revealed

in the income level regressions of Table A—5. AID has a generally positive
employment rates or relative labor force are used as measures of the relative
quantity of blacks in the market rather than the measure employed here.
                                                       58
                                                                                                                       .
                                                    TABLE A—3

                        MALES                                                       FEMALES

                 WAGE                  WEL                COMPEN          WAGE            WEL               COMPEN
           W            NW       W           NW       W       NW      W      NW       W         NW      W       NW


1968      .786      .866        .002     .013       .016      .020   .754    .772   .015        .101   .020    .015

1969      .792      .868        .002     .013       .018      .021   .754    .787   .016        .096   .018     .018

1970      .791      .864        .002         .013   .022      .025   .754    .782   .019        .104   .022     .016

1971      .784      .839        .002         .014   .025      .026   .746    .758   .019        .124   .023     .017

1972      .781      .857        .002         .012   .025      .026   .736    .761   .019        .114   .022     .016

1973      .776      .861        .002         .009   .024      .023   .733    .754   .019        .117   .022     .015

1974      .778      .841        .003         .014   .029      .032   .720    .749   .022        .110   .026     .017


                 Proportior of income coming from wages and salaries (WAGE); public                                    S
   assistance and welfare (WEL); and unemployment and workers compensation,

   government employee pensions, and veterans payments (COMPEN); by race and

   sex.




                                                                                                                       S
                                                   59




                                                TABLE A-4




                                      MALES                                       FEMALES
                  WAGE               WEL              COMPEN            WAGE          WEL             COMPEN
             W           NW     W          NW     W        NW      W       NW       W       NW       W    NW

    1968   .799      .843     .015     .056     .094      .082   .716      .748   .028      .176   .054   .037

    1969   .804      .843     .017     .057     .102      .084   .717      .758   .041      .178   .056   .046

    1970   .799      .836     .019     .062     .124      .103   .708      .727   .047      .203   .063   .051

    1971   .798      .812     .019     .067     .131      .105   .703      .702   .048      .233   .066   .054

    1972   .793      .812     .018     .062     .126      .099   .695      .688   .049      .236   .065   .053

    1973   .796      .824     .016     .052     .115      .095   .701      .699   .046      .221   .060   .046
S   1974   .789      .804     .022     .071     .140      .118   .692      .694   .057      .238   .073   .054


                 Number of people receiving wage, WEL, and COMPEN (as defined in

     Table A—3) as a proportion of all people receiving income;by race and sex.
                                         60


                                   TABLE A-5
                         (t—statistics in parentheses)


Black Males        C     TINE    DGNP         EEOC    AID    UNCOMP    R2     D.W.

1. Income 1948—74 6.29   .026   1.17   .002    .198           .009     .965   2.35
                 (4.34) (6.21) (3.94) (.099) (.793)          (1.07)

2. Wage/Salary   10.31   .041     .505         —.174
                                              .011     —.236           .969   2.04
   1948—74       (3.10) (4.07)   (1.38) (.550) (—.645) (—.550)

3. wage/Salary of 5.06   .021    —.192   .005    .288         .164     .983   2.15
   Yr—round full—(2.17) (2.98)   (—.891) (.489) (1.19)       (.518)
   time 1955—74

Black Females

4. Income 1948—74 1.81    .029    .637        .018    .780    .007     .973   1.85
                                                                        .



                 (.920) (5.17)   (1.57) (.818) (2.29)        (.598)

5. Wage/Salary    5.94   .048     .229 —.002     1.02        —.719     .987   1.76
   1948—74       (1.84) (4.88)   (.644) (—.131) (3.92)       (—1.76)

6. Wage/Salary of 2.51   .022    —.574 —.002    1.04         —.162     .985   2.05
   Yr—round full—(.801) (2.31)
   time 1955—74
                                 (—1.98)(.138) (3.22)        (—.380)                 .
White Males

7. Income 1948—74 9.72   .029    .554 —.013    —.288    .011           .978   1.28
                 (11.38)(l1.57) (3.16) (—1.32) (—1.94) (2.32)

8. Wage/Salary    6.15   .022     .467 —.009    —.391         .600     .991   1.56
   1948—74        (4.42)(5.l9)   (3.04) (—1.10)(—3.48)       (3.40)

9. Wage/Salary of 5.17   .015     .199 —.0003 —.002     .449           .991   2.47
   Yr—round full— (3.99)(395)    (1.67) (.052) (—.012) (2.55)
   time 1955—74

White Females

10.Income 1948—74 3.98   .001     .961        .027    .584   — .010    .954   1.74
                 (4.55) (.324)   (5.34) (2.74) (3.84)        (—2.19)

ll.Wage/Salary    4.90   .010     .393 —.015          .019    .372     .988   1.54
   1948—74       (4.90) (3.20)   (3.57) (—2.62) (.236)       (2.93)




                                                                                     .
12.Wage/Salary of 5.29   .009     .193         .001   .220    .205     .987   1.55
   Yr—round full—(4.52) (2.46)   (1.79) (.241) (1.81)        (1.29)
   time 1955—74
                                   61

impact on the level of female income with a much stronger effect for black

females than for whites. Unemployment compensation payments clearly result

in larger increases in white male income than in black male income.

        The upshot of this discussion is that the aggregate data do not

support the argument that measured growth in relative black wages and

income is due to federal antidiscrjxninatjou efforts as measured in the

literature. Part of the measured growth is more properly attributed to

increasing social expenditure in the sixties which led to a withdrawal of

black workers——especially low wage black workers——from the labor force.

        However, we do not shift to the other extreme and conclude that

all of the measured relative wage growth of blacks is due to the reduction

of blacks from the work force. The excellent studies of Freeman (1977)

and Smith and Welch (1976) refute any such conclusion. Nor do we deny

that antidiscrimination activity may have had some effect on raising black

status. A noteworthy finding in both the Freeman and Smith and Welch

analyses is that yowg black workers have made spectacular gains in relative

status in recent years. 4oreover, the data on school enrollment rates for

blacks shows a sharp increase in the mid—sixties——precisely what would be

expected if their long term prospects in the labor market had been improved

byantidiscrinijnatjon legislation. Since it is likely that antidiscrimination

programs have their greatest impact on young workers who can still alter

their career plans, this evidence tends to support the view that antidiscrimi—

nation legislation may have had a beneficial Impact.

        The important point to extract from our analysis is that for the

group of blacks as a whole, there is little evidence from the time series

that antidiscrimination legislation has altered relative black status. And
                                  62

for this group, there is considerable evidence that social transfer

programs have played an important, albeit not monolithic, role in

elevating black wage rates relative to white wage rates.




                                                                      .
                                     63


                                  APPENDIX B


                                DATA SOURCES

Income

           Median income includes all income for persons 14 years of age

and older receiving Income. The median wage and salary income group consists

of all wage and salary income for persons 14 years of age and over receiving

such income. Year round, full—time income refers to all wage and salary

income of year round, full time workers. Due to the lack of published

data, the regional figures refer only to median income. All these figures

(except for the 1949 regional income figures, which came from the U.S.

Census of Population, 1950, Detailed Characteristics) come from the following

issues of the U. S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports, Series

P—60:    5 (1947), 6 (1948), 7 (1949), 9 (1950), 11 (1951), 14 (1952),

16   (1953), 19 (1954), 23 (1955), 27 (1956), 30 (1957), 33 (1958), 35 (1959),
37 (1960), 39 (1961), 41 (1962), 43 (1963), 47 (1964), 51 (1965), 53 (1966),
60 (1967), 66 (1968), 75 (1969), 80 (1970), 85 (1971), 90 (1972), 97 (1973)
101 (1974), and 103 (an advanced report on 1975). The last eight issues
also provided the information for Tables A and B in the Appendix.

DGNP, TIME, and EEOCYR

          Consistent with the original Freeman study (1973) our time variable

takes a value of 1 beginning in 1947, and our deviation from gross national

product (DGNP) is computed using Freeman's computed trend (see his footnote 8)——
                           that
though it should be noted / his data goes up to 1972 and our data extends through
                                   based on a
1975. The reported EEOC budget is /   fiscal year from July 1 to June 30,
and it appears to us that Freeman used this fiscal year measure in the
                                  64

construction of his EEOC variable. The corrected calendar year variable

(the log of accumulated real EEOC calendar year expenditures per nonwhite worker)

is of course highly correlated with Freeman's variable, shows only a

marginally smaller effect, and is the variable we employ in the above

regressions.


Education, Labor Force Participation Rates

         These data come from the 1976 Employment and Training Report of

the President and the 1975 Handbook of Labor Statistics. The labor force

participation rates are for the civilian labor force 16 years and over, and

are only available to 1948. Education refers to the median years of school

completed by the civilian labor force 18 years and older, and is available

only for selected years before 1964. We employed Freeman's interpolated

values for the missing years.


AID and UNCOMP

         Average monthly payment per recipient in the Aid to Families with

Dependent Children program came from the 1974 and 1975 Annual Statistical

Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin.   The 1975 Statistical Abstract
                         the
of the United States and/1970 edition of the Bureau of the Census' Historical

Statistics of the United States contain data on the average monthly unemploy-

ment compensation per beneficiary.


Additional Data Used in the Tables

         The proportion of nonwhite female headed familicas   are from the

following issues of the U. S. Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports,

Series P—20: 16 and 17 (1947), 26 (1949), 33 (1950), 44 (1952), 53 (1953),

67 (1954 and 1955), 75 (1956), 83 (1957), 88 (1958), 100 (1959), 106 (1960),
                                   65

116 (1961), 125 (1962), 139 (1963 and 1964), 153 (1965), 164 (1966),

173 (1967), 191 (1968), 200 (1969), 218 (1970), 233 (1971), 251 (1972),

258 (1973), 276 (1974), and 291 (1975. We interpolated for the missing

1949 and 1951 data.
                                  66



                                                                               .
                              REFERENCES



Adams, A. V. Toward Fair Employment and the EEOC: A Study of Compliance
        Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Washington, D. C.:
        U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, August 31, 1972.

Anderson, B. E. and Wallace, P. "Public Policy and Black Economic Progress:
        A Review of the Evidence." American Economic Review 65, No. 2
        (May 1975): 47—52.

Ashenfelter, 0. "Changes in Labor Market Discrimination Over Time."
        Journal of Human Resources 5 (Fall 1970): 403—429.


Ashenfelter, 0. and Heckman, James J. "Measuring the Effect of An Anti—
        discrimination Program," in Orley Ashenfelter and James Blum, (eds.)
        Evaluating the Labor Market Effects of Social Programs. Princeton,
        N.J.: Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University, in press.

Belier, A. H. "The Effects of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 on
        the Economic Position of Minorities." Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia
        University, 1974.

Becker, G. Economics of Discrimination, 2nd ed., Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press, 1971. 1st ed., 1957.

Butler, R. and Heckman, James J. "The Impact of Government Programs on the
        Labor Market Status of Black Americans." Unpublished manuscript,
        University of Chicago, November, 1976.

Burman, George. "The Economics of Discrimination: The Impact of Public
        Policy." Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1973.

Flanagan, Robert J. "Actual versus Potential Impact of Government Anti—
        discrimination Programs." Industrial Labor Relations Review 29,
        No. 4 (July 1976): 486—507.

Freeman, R. B. The Black Elite. McGraw Hill, 1977.

__________• "Changes in the Labor Market for Black Americans." Brookings
        Papers 1 (1973): 67—120.

Goldstein, Morris and Smith, Robert S. "The Estimated Impact of the Anti—
        discrimination Program Aimed at Federal Contractors." Industrial
        Labor Relations Review 29, No. 4 (July 1976): 523—543.

Griliches, Z. "A Note on Capital—Skill Complementarity." Review of Economics
        and Statistics (1968).
                                   67

Haworth, J.; Gwartney, J.; and Haworth, C. "Earnings, Productivity and
        Changes in Employment Discrimination During the 1960's."
        American Economic Review 65, No. 1 (March 1975): 158—68.

Heckman, James J. "Simultaneous Equation Models with and without Structural
        Shift in the Equations," in Goldfeld and Quandt teds.) Studies in
        Nonlinear Estimation. Ballinger, 1976.

Heckman, James J. and Wolpin, K. "Does the Contract Compliance Program
        Work? Mi Analysis of Chicago Data." Industrial Labor Relations
        Review 29, No. 4 (July 1976): 544—564.

lionig, Marjorie. "The Impact of Welfare Payments on Family Stability," in
        R. I. Lerman, Studies Prepared for the Subcommittee on Fiscal
        Policy of the Joint Economic Conmiittee, 79th Congress of the
        United States, November 4, 1973.

Jones, James E., Jr. "Comment." Industrial Labor Relations Review
        29, No. 4 (July 1976): 281—84.

Kidder, Alice. "Federal Compliance Efforts in the Carolina Textile Industry:
        A Summary Report," in the Twenty—fifth Annual Proceedings of the
        Industrial Relations Research Association, December 1972, pp. 353—361.

King, Alan G. and Marshall, Ray. "Black—White Economic Convergence and
        the Civil Rights Act of 1964," in Proceedings, Industrial Relations
        Research Association, Spring 1974, pp. 462—71.

Landes, William M. "The Economics of Fair Employment Laws." Journal of
        Political Economy 76, No. 4 (July/August 1968): 507—52.

__________   "The Effect of State Fair Employment Laws on the Economic
        Position of Nonwhites." American Economic Review 57 (May 1967):
        578—90.

Lerman, Robert I. "The Family, Poverty, and Welfare Programs: An Intro-
        ductory Essay on Problems of Analysis and Policy," in Studies
        Prepared for the Subcommittee on Fiscal Policy of the Joint
        Economic Committee, 79th Congress of the United States, Paper No.
        12, November 4, 1973.

Ligget, M. H. "The Efficacy of State Fair Employment Practice Commissions."
        Industrial Labor Relations Review 22, No. 4 (July 1969).

Marshall, Ray; Knapp, Charles; Ligget, N.; and Clover, Robert. "The Impact
        of Court Cases and Out—of—Court Settlements on Minority Employment."
        Center for the Study of Human Resources, The University of Texas,
        February, 1976.

Nerton, Robert. "The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social Action."
        American Sociological Review 1 (1936): 893—904.
                                   68

Norgren, Paul H. and Hill, Samuel E. Toward Fair Employment. New York:
        Columbia University Press, 1964.

Smith, James P. and Welch, Finis. "Black—White Male Wage Ratios: 1960—
        1970." American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Vroman, Wayne. "Changes in Black Workers Relative Earnings: Evidence
        from the 1960's, in G. M. Furstenberg et al, (eds.) Patterns of
        Racial Discrimination. Lexington, 1974.

Waisglass, Harry J. "Discussion," in Proceedings, Industrial Relations
        Research Association, December 1972, pp. 370—373.

Wallace, Phyllis A. "A Decade of Policy Development in Equal Opportunities
        in Employment and Housing." Massachusetts Institute of Technology
        Working Paper #767—75, January 1975.

Welch, Finis. "Black—White Differences in Returns to Schooling." American
        Economic Review 63 (December 1973): 893—907.

__________   "Labor Market Discrimination: An Interpretation of Income
        Differences in the Rural South." Journal of Political Economy
        75 (June 1967): 225—240.

Wolkinson, Benjamin W. B1acks Unions, and the EEOC. Lexington Books,
        1973.

Wolpin, Kenneth. "Education, Screening, and the Demand for Labor of
        Uncertain Quality." Ph.D. Dissertation, City University of
        New York, 1974.




                                                                             .
