              NBER Working Paper Series




                  NOTES ON THE PUBLIC DEBT
                    AND SOCIAL INSURANCE



                         Jerry   Green



                   Working Paper No.     188




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305



                           July 1977



                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for cotnents only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

This research was supported by a contract with NBER from the
Office of Income Security Policy, Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare (No. HEW—lOO—76--0l70).
Notes on the Public Debt and Social Insurance



Introduction                                                      1

A. Intergenerational Aspects of the Public Debt: certainty

     1. The Diamond Model Reviewed                               5

     2. Intergenerational Considerations: extensions of the
         Diamond model                                           10

     3.   Open Problems in the Theory of the Public Debt under
          Certainty                                              14

B.   Intergenerational Aspects of the Public Debt: uncertainty   18

Footnotes                                                        21

References                                                       22
      Introduction

      Due   perhaps   to its very size, the public debt has long ben the subject

of economic analysis and debate.' Yet despite this history, its economic

effects are still not fully understood on either theoretical or empirical

grounds. Presently, the areas of persistent doubt, or disagreement, have

been thrust further to the fore for several reasons. First, economic events

of the early 1970's left traditional Keynesian macroeconomic theories in an

uneasy position. Challenged by the monetarist position,2 the central and

differing roles of the public debt in the two theories formed a focal point

for the analyses.3 Second, recent awareness of the acute state of the social

security system4 which is in the position of owing a huge unfunded debt to

the current working population and faces a further adverse swing in the

ratio of retirees to workers due to demographic factors, has highlighted

the need to reevaluate the role of the public debt and social insurance

policy in our economy. Intergenerational aspects of income redistribution

and   risk—bearing    more generally5 have also been raised in this context.

Finally, the question of the choice of the discount rate for public invest-

ment6 in the context of a growing economy without lump—sum taxation, has

led to the study of the relationship between bond—financing and tax—f man—

cing, and their implications for project selection.

       In the wake of these, further open questions have been generated: What

are the implications of having government bonds with interest and principle

denominated in money units, rather than being indexed to prices, wages, or

something else?7 What are the effects of public debt issuance on the dis-

tribution of income?

       In these notes I hope to touch on a variety of these issues and to

suggest ways in which they might be approached. It is to be viewed
                                2




as a research proposal, or an outline of open problems rather than as a

statement of results.

     The notes are divided into two sections. In the first, problems

of Intertemporal reallocation of resources through the public debt and

social security are treated in the context of complete certainty about

future events. Both positive and normative aspects a-f the problem are

Investigated, but principle emphasis is given to the latter. In the

second section, the set of issues related to uncertainty and the role of

Intergenerational social insurance in its mitigation are explored.

     The remainder of this introduction consists of a brief summary of

these two sections; details follow in the body of the notes.

A. Intergenerational Aspects of Public Debt: certainty.

     Public debt as a method of financing public investment has recently

been given a rigorous treatment by Arrow and Kurz. Their pathbreak—

ing book deals with the case in which the investment is to be made by a

government which does not directly control the private savings behavior

of its citizens. When faced with a particular tax structure and planned

sequence of public investment levels, the private sector determines its

savings behavior through competitive markets for capital and the factors

of production. Because private and public capital may be complemen—

tary inputs in the aggregate production process, and public capital is not

producible by the private sector, the financing and investment decisions

are intertwined.

    Arrow and Kurz treat the case in which the government's objective

is to maximize its citizen's welfare. Because the private sector Is

modelled as a single, infinitely long—lived, household, this amounts to
                                    3




the assumption that the public and private sectors have the same objec-

tive function.

     In the context of a simple life—cycle model, there is an obvious

direction to pursue: If the government maximizes a utilitarian objec-

tive function over all generations, the coincidence of goals assumed by

Arrow and Kurz no longer exists.

     One of their theorems sheds light on this case: It states that the

coincidence of goals condition is necessary and sufficient for a system

with income taxation and public debt to be able to achieve any arbitrary

feasible path. By virtue of this result we know that the life—cycle

problem is a second—best one.

     How can we characterize the second—best policy? In particular, what

is the second—best optimal relationship between the rate of return on

public investment, that on private investment and the social rate of time

preference?



B. Intergenerational Aspects of the Public Debt: uncertainty

     One of the interesting features of the public debt other than its

roles in aggregate demand determination and as a means of financing in-

vestment, is its ability to provide mutual intergenerational insurance

against risks common to members of an age cohort. Modelling this in

the overlapping generations framework as in section A, some of the same

questions arise as in the certainty case.

     When,    given   a feasible contingent intergenerational consumption

plan, is it possible to decentralize this system by means of a tax system

 and a social security/ government debt policy, with rates changing with

 respect to the observed events. What      other   instruments are part of this
                                    4




scheme? Is it necessary to distinguish individuals by age in the implemen-

tation of various taxes?

     If we are in a model where complete decentralizability fails to obtain,

what types of contingent consumption arrangements are possible in the steady

state, and how are they implemented given the available policy tools? In

such a second—best world, do the precepts of productive efficiency under

constant returns still hold as in the certainty case?
                                  5




A. Intergenerational Aspects of the Public Debt: certainty

     1. The Diatxrnd Model Reviewed

     There are two main issues that come under the broad heading of

intergenerational aspects of the public debt. The first is whether

using debt as a policy instrument can increase the efficiency of the

economy, both dynamically and in the steady—state. The second is the

relationship between the required rate of return on public investment,

that on private investment and the social rate of time preference

when debt finance is available. As we will see, these are closely con-

nected. They differ only in so far as the second problem requires us to

nx,del public investment as a different type of capital. It may not be

perfectly substitutable with private capital in the production process;

and it is not available as an investint to the private sector. In the

first type of model, the two are indistinguishable and the government

has direct access to the private capital market. We will begin there,

because of its greater simplicity.

     Much of the recent literature uses the basic model of Diamond

 (1965) to capture both the growth and the intergenerational aspects of

 capital accumulation. In this model, a generation born at time t con-

 sists of identical individuals whose lifetime is two periods, t     and

 t+1. There are two goods in the system, labor services and a single

 consumption—capital good. Every individual is endowed with one unit

 of labor services when young and none, when old.

      Thus, at date t,   the   economy consists of an old generation owning

     units of capital in the aggregate and a young generation owning L

 units of labor services in the aggregate.
                                                  6




        Production takes place within the period according to the stationary

neoclassical production


(1)                 =
                        F(K,    Lt)


        Since the stocks of the two factors are supplied inelastically, the

real factot prices         w and           are determined by competitive forces as

the respective marginal products. By homogeneity of the production

function, we have


(2)            w =      f(k)    —
                                    k f'(k)
(3)            rf =     f'(k)
where k =                 and
                                    f(k)      1 F(K, Lb). Eliminating kt one can
                                              t




write

(4)
              w cp(r)

which is the factor—price frontier.

        The   linkage between adjacent periods in this system depends on two
factors, which together determine the movement of k             to
              is   just the savings of generation t.        Assuming no uncertainty
about    the rate of return on their savings,
                                                        r+1, Kt+i is determined by
solving


              max   u(c,    c+i)

subject to
                                                    7




          wt >c t +             1
                            (l+r1) t+l
                                       C



which is the problem faced by the typical economic agent, and multi—

plying his savings, (Ut —                         by the population size.
                                           ce),
          To determine k+i, the percapita savings, w —                 c    is divided by

the ratio of the population sizes at the two dates. Thus, assuming a

constant growth rate a,


1
                  -
                 k t+l = l+n
                             t   t
                                V —c



          We   have observed above that w depends on kt and c depends on both

k     (through w) and r+i. Therefore (5) can be reexpressed as

'I                          =
                                f(k)—k
                                  t    t
                                         f'(k)—c(k,
                                          l+ii
                                               t         tt
                                                    rt+1 )


          In order for the perfect foresight assumption to be justified,

               f' (k÷) is required. Thus applying f'(.) (a one—to—one func-

tion) to both sides of (6) we have


(7)              r                   f(k) — k f'(k) —     c   (kr, r+i)
                                                  1+n


as an equation to be solved for r+1. The solution in turn determines

          as a function of k.

          An alternative interpretation of (7) which Diamond used to analyze

 the stability of this system, can be obtained by writing it directly in

 terms of w and



    (8)           r
                      t+l
                            =ft(t           tt
                                     w —c(w,rt+l)
                                            l+n
                                        8




     One    can look for steady states as solutions to (6) and (8) in w and

r, or one can look for values of k such that the solution to (7) is

precisely f'(k).

     To introduce government debt into the model, we suppose that the

government offers to borrow from generation t, when they are young,

inelastically with respect to the rate of interest. Since in this sys-

tem the government debt must yield the same return as private capital,

the government debt is held as an asset by the generation t in place of

private capital. At date t+l, the government must refund the debt, plus

Interest, and can borrow again from the new, larger, generation. Never-

theless, as long as r>n, this new borrowing will not finance the prin-

ciple plus interest, and taxes will have to be levied to make up the

difference. For these reasons, when r > a, borrowing.is going to be

unambiguously harmful:     It   causes extra taxes to be collected, and it

lowers total Income by displacing private investment. Since the growth

path is efficient when r >      a,   there is no way to improve the welfare

of all generations by means of this type of policy. In the inefficient

case, r <   n, public borrowing will serve to reduce capital Intensity

and thereby promote efficiency.

    One    might   think, on the basis of this analysis, that if the govern-

ment were to demand bonds inelastically, it could improve welfare in

the steady—state. Although the validity of this proposition for the

steady state is easy to demonstrate, the policy cannot be executed

without confiscatory taxation of the older generation in the initial

period. When the bonds are bought by the government in the Initial

period, the young generation must be paid out of tax revenues. If It is
                                 9




they who are taxed, their welfare must decrease. The older generation,

not anticipating taxation, cannot be taxed unless the government is

willing to forego their welfare for the sake of future generations.

Thus, the problem must be treated explicitly on the basis of inter-

generational equity vs. efficiency, and a dominance criterion cannot be

applied.
                                   10




       2. Intergenerational Considerations: extensions of the Diamond

           Model

       Because of the results mentioned above, It is necessary to consider

objective functions which aggregates the welfare of agents living in

different generations. This is the approach taken in Arrow and Kurz

(1969) and Pestieau (1974). A set of instruments is specified that is

typically more complex than Diamond's assumption of lump—sum labor in-

come taxation. One asks whether the optimal path for the economy,

describing the maximal feasible value of this objective function, can be

attained through the use of these instruments in a decentralized

economy.

       If the answer to this question is in the negative, we are then in

the framework of second—best theory. In these cases one wants to des-

cribe the optimizing levels of the control variables and contrast them

with their first—best values.

       The common objective function is



(9)                (l+S) u t
            t=0


where u is the lifetime utility attained by generation t. Pestieau
deals with the same overlapping generations framework as Diamond, above;

Arrow—Kurz takes the view that there isa single, infinitely long lived

household, which discounts its own utility at the rate 6.

       We begin with Pestieau, since It Is closest to Diamond. He con-

siders the household utility function


(10)
            u(c, ct+i, L)
                                              11


and the production function


(11)
                  Y F(K, C L)
where         is government capital. The available instruments are a wage

tax, an interest tax, public debt and public investment. There are

several important additional complexities built into this system, beyond

those in Diamond's model. The first is that labor is no longer supplied

inelastically so that lump—sum taxation of the younger generation can

no longer be Interpreted as wage taxation. The second is that govern-

ment capital is physically distinguished from private capital. Implicit—

ly this means that the government is forbidden to invest in the latter

and the private sector cannot buy the former. This feature is comparable

to the Arrow—Kurz formulation, but their labor supply function is inelas-

tic. The elasticity of factor supplies, both of labor and of capital

indirectly through savings, are the crucial forces shaping the optimal

policy in these models.

        A third complexity, and in my view an artificial one, arises from

the specification of the government's budget constraint. The govern-

ment's net revenue at date t consists of taxes less interest on debt,

plus rent on government capital. This Is written as,

(12)              0w,t L + 0r,t k
                                        + F —      r...1   Bt_l


where


        0         and 0         are the tax rates on wages and profits
            v,t           r,t

                  is the marginal product of government capital,

and


                  is the past debt issue.
                                   12




       This net revenue, plus any new borrowing, constitutes the level of

government investment up to the next date.8

       The assumption about the revenue from renting government capital

is particularly odd in this context. Since the government is the only

owner of government capital, It is not entirely clear why it should be

restricted to rent it out at the competitive price. One possible argu-

ment is that, having selected the quantity, it must accept the marginal

product as the price of government capital services, or else some of the

stock will be unemployed. However this does not preclude the govern-

ment from charging a price below the private marginal product, and hold-

ing the utilization down to the available stock by other means. Per-

haps more realistically, it may be difficult, if not impossible, to

collect any rentals at all on government owned capital, because it may

enter into the production process in non—appropriable ways. This diffi-

culty is hidden in the aggregative structure of the mathematical model.

Arrow—Kurz take the more flexible position that the rental is itself a

policy variable between these limits. For the most part, however, they

work with the assumption that government capital services are provided

free of charge. It would be of interest to see if Pestieau's conclu-

sions about optimal taxation and government investment in this frame-

work are robust to changing his specification of the budget constraint

In this way.

       Under these conditions, Pestieau derives the first—order conditions

for optimization with respect to 0, 0r and B In the steady state.

These Imply that


(13)        F1 = F2 =   (l+S)
                                 13




Rates of return on the two types of capital are equal and are equated to

the social rate of time preference. A first—best is not achieved,

however, since these rates may not be the same as the private, net of

tax, rate of return on investment.
                                 14




     3. Qpen Problems in the Theory of the Public Debt under Certainty

     These models are in need of generalization in several respects, most

of which center crucially on the introduction of multiple periods for

individuals' lifetimes. Apart from an increase in realism, longer

lifetimes raise issues of both a theoretical nature in the theory of

optimal taxation, and of a conceptual nature in the modeling of indi-

viduals' beliefs about future rates of taxation.

     With three or more periods of life, the individual could, in prin-

ciple, be faced with different rates of labor and capital income taxa-

tion as a function of his age. These might be useful for the purpose of

overcoming imperfections in the capital market, dynamic inefficiencies

of the Diamond type (see above), or the absence of suitable instruments

of lump—sum taxation as in the Pestieau model (see above). For practical

reasons, however, age—specific taxation may not be feasible. In such

cases, further problems of a second—best nature will arise, and it would

be interesting to investigate, for example, the way in which the rate of

return on government borrowing would be biased.

     In a recent paper Auerbach (1977) has investigated a model in which

there are two types of capital with different degrees of substitutability

with labor. Employing a two—period lifetime structure has shown that

it is valuable to distort the returns to the two types of capital dif-

ferently, as an Indirect way of taxing labor and financing a public debt

intended to reduce the dynamic Inefficiency inherent in private life—

cycle accumulation programs. However, although consumers' prices should

be made to differ in this second—best environment, producers prices

should not be distorted. Just as In the Diamond—Mirrlees (1971) static

Constant returns to scale model, producer effieiency should not be disturbed.
                                 15




     It is apparent from the analogy between the Auerbach and Diamond—

Mirrlees models that this result persists in the presence of age—

specific taxation. But with multi—period lifetimes and no age—specific

taxation possible, the potential advantage of placing part of the dis—

tortive burden on production inefficiency may   be   relevant. This re-

mains one of the important open theoretical questions at the present

stage of research.

     Perceptions about future rates of taxation9 are another type

of problem which becomes much more serious In the multi—period litera-

ture context. The arguments raised by Barro (1974) are directed towards

establishing the proposition that government bonds are not part of the

net wealth of the community because the economic agents perceive their

future tax liabilities to be Increased in order to cover interest pay-

ments on the debt.

     Barro counters the usual rebuttal that the debt bears on future

generations, whose consumption plans are not part of the instantaneous

macroeconomic equilibrium, by an appeal to the bequest motive. If there

is a margin on which bequest decisions are made, then when debt is increased

more bequests will be necessary to offset the higher level of interest

costs, and this extra savings, he asserts, will reduce current

consumption to precisely that level consistent with the original wealth

and real income.

     A second line of attack on this neutrality hypothesis is that the

government's debt is viewed as a safer asset than the privately issued

claims that it displaces. Private consumption will thus increase because

of the change in the characteristics of individuals' portfolios, rather
                                 16




than an increase in the net level of wealth 2 e. Barro rejects this

on the theory that the goverment does not have any risk pooling oppor-

tunities not also available to the market via private, mutual—fund type

arrangements. No fundamentally new security can be issued.

     The first of Barro's counter—arguments is rejected by Feldstein

(1976) and Buchanan (1976) on the grounds that it reqtiires a "no—

growth" hypothesis. Feldstein therefore argues, in defense of his 1974

article, that social security is a source of net wealth and thereby de-

presses private savings.

     Although correct as far as it goes, Feldstein's point is not entirely

complete. One characteristic of social security which distinguishes it

from both public debt and private financial assets is its lack of inheri-

tability. Although limited provisions exist in the United States for

widows and dependent children, the value of the social insurance bene-

fits decreases upon the death of the principle beneficiary. Therefore

social security wealth is not perfectly substitutable with private asset

accumulation, and a full offset is not to be expected. On the other

hand, the aspects of social security that are relevant to insurance

against privately risky events (health, disability, death) make it more

valuable than a purely nominal claim. Thus, to the extent that there

is a precautionary motive for saving, the offset of private wealth may

be more than one for one. It certainly seems necessary to model both of

these forces explicitly in a life cycle model with population growth

before a definitive answer to the Barro—Feldstein controversy can be

discussed.


                                                                             3
                                 17




    Barr&s second argument, concerning aggregate risk—pooling possi-

bilities on the private and social levels requires treating uncertainty

of a different type than that mentioned above. Here the emphasis is on

risky events that affect the welfare of members of a cohort similarly,

rather than independently. By setting up a debt/social insurance

program that's variable contingent upon these aggregate risk events,

the government may be able to create new securities. This requires a

new type of intergenerational model which we turn to in the following

section.
                                    18




B. Intergenerational Aspects of the Public Debt: uncertainty

    A further, and perhaps equally important, use of intergenerational

intervention is to mitigate uncertainties which might affect all members

of an age cohort similarly, and which therefore cannot be efficiently

insured by contracts among these agents alone. By adopting a debt/tax

policy that is flexible with respect to the outcome of aggregate risks,

the investment and interternporal allocation policies of individuals can

be arranged so as to provide some mutual insurance across generations.

    Because of the greater complexity of this stochastic system, it is

easiest to begin by simplifying the role of capital as a factor of produc—

tion. It is assumed that labor is paid a fixed wage, which can thus be

regarded as the endowment of the younger age group. This can be either

consumed or invested, investment constituting a one period storage

activity. As above, in the case of two—period lifetimes, the results of

the investment activity constitute consumption In the second period of

life.

        Uncertainty takes the form of a randomized return, r, per unit of

Investment. Returns are perfectly correlated for agents within the same

generation, but are independent and identically distributed across

generations. Stokey (1977) has examined this system and obtained the

following results.

        Any feasible steady—state policy in which the capital stock Is

non—stochastic can be decentralized if the following four instruments

are available:

        a) a consumption tax

        b) lump—sum, generation—specific, subsidies
                                    19




    c) an interest income     tax
    d) public debt (whose yield is set equal to that on private
                        capital)

Several things must be noted about these instruments:

    The level of debt and the rates of taxation or subsidization must

be allowed to depend on the current realization of r, but they are inde-

pendent of past values. Public debt is defined to be an asset which

duplicates the return on private investment. This restriction could have

been generalized to any pattern of returns with the property that the

desired, fixed, level of private capital would be held in everyone's

portfolio. It is of interest to note that such types of public debt are

unnecessary to administer the decentralization of any plan with fixed

capital stock, as long as the other state—contingent policies are avail-

able.

        Finally, note that the only parts of the policy in which the govern-

ment is required to distinguish between agents of differeng ages is in

the administration of the lump—sum, age—specific subsidies. Because of

the nature of capital and labor in this simplified overlapping genera-

tions model, this amount to state—contingent wage taxation and social

security.

        Corresponding to these observations there are several conjectures

that should be investigated. The answers will shed light on the role of

public debt and social security in more general models, and on the possi-

bility of decentralizing efficient patterns of intergenerational risk—

bearing with these instruments.

        Most of these extensions are related to models with multi period

lifetimes, Instead of only two. Apart from the added realism, this ex—
                                   20




tension is important for several reasons of analytic interest, with

potential relevance for social insurance policies.

       The capital stock at any date will depend on the sequence of events

that has taken place within the lifetimes of the oldest generation then

alive. Their savings/consumption patterns will depend on realizations

during their lives. Thus, policies that are restricted to vary with only

the current realization may not be able to sustain growth paths with a

constant capital stock. This suggests two possibilities——either treat

stochastic steady states explicitly, and find out which of these can be

decentralized by policies of the type considered, or generalize the policy

to be conditional on either the aggregate capital stock, or, more gener-

ally, on Its distribution of ownership by age group.

       Another aspect of multiperiod lifetimes, relevant to a second best

world in which some feasible steady states cannot be decentralized by the

available instruments, is that age—specific social insurance schemes can

serve as a partial substitute for the absence of age—specific interest

income taxation. Further, a policy of issuing public debt whose returns

differ from that on private capital, but which will be held together with

private capital in portfolios, may be useful in these models, whereas we

had argued that it was redundant in the simpler, two—period lifetime sys-

tem.

       Even within the two—period context, it may be a valuable type of

policy when the full set of instruments is not available. In particular

it would be of interest to see whether the decentralizability results hold

up if state—contingent consumption taxes are removed, but debt/social in-

surance policies can Incorporate the issuance of such assets.
                                 21




Footnotes

     1. The literature on the burden of public debt goes back quite far.

The interested reader might begin with Modigliani (1961) which gives one

of the first analytic treatments of the subject, and Ferguson (1964), in

which an excellent survey of the early literature is given.

     2. Some of the principal critics of Keynesian macro policy, led by

Friedman (see, for example Friedman (1968) and Barro (1976), Sargent (1976),

(1973), and Sargent and Wallace (1976).

     3. See Barro (1974), and the subsequent comments by Feldstein (1976)

and Buchanan (1976).

     4. See Munnell (1974), Feldstein (1974).

     5. See Fleming (1976), Stokey (1977).

     6. See Arrow (1966), Marglin (1963), Arrow—Kurz (1969), Dreze—

Sandmo (1971). A more general treatment of the local welfare calculus is

given in Bradford (1975).

     7. See Fischer (1975). Sheshinski (1977) explores the possibility

of linking wage contracts to nominal GNP, rather than to a price index,

which may have superior properties as an automatic stabilization device.

      8. Pestieau also assumes that both debt and capital have a maturity

of one period, rather than being consoles and indestructible, respective-

 ly. This point is, however, inconsequential for the economics of his

 analysis.

      9. See Kochin (1974) and Bomberger (1977).
                                 22

References

Auerbach, A. "The Optimal Taxation of Heterogeneous Capital," Harvard

     University, mimeographed, 1977.

Arrow, K. J. "Discounting and Public Investment Criteria," Water

     search, A. V. Kneese and S. C. Smith (eds.), Johns Hopkins Press,

     1966.

Arrow, K. J. and M. Kurz, Public Investment, the Rate of Return, and

     Optimal Fiscal Policy, 1969, Johns Hopkins Press.

Barro, R. J. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political

     Economy, Nov.—Dec. 1974, 82, 1095—1117.

Barro, R. J. and H. Growman, Money, Employment and Inflation, Cambridge

     University Press, 1976.

Bomberger, W. A., "Government Bonds, Anticipated Taxes and Fiscal Policy,"

     Wayne State University, mimeographed, 1977.

Bradford, D. "Constraints on Government Investment Opportunities and the

     Choice of Discount Rate," American Economic Review, December 1975,

     65, 887—899.

Buchanan, J. N. "Barro on the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem," Journal of

     Political Economy, April 1976, 84, 343—349.

Diamond, P. and J. Nirriess, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production, parts

     I and II," American Economic Review, March and June 1971, 61, pp. 8—27

     and 261—278.

Dreze, J. H. and A. Sandmo "Discount Rates for Public Investment in Closed

     and Open Economics," Economica, Nov. 1971, 38, 395—412.

Feldstein, M. S. "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate

     Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, Sept.—Oct.

     1974, 82, 905—926.
                                    23




Ferguson, J. M. Public Debt and Future Generations, University of North

     Carolina Press, 1964.

Fischer, S. "The Demand for Index Bonds," Journal of Political Economy,

     February 1977, 85, 191—206.

Fleming, J. "The Effects of Earnings Inequality, Imperfect Capital Mar-

     kets and   Dynastic   Altruism on the Distribution of Wealth in Life

     Cycle Models," unpublished manuscript, 1976.

Friedman, M. "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review,

     March 1968, 58, 1—17.

Kochin, L. A. "Are Future Taxes Anticipated by Consumers," Journal of

     Money, Credit and Banking, August 1974, 6, 385—394.

Marglin, S. "The Opportunity Costs of Public Investment," Quarterly

     Journal of Economics, May     1963,   77, 215—289.

Modigliani, F. "Long—run Implications of Alternative Fiscal Policies and

     the Burden of the National Debt," Economic Journal, Dec. 1961, 71,

     730—755.

Munnell, A. The Effect of Social Security on Personal Savings, Ballinger,

     1974.

Pestieau, P. "Optimal Taxation and         Discount   Rate for Public Investment

     in a Growth Setting," Journal of Public Economics, 1974, 3, 217—235.

Sheshlnski, E. "Indexation for Inflation and the Distribution of Income,"

     unpublished manuscript, 1977.

Sargent, T. "The Observational Equivalence of National and Unnatural

     Rate Theories of Macro—economics," Journal of Political Economy,

     June 1976, 84, 651—740.
                                24



Sargent, T. "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest and Natural

     Rate of Unemployment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1973,

     pp. 429—472 and 799—800.

Sargent, T. and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations and the Theory of

    Economic Policy," Journal of Monday Economics, April 1976, 2, 169—184.

Stokey, N. "Some Security Aspects of Social Security," Harvard Univer—

    sity, unpublished manuscript, 1977.
