                NBER Working Paper Series




                 SHARE-TENANCY AND FAMILY SIZE

                   IN THE BRAZILIAN NORTHEAST


                  Anna Luiza Ozorio de Almeida



                    Working Paper No. 200




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305




                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NEER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.
    SCCCT*QIA DC .A?ICJ*MCNTO 0* PtESONCIA 0* I(IjSLICA
    IN3TITUYO DC LANEJAMCNT0 £CONÔMICO C 0CAL (IP!A)




                                                                                   *
          SHARE-TENANCY AND FAMILY SIZE IN THE BRAZILIAN NORTHEAST

                                Anna Luiza Ozorio de Almeida



Visiting Scholar                                          Research Economist
National Bureau of Economic                               'National Institute of Economic
   Research                                                  and Social Research
            (NBER-West) '
                                                               (INPES—IPEA)
Stanford, California                                      Rio de Janeiro, Brazil




*
 This paper constitutes a chorough revision of an earlier attempt
to analyze the data collected by the Northeast Brazil Hou.ehold
Pilot Survey, RPO 299, carried out in 1974 by the Department of
Agriculture and Supply of the Sucerintendency for the Development
of the Northeast (DA.i.-SUDENE) in cooperation with the Population
and Human Resources Division of the Development Economics Deprr€nt
and with the Development Research Center of the World Bank. The
data supplied by the above institutions, the financial support
provided by the Ford Foundation and the opportunity to perform
this work at the National Bureau of Economic Research-West are
gratefully acknowledged.
I am tharfu1l for comments elicited by the presentation of earlier
versions of this research at the Ford Foundation's Symposium on
Population in Rio do Janeiro, June 1976, and at two seminars at
Stanford:        the Labor Seminar            in October 1976 and the Agriculture
and Economic Development Seminar in January 1977. My greatest
debt of gratitude is to Robert J. Willis, for acquainting me with
the current literature on fertility in Third World countries and
for discussing this work with me at successive, though not
necessarily prcgicsive ,stages of its execution. The inadequacies
that ret'uin are entirely of my own making and responsibility. All
Comments are welcome.
I(c(vama 01 U.A!j*M(PIT0 0& PI(!I0CI* 0* tP(JRUC*
 %flhtflO CL P.AIIL)AMLJ4T0 £CONÔNICO   I   $OC.M. (IPUJ

                    a.


Contents
                                                            Page

1.   introduction                                              1.


2. Background                                                  2

3. Fertility Decisions among Small Land Owners and Share-
     Tenants                                                  8

4. Some Life-Cycle Patterns of Rural Household Behavior in
   Northeast Brazil                                           13

     Figure 1 - Surviving Children in Each Location           18

     FIgure 2 - Surviving Children by Tenure Class           19

     Figure 3 — Total Live Births by Tenure Class            20

5. Conclusions
6. Appendix: Tables 1-19


                                                                          C




                                                              IPEA — 27
 IICR*TARIA 01 PtJNCJAMINTO 0* PnE3I0NCIA 0* *IPUILIC*         -
 INSTITUTO 0* Pt.*N*JAM(NTO ECONÔMICO £ SOCIAl. (IPEA




1. Introduction

                Latin America is known for its high rate of population
growth     and for the very high fertility rate of its rural. population.
The decline in Latin American fertility with urbanization and
economic growth has been attributed to many causes, both economic
and non—economic)- it is usually argued that new incentives for
fertility control are associated with these declines, countering
what is called a "traditional", "lethargic", "fatalistic" and
otherwise irrational mentality which favors large families in
Third World countries..2
                In this paper it is               proposed   that high rural fertility
in Latin America is a deliberate and rational adjustment to the
conditions of agricultural production that prevail in many areas
of the continent. The main finding is that sharetenancy, the
predominant         form of organization of production in the sparsely
populated central regions of the Northeast, and a common institution
in much of Latin America,3 contains a set of powerful fertility
inducements which are lost when households face a wage-labor
situation      in agriculture or in cities. Thus, the rapid decline of
rural    fertility in   the past decade in Latin America4 may be due,in
part,    to   the general demise of sharetenancy and its replacement by
sub-family        farms (minifundios) dependent on wage labor5. These
broad    implications are discussed in the                   final section of the paper.



     1Frank W. Oechli and Dudley Kirk, "Modernization and the
      Demographic Transition in Latin America and the Caribbean
       Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol 23, April 1975,
      pp 391—419.

     2Frank W. Notestein, "Population: rhe Long View", in Theodore
      W. Schultz, ed., Food for the World, University of Chicago Press,
      Chicago, 1945, pp-57.

     3lnternatj.onaj. Labor Office, The Landless Farmer in Latin America,
      Studies and Reports, New Series, N9 47, Geneva, 1957.

     4Barry Edmonstort, Urban and Rural Fertility Changes in Latin
      America, The Influence of Migration and Urbanization in Brazil,
      Colombia and Mexico, Interdisciplinary Program for Population
      Analysis — ICP — Smithsonian Institution, September 1975.
     5Alain de Janvry, Carlos Bertito and
                                          Efraim Franco, Rural Development
      in Latin America: Three Projects Observed,Departme    of
      Agricultural Economics, University of California, Berkeley, 1977,
      Part I (forthcomnu.ng).



                                                                                   IP*A — 37
 UGR(T*A 01 PtA(jAMVST0 0* (S0NCl* 0* PU$UC*
 IMSTITVTQ   01 PLNUJAMCtdTO ICONÔNICO C                                  2.

                  The empirical evidence is drawn from one of the most
backward and highest fertility areas of Latin America: .the Brazilian
Northeast. The ecological and economic environment of poor rural
households in that region is described and their fertility and
economic behavior is presented in a series of life—cycle profiles
calculated from a small sample gathered in two representative sub-
regions.

2. Background

                  Over thirty million people live in the Brazilian Northeast,
a large geographical area (1,600,00 square kilometers), notorious
for the occurrence of sporadic droughts which destroy agricultural
production6 and cause masses of the rural population to migrate to
cities, to more humid rural areas within the Northeast itself, or
to other regions of Brazil. By expelling people in this fashion,
the drought-prone central areas of the Northeast have contributed
heavily to Brazilian urban population growth problems, while
maintaining a moderate rate of increase within their own confines.7
Steadily drained of prime workers, those who are left behind
constitute the poorest segment of the Brazilian population. In 1974,
the year to which this study refers, Northeastern rural per capita
income was U.S.$ 200, as compared to the national average of
U.S.$ 800. It is also a population of above average fertility, with
child-woman ratios roughly 30% above the national average in 1970.8




    6Analysis of annual rainfall statistics since 1930 in the State
     of Rio Grande do Norte shows that critical drought years
     (annual rainfall less than 250 m.m.) that cause severe crop
     losses have approximately 20% probability of occurrence: i.e.,
     one year in five. Report N9 921-BR, Northeast Brazil Rio
     Grande do Norte Development Project, R DD—ARDD-WB, November 11,
     1975, Annex 1 p. 2.

    7For example, in Rio Grande do Norte, the drought—prone state
     covered in the sample analyzed in this paper, the average annual
     rate of rural population growth was only 1.2%, while the urban
     rate was 5.3% in the same state from 1960 to 1970, according
     to the National Demographic Censuses.

    8Based on data.presented by Barry Edmonston and Carl R. Zulauf,
     "Data for Analyzing Rural-Urban Fertility Levels in Brazil,
     Colombia and Mexico", Food Research Institute, Stanford
     University, September 1975, Table 4, p. 16.


                                                                     IPZA — 27
ILCRETAIA Ot PUEJ*MENT0 0* PflE3I0NCI* 0* EPSLICA
                                                                     3
IN$TITUTO CE PLANLJAMEIETO ECONOMICO ( SOCIAl. (IP(*




         The rural household survey described below is evenly
divided between an out-migration region - the Sertio do Seridô
region of the state of Rio Grande do Norte - and an in-migration
region in the State of Maranhäo. The Rio Grandedo Norte part of
the sample (85 households), was collected in Caicô and Flornia,
two "townships" (municipios) , in the hot semi-arid area of the
central Northeastern region called the sertão (400—600 m.m. of
rainfall per year during 4-6 months and periodic drought; mean
yearly temperatures ranging from 239 C. to 279 C.) . The region
consists of large, flat, rocky stretches interrupted by abrupt
mesas and interspersed by fertile valleys where the land is
cultivated. Population density is very low (2-24 inhabitants
per   square kilometer) , but the    are lively and peopled by a
                                                   towns
population well rooted in distinctive customs, proud and even
rowdy, where brawls and shoot-outs are not uncommon. Perennial
cotton and cattle are the main cash—earning economic activities.
Beans and corn are interplanted with first—year cotton for
subsistance. As would be expected under conditions of risky
agriculture, large farms (fazendas) rely on sharing labor contracts
rather than wage or fixed rent agreements.1° Sharing occurs both
in the form of share—tenancy (parceiros)11 and in the form of



   9SUDENE—DAA, Pesguisa do Tarnanho Tpico da Unidade de Produçäo
    gicola do Nordeste: Reiatôrio da Fase I(Versao Preliminar),
    Recife, December 1975, p. 90.

  10Much of the mushrooming literature on sharecropping links this
    form of contractual labor. arrangement with risk-sharing between
      landlord and agricultural worker, under conditions of output
      uncertainty. See, for example: S.N.S. Cheurig, "Transactions
      Costs, Risk Aversion and the Choice of Contractual Arrangements',
      Journal of Law and Economics, April 1969, pp. 23-42; D.M.G.
      Newbery, "The Choice of Rental Contract in Peasant Agriculture",
      Chapter 5 of Agriculture in Development Theory, L. Reynolds
      (ed.), New Haven: Yale University Press; and also D.M.G.
      Newberry, Risk Sharing, Sharecropping and Uncertain Labor
      Markets, IMSS Technical Report N9 202, April 1976, Stanford;
      T.D. Reid, "Sharecropping As an Understandable Market Response:
      The Post-Bellum South", The Journal of Economic History,vol. 33
      n9 1, March 1973, pp. 106—130.

 Share—tenants (pçeiros) exercise some entrepreneurial judgment
      and relative autonomy over a given, definite plot of land.
      Sharecroppers (moradores)exercise no management skills, and do
      not have a definite plot of land. They receive a share of the
      output they harvest, as a wage payment in kind. Thus share-
      croppers are a mix of share-tenants and money wage workers.
      Given the absense of fixed rent contracts in the sample, both
      sharecroppers and share—tenants will be called, sirnply,'tenants",
      in order to simplify the exposition.
$ECn1TAA 01 M.ANIJAM(NT0 0* PRCI0NCI* 0* 1PIUCA
IN*TI1flO 01 PI.M4UAMthTO ccoN6.rnco C 1OClA. (IP1.*                     4.

sharecropping        (moradores). Pure wage-labor is practically
nonexistent. 12


         In the Maranhäo part of the sample (80 households), the
surveyed township - Moncão                -
                             contrasts strikingly with the Serid.
It    is a
        pre-amazonic region to the west of Rio Grande do Norte,
also with low population density (3-24 inhabitants per square
kilometer), but heavier rainfall (600—2,000 m.m. per year over a
4—6 month period), flat plains, and a shallow topsoil that is
easily eroded if the forest is removed. A nomadic population of
squatters (posseiros)practices slash and burn agriculture on the
forest fringe. Corn, beans and manioc are grown for subsistence
and rice is sold to marketing intermediaries who transport and
resell it in urban markets. Extraction of babacu and carnaCiba
nuts are the main cash earning alternatives13 to rice. Rapid soil
erosion in the space of a. few years, plus inability to control the
onrush of weeds, push the farmer ever farther into the forest,
followed steadily by cattle ranchers whose herds prevent the return
of the former vegetation.14

         Given their surrounding ecological environments, households
in both surveyed regions face periodic years of financial stress,
either because of the need to move to another location along the
forest fringe or because of a drought in the sertão. Since they.
have rarely been able to save enough to finance the added
expenditures, they frequently fall into debt during these critical
years. However, unless exceptionally high yields occur during the
next inter—crisis years, farmers may not manage to save enough,
after paying off their debts, to survive the next drought or to
finance the next move without having to borrow again. Under fortunate




      120n1y one     pure    wage laborer was found in the present sample.

      131n fact, as it turned out, many of these farmers are renters,
        not of land, but of nut trees   This form of contract was not
        predicted by the questionnaire, and therefore was not
        adequately recorded in the sample.

      14P.L. Scandizzo, Land Distribution Tenancy Systems and Target
        Populations in Northeast Brazil, Report Prepared for the
        Special Economic Mission to Northeast Brazil, DRC—WB,
        September 24, 1974, p. 4.3.4.




                                                                      IPEA — 27
              01 PL*NIJAM*NTO 0* PRCSIOtNCI* 0* !EP$8LIC*                       5
 INSTITUTO   01 PLANEJAMENTO   ECONÔMICO   £ SOCIAl. (IPLA)




circumstances,             the occurrence in succession of a sufficient number
of good crops does allow some households to save enough to buy a
small sub-family plot (miniftindio) of their own, typically under
10 ha. in area.15 This is not an unmixed blessing, since small
landowners forfeit their claim to credit customarily extended by
land—lords and become more vulnerable than tenants to year—to—year
irregularities in output.16 Moreover, the existence of labor
slack during much of the year reduces the dependability of the              wage
employment alternative when small landowners needs it most.
Consequently, small landowners sometimes give up their plots and
revert to tenancy in crisis years. There appears to be considerable
mobility        back and         forth among small landowners, tenants and squatters
in   the      Brazilian Northeast. These three types of agricultural
labor        account for approximately 60% of the northeastern labor force. 17
The remainder are mainly wage laborers and intermediate size owner-
operators.

         The principil employer of this labor-force, whether on
a full or part-time basis, is a small group of landlords who own
most of the arable land and virtually monopolize access to water
reervoirs   in the drought prone areas. Since landlords'
agricultural income is dependent on the production of cash crops,
their main problem is to elicit from the unrooted, roving and
dispersed northeastern population a sufficiently large and
sufficiently steady flow of labor devoted to cash crop production.
                  An unique symbiotic solution to the security       needs of
).andless       rural households and  tc the labor requirements of
landlords         in the Brazilian NOrtheast has been the emergence


     15From 1960 to 1970, the number of minifundios in the Northeast
       as a whole nearly doubled (873,124 to 1,503,280) while the
       average area of a minifundio fell from 3.14 ha to 2.72 ha.
       This reduction in the average size of the plot has occasioned
       increasing part—time sharecropping or part—time wage work by
       small 1ando•.'ners. See P.L. Scandjzzo, Land Distribution,...,
        Table 1.2 p.3.

     16Aw Johnson, Sharecroppers of the Serto: Economics and
       Dependence on a Brazilian Plantation,1971, Stanford University
       Press, Stanford ,Californja, discusses the role of landlords
       as creditors to their tenants in the Brazilian Northeast.

     17Fundaçäo Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatistica(FIBGE)
       Censo Agroecuirio de 1970, Total Brasil, Table 12.




                                                                            IPEA — 27
 1(CRCT*A 01 PLINCJAM(NTO 0* PRESIOtWCI* 0* RIPulucA
 INSTITUTO 01 Pt.AMJAM(MTO   1C0NÔMC0   I 5OCU.
                                                                      6.


of a specific form of share-tenancy arrangement, quite different in
many respects from its counterparts in Asia18 or in post Civil—War
Southern United States.19 Landlords provide tenants with an elastic
supply of land, according to household size, food consumption credit,
and marketing services (for their cash—crop production as well as
for their consumption purchases) , in return for a contractually
fixed share of their output and the right to be paid in kind for
all   debts. This agreement protects the tenant household from the
extreme distress occasioned by severe droughts and cushions them
from the impact of milder climatic variations. Since the debt is
paid back at harvest time each year in terms of the cash crop, this
system increases the quantitity of that crop that the landlord takes
to market, above and beyond his own contractual share, in a form
similar to that of the crop—lien system of the South of the United
States in the post—slavery period.20

                Aside from the sharing proportion, other features of the
Northeast Brazil sharing agreement are not explicitly contracted.
In particular, neither the labor obligations of the tenant, nor the
credit services of the landlord are formally stated. This
contrasts with the painstaking detail of share—tenancy contracts
elsewhere21; probably reflecting the fact that formal labor contracts
are basically unenforceable by absentee landlords and that informal



      18Steven N.S. Cheung, The Theory of Share Tenancy, University
        of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1969.

      19Roger Ransom and Pi.ch&rd Sutch, What was Freedom's Price?,
        An Economic History of the Post Emancipation American South,
        Berkeley and Riverside, California, 1977 (forthcoming)

      20Crop—lien indebtedness occurs when farmers promise to pay back
        their loans in kind, in terms of a portion of their future
        harvest. This form of collateral on loans was also typical of
        Post-Bellum sharecropping in Southern United States. See R.L.
        Ransom and R. Sutch, "Debt Peonage in the Cotton South after
        the Civil War", The American Economic Review,Vo. 62, N9 1,
        March 1972, pp. 77-86; the critique by W.W. Brown and M. 0.
        Reynolds, "Debt Peonage Re—examined", The Journal of Economic
        History, Vol. 33, N9 4, December 1973, pp. 862—87l, and the
        subsequent paper by R. Ransom and R. Sutch, "The 'Lock—In'
        Mechanism and Overproduction of Cotton in the Posthellum South',
        Agricultural History, Vol. XLIX N9 2, April 1975, pp. 405—425.

      21Joseph Reid Jr., Agricultural History, Vol 49, N9 2, April
        1975, pp 426—440.




                                                                    IPEA — 27
 IcCrT*ntA DC PUMCJAMCN1O 0* PRW0MCIA 0* ACP!UCA                                 7.
 IN$TrTUTO   OC PtAMCJAMENTO   CCONÔMICO   I   SOCIAl. (IPCA)




credit transactions allow for interest rates typically well above
maximum legal rates. Instead of explicit contracts, therefore,
the crop—lien system takes over as an expedient device for
controling and eliciting tenant labor. The fact that debt
repayment is subtracted from the tenant's share at harvest time
increases his chances of indebtedness for the following year,
unless he devotes more labor to the cash crop or a particularly
good yield happens to come his way. Otherwise, his consumption
needs may again overshoot his income and he will incur in iurther
debt. Moreover, if another bad year occurs, or if another
dependent member joinsthe household, then the escape from
indebtedness during that year will necessarily                  require much more labor
input        into the cash crop. This will reallocate labor effort          away
from food production and may, in turn, boost food purchase
requirements, unless the total amount of labor effort by the
household is increased.


                Chronic indebtedness is an intrinsic feature of share—
tenancy        in the Brazilian Northeast and elsewhere.22 Indeed,
given the uncertainty typical of the Northeastern ecoloay
indebtedness itself may be one of the principal motives of both
parties to the contract. It causes relatively high specialization
of tenant labor in cash-crop production, as well as relatively -
more labor effort per household, than in the case of wage
laborers.23 In                   proposed that an additional
                           this paper it is
result of share—tenancy indebtedness is that tenants will desire
and achieve larger families than other rural households. The
arg'iment        is presented in the next section.




    22
       See Sources in footnote ( 20 )above.


    23See very interesting evidence to this effect in Maria Rita
      Garcia Loureiro, Parceria e Capitaljsmo, Zahar, Rio de Ja-
      neiro, 1977.




                                                                              IPIA — 37
$EC[TAA DC PtANVAMVTO GA PRC3tOtNC1A GA UiuUCA                             8.
IN$T1TVTO DC PtMCJAMthTO CCONÔMICO £ $OCIM. (IPU




3.   Fertility Decisions Among Small Land          Owners and Share-Tenants


              Fertility       behavior, to the extent that it is deliberate,
reflects the satisfactions that parents expect to derive from their
children  throughout the remainder of their life—times. This
satisfaction may come from the children in and of themselves,
or from the income that is expected of them.24This expected incorre,
in its turn, may be prized as a boost to parents' incomes while
they are still economically active, here called a "labor motive"


      24
         In the first instance (children desired mostly for their
           in sake),       fertility
                                behavior has merited a long and qrowiflq
          literature, focused predominantely on developed countries,
                Gary S. Becker," An Economic Analysis of Fertility"
         in Demographic and Economic Change in Developed Countries,
         Universities — National Bureau Committee for Economic
         Research, Conference Series 11, Princeton University Press,
         Princeton, 1960, pp. 209—231; Gary S. Becker and H. Gregg
         Lewis, "On the Interaction Between the Quantity and Quality
         of Children", Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, N9 2,
         Part II, March/April, 1973, pp S279-S288; Robert J. Willis,
         "A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility
         Behavior", •Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81, N 2,
         Part II, March/April 1973, pp. S14-S64; and many others
         who emphasize the cost of child—services i.e., of the
         satisfaction derived from children themselves. Warren C.
         Sanderson, The Interaction Between Aspirations and Resources:
         The View of Easterlin and Other New Home Economists ,CP?.G
         Research Memorandum N9 200, Stanford University, has proposed
         that 'the above group of fertility analysts are approximating
           a large rival group, led by Richard A. Easterlin. "On
         The Relations of Economic Factors to Recent and Projected
         Fertility Changes", Demography, Vol. 3, 1966, pp 131—151;
         Richard A. Easterlin, "An Economic Framework for Fertility
         Analysis", Studies in Family Planning, Vol 6, N9 3, March
         1975, pp 54—63, and several others, who emphasize parental
         mobility aspirations, status and other sociological variables
         in explaining fertility behavior. This literature has been
         surveyed by Warren E. Sanderson in Economic Theories of
         Fertility; What do They Explain? NBER working paper series
         N9 36, March 1974 and by Harvey Leibenstein, "An Interpretation
         of the Economic Theory of Fertility: Promising Path or Blind
         Alley?", Journal of Economic Literature, Vol 12, N9 2,
         June 1974, pp 457—479.




                                                                        IPEA — 37
ucrv*a* DC PUIICJAMCNI'O 0* PC3IDNCIA 0* Pö.UCA                                 9
INSTITUTO DC PLAHCJAMENTO   £CONÔMICO   C SOCIAl. (IPCA)




for fertility 25 or as a hoped-for means of support during
                                                                              26
parents' old age,here called a "pension motive" for fertility
In addition, given the conditions that prevail in the Brazilian
Northeast, emergency support is required in the occurrence of
crisis years, whether due to drought or travel.27

         There are many controversies regarding whether the net
present value of children's future income contributions is positive
or negative at their time of birth, over the difference in social
versus private rates of discount concerning fertility decisions25




         most stimulating discussion on the "labor motive" is
       contained in John C. Caldwell, Towards a Restatement of
       Demographic Transition Theory; An Investigation of Conditions
       Before and at the Onset of Fertility Decline Employing
       Primarily African Experience and Data, February 1976, (rnimeo).
       In spite of an excessively early cut—off age (children are
       assumed to leave home when they are 19 years old), some
       empirical evidence on net positive "labor—benefits" from
        children in the Philipines, Java and Nepal are presented by
       Peter H. Lindert, Child Costs and Economic Development, paper
       presented at the Universities - NBER Conference on Population
       and Economic Change in Less Developed Countries, September-
       October, 1976.
   26
        Philip A. Neher, Peasants, Procreation and Pensions' ,          The
        American Economic Review, Vol 61, Nc 3, part 1, June
       pp 380-389 and Dov Chrnichovsky, Fertility Behavior
                                                                      l97l
                                                                      in
       Underdeveloped Countries; An Investment Approach,Ph.D.
       Dissertation, City University of New York, 1975, both divide
       parental life-times into only two periods (Neher's third
       period is posthumous). This forces pension—benefits to
       overpower labor-ber.e fits, which come in between
        procreation and dependency.
   27This fourth motive was frequently rntioned by respondents
     in the survey analysed below. But since it was not predicted
       in the coding scheme, it was not recorded. The other three motives
       were first discriminated by Harvey Leibenstein in Economic
       Backwardness and Economic Growth, John Wiley, New York, 1957,
       p. 161.
   28See the survey              on this branch of the fertility literature
     by Warren C. Robinson and David E. Horlacher, "Population
     Growth and Economic Welfare', Reports on Population and
     Family Planning, N9 6, February 1971, pp 1-9.




                                                                              IPCA — 27
UCREYAI* DI PLAICiAMV41O   DA   PRflIONCIA O& JIIPUILICA
IN$flTUTO DI Pi.ANUAMLiSTQ LCOMÔMICO £ $OCA (IPCA
                                                                    10.


and over the extent to which fertility behavior is consciously
determined.29 If it were established that parents in Northeastern
Brazil do receive a net positive flow of income from their
children, that alternative means of ensuring themselves of future
income are available to them, and finally, that there are positive
costs to child—rearing as well as to procuring durable income—
yielding assets, then it would be valid to examine whether the
fertility of those parents may be consciously influenced by the
relative costs of children versus alternative sources of future
income. In order to empirically test such a hypothesis, however,
one must first translate the abstract economic concepts of assets
and costs, into their concrete manifestations in the specific
Northeastern context.


              The main alternative to children as a source of future
income   in the rural areas of Northeast Brazil is land. Cattle
are very risky, since they perish in a severe drought. Cooperatives
and banks are unreachable, since they do not extend credit to
those who have no collateral. Investments in formal schooling are
somewhat pointless in an economy with skill requirements learned
through work experience, not in the traditional class rooms of
small rural communities. Out-migration holds the nebulous
promise of higher paying urban jobs, but also the expectation of
long uncomfortable travel on crowded buses to places where cash
is needed for every transaction, plus an indefinite period of
unemployed adjustment to foreign surroundings. Investment in the
future, therefore, narrows down to investment in children or in
land. Land provides income even to very small land'wners, who
frequently sharcrop Out their miniscule plots.30 Old people who
at least own their land are therefore assured of "retirement"
income even if there are no children to support them.


   29Richard A. Easterlin, Robert A. Pollak and Michael L. Wachter,
     Toward a More General Economic Model of Fertility Determination:
     Endogenous Preferences arid Natural Fertility, paper presented
     for the Universities - NBEP. Conference on Economic and
     Demographic Change in Less Developed Countries, Philadelphia,
     September-October 1976, propose a typology of "pre—modern",
     "intermediate" and "wholy modern" populations according to
     the degree of conscious deliberateness in their fertility
      behavior.
   30Gary P. Kutcher and Pasquale L. Scandizzo, Land Tenure,
     Employment and Farm Performance in Rio Grande do Norte, The
     World Bank, Development Research Center, Development Planning
     Division, Working Paper N9 RPO:273/XVII/l, Table 4, p.6.

                                                                 IPA — 27
SCR(TAR$A OC PLA?CJAMCNTO   0*   •RESI0NCt* 0* RCP(8UCA
                                                                                     11
INSTITUTO OC PLANEJAMENTO £CONMICO C SOCIAL (IPW




          The cost of land, however, is money, that scarce resource
in an economy with a strong subsistance component, where all the
principal  transactions are effected in kind. Moreover, large land-
lords are reluctant to sell small plots of land and, when they do
so, restrict such sales to low productivity plots far from water
reservoirs. This has caused the progressive partitioning of
already small plots into even smaller units over time, as mentioned
previously, unti' they are no longer sufficient to support a
household without the exertion of further labor elsewhere. Thus,
imperfections in the land market have progressively inqreased the
cost   of acquiring land in the rural northeast.
              The cost of children, on the other hand, is not measured
in   cash,   but in terms of the time and goods devoted to them by
the family. In              a labor-slack economy,the time-cost of children
is quite low31           and the goods-cost               probablypredominantes. Among
the goods consumed by children, the largest component in near
subsistence circumstances is food.32 In fact, child mortality
is critically high during the weaning ages, 2-3 years, when
children become most vulnerable to food shortages.33




     31The time-cost of children, especially that of the mother, is
       a critical variable in deliberate—controled fertility models
       such as those cited in the first part of footnote ( 24
       above. But the availability of grandparents and pre—adolescents
       to take care of young children, and the lack of employment
       alternatives for these types of household members, reduces
       the time-intensity of child-rearing for the household as a whole.
     32Consumption of non-food items is low, not only for children
       but for every household member. Bare, unflored huts,
       furnitureless except for hammocs, a fire—wood stove and,
       perhaps, one or two hurriedly procured stools greet the
       outsider;     that is all. Food                        is
                                             the main consumption
       item and fathers' often joke about the food—cost of young
       children by answering that their main "contribution" to the
       household         is eating:
             "Does (...)help you with your farm-work?"
                "(...)      helps by eating"
               '...)        ajuda na roca?"
                "i...)      auda      é   pr'a   comer")
     33Ruy Laurenti, "Alauns Aspectos da Mortalidade de Crianças r4eno
       res de 5 Anos em Trés Areas Brasileiras", Crescimento Fooulaci—
        onal(Histôrico e Atual) e Comoonentes do Crescimento
        dade e Migraçoes) , Codernos CERAP N9 l6,Sao Paulo, 1973, pp.
        75—92 finds tRat malnutrition is responsible for 70% to 80
        of       child-deaths between 1 and 4 yeurs of age in surveyed
        rural communities in Brazil.



                                                                                    IPIA—27
  sCc(Ta* DC P.M4EiAMEMT0 0* PRE5ION** 0* CPUULICA
  IN$TITUTO   OC M.ANCJAMCNTO   £C0$ÔMPCO C $QCIM. (9PCA)
                                                                          12


                cost of food in those surroundings, in its turn, has
                   The
 three components. The first is the land and labor cost of food
 production by the household itself, there being no capital to speak
 of. The second is the retail margin of food purchases. The third
 is the interest-rate charged by the creditor who finances inter-
 harvest food consumption by deficit households.
                  The first Cost, the production cost of food, can be
expected to be higher, and to rise more with growing family size,
among small landowners than because of the incidence of diminishing
returns in minifundos. This problem is circumvented among tenants,
however, is circumvented by landlords' practice of alloting land
according to their family size. The second cost, the interest cost
of food, is also much higher for small land owners, who have only
local usurers to finance their consumption, than for share-tenants
who have easy access to the credit extended by their landlords.
The third cost, the retail cost of food, is probably about the same
for all houselolds,. or approximately so. Thus, the food cost of
children, n that environment, should be lower for share—tenants
than for small land owners.

          These considerations lead to the prediction that share-
tenants would want and have more children than other rural residents
for two reasons. First, because the cost of acquiring child-
substitutes (maiply land) is relatively high for them and secondly,
because the cost of acquiring children (mainly consumer credit) is
relatively low for share—tenants compared to other agricultural
households. One would, in fact, expect tenants to be less conscious
of the costs of child rearing and more aware of the beaefits to be
derived from children.Therefore, they may engage in practices which
increase their fertility and, more importantly, these practices  may
even be consciously motivated towards high fertility. Given the
common ethnic, regional, cultural, economic background of all these
rural households;given the relative mobility between small land
owners and         of share tenants; given their common
                                                contact with reiativs
who have undertaken the drastic out-migration venture and who have
thereby adopted lower urban fertility patterns, then both high and
low fertility may be the outcome of deliberate decisions, not of
ritual practices performed with no fertility outcome in mind.




                                                                        PEA —
           01 PtANEJAMEt4TO OA PR13ONCIA OA REPUILICA                    13
INSTITUTO 01 PtAJ4IJAMENTO ECONÔMICO I SOCIAl. (IPIAl




                This hypothesis differs both from those advanced by
controled fertility advocates as well as by natural fertility
advocates for Third World countries.34 It proposes that a natural
fertility outcome may be the result of a deliberate but truncated
ef fort to obtain a more than the feasible number of births. This
desire for high fertility may be economically motivated and
analysable according to a choice-theoretic decision model that
would take into account the specific costs and benefits associated
with children, such as those mentioned briefly in the above
paragraphs.

          The following section presents evidence of high desired
fertility among share tenants and low desired fertility among
small land owners drwn from a small sample taken in Northeastern
Brazil. Evidence of different relative costs and benefits
associated with children among different tenure classes are also
presented at the end of the section.

4. Some Life-Cycle Patterns of Rural Household Behavior in
    Northeast Brazil


                The original objective of the small household survey
described in this section had been to prepare for a subsequent
and larger survey on the fertility and household behavior of small
farmers in Northeastern Brazil.35 The sequel was never carried
out, however, and the experimental questionnaires became the only
comprehensive source of information on rural household behavior
to emerge from .he project.




     34See footnotes (24,25 and 29) aboe.


     35Project RPO 273 of the SUDENE/DRC survey carried out in
        1973.




                                                                       IPEA   —V
$ICtTARI* 0* PtAIIU*MCNTO 0* PRL3IDNcla 0* fl*PUUCA
INITITUTO DI P.A?IIJAMCNT0 LCONOMICO C   SOCIAi.   (IPIA)
                                                                                         14.


               Problems
                   concerning truncation, the unrepresentative
nature of the sample inconsistencies among
                                                      surveyed  localities
and many others have been discussed in
                                       several World Sank
reports36 and need not be enumerated here. In all, considering
the flood conditions faced that year by the interviewers, results
have turned out to be surprisingly consistent with state and
regional figures.37 The sample is very small: consistent economic
and demographic information was obtained for Only 165 households
in all. 38


   36See T. King, D. Chernichovsky and R. Moran, "Economic Aspects
     of Household Fertility Behavior and Labor Supply, Phase I
     Report", Population and Human Resources Division,Development
      Economics Departrnnt, Washington, IBRD, June 1976; C. Cavalcan
      ti, "Pesquisa sobre a Familia Rural: Sugestöes para urn projeto
     de pesquisa" ("Survey on the Northeastern Rural Household:
     Suggestions for a Research Project") Recife, Instituto Joa-
                                                            ,

     quim Nabuco, July 1975; A.L. Ozorio de Almeida, "Report on
     the Northeastern Brazil Rural Household Survey Pilot Project",
     Rio de Janeiro, INPES, July 1974.

  37it is perhaps surprising that mean values for key demographic
    variables do not deviate substantially from the overall
    pattern for the Brazilian Northeast. However, according to
    R. Moran, "Socioeconomic Characteristics of Sampled Househo.lds:
    Comparisons with Northeast and Country-wide Samples from
     Official Brazilian Surveys", unpublished, PHRD-DED—WB, working
     age women do appear to be somewhat overrepresr.ted, female
     literacy is higher and fertility and mortality rates are
     somewhat lower than in the Northeast as a whole, especially
     among the younger women in the sample:
                                                            Brazilian        Pilot
                                                            Northeast        Survey
    Working age proportion (%)                                  40             60
    Female literacy (%)                                         50             43
    Average Live Births per Woman
    Child Survival Ratio (%)                                     6.7            6
                                                                72            66
    Mean Household Size                                          6.7           7.6
    Proportion of non—nuclear
      fai1y_jenthers (%)                                         7            16

  38Thirteert
             questionnaires, corresponding to households numbered
    023, 047, 052, 053, 054, 056, 094, 111, 143, 153, 156 and 157,
    were removed from the sample due to data omissions critical
    to the             analysis. Differences in ieans computed
    here and in other papers using the same data should be
    attributed to different exclusion criteria. See, for example,
    Dov Chernichovsky, "Some Socioeconomic Aspects of Fertility
    Behavior in Northeast Brazil, "PHRD—DED-WB, November 1976.




                                                                                     IPEA — 27
RCR1T** 01 PUNIJAMINTO 0* PRC3IDNCIA ON REPÜPUC*
                                                                      15
INSTITUTO 01 PtANIJAMINTO ICONOMICO £ 0CI*L (IPIA)




              Because     of the many known shortcomings of the data base,
it is used in this paper as illustrative support for empirical
propositions, rather than as a vehicle for hypothesis testing. The
demographic and economic life cycle patterns preéented will hopefully
be   thought-provoking for data-starved students of rural household
behavior in the Third World. In addition, some of the findings may
prove insightful for those interested in 19th century demographic
transitions among countries which experienced a sharecropping stage
between slavery, or serfdom, arid free wage rural labor.39

              This section describes several salient features of life—
cycle household behavior among tenants, small landowners and
squatters living in the environs of two townships in the State of
Rio Grande do Norte - Caicô and Florânia- and one township in the
State of Marariho         -
                    Moncão - in the Brazilian Northeast. As is
shown below, tenants are found to have outstandingly high fertility
levels compared to the other population groups and even compared
to natural fertility populations in other countries. Fertility
differentials within the sample appear to be consistent with
differences in childrents contributions to household income
throughout the life cycle in each sample subgroup, as well as
with mothers' and fathers' stated perceptions of the relative costs
and benefits of child rearing. All tables referred to in the text
are in the appendix.

          Table 1 shows the distribution of the sample among age—
location—tenure cells. The disadvantage of the small sample is
evident by the small number df observations in each cell and by the
number of empty cells. Ten—year age brackets would have eliminated
empty cells, but they would also have entailed a loss of comparability
between the fertility profiles shown here and those presented by
other authors.



     39me absence of pure wage laborers in this sarile is noteworthy,
       given the rapid demise of tenancy in the South of the country
       and 3.ts substitution by wage contracts. It is said that the
       switch to wage labor in the South is caused by fear of tenants'
       claims to land farmed by them over a certain number of years,
       Consonant with recent rural labor legislation. If so, this
       threat had not yet been perceived by the landlords in the
       Serido in 1974.




                                                                      tPEA — 27
icCcr*m* DE tAN(iAMUYO 0* •U(310tsc1a           PU
IN$TITUTO   OC PtMUAMtNT0 CCONONICO £ dOCiAa. UPI*3                           16


                   The largest tenure class in the present sample is
composed of squatters; the smallest comprises                small landowners.
Only three interviewed mothers were under twenty years of age;
thirty-eight (the largest age contingent) were over fifty. This
heavy representation of relatively older women is somewhat atypical
of the region,40 but turns Out to be quite fortunate for the
purpose of calculating retrospective fertility schedules, shown
in the next table.


          Table 2 presents estimated retrospective fertility
profiles for the surviving children of all, women in the sample.41
The estimate, however, is heavily influenced by the past fertility
experience of older women and may not be representative of the
fertility behavior of women currently belonging to each age
         42
bracket.


                                               Table 2 is that
                   The first impression gained from
completed     surviving family size is rather moderate: 5.7 children
for     the sample as a whole: 5.76 in Caicd, 6.91 in Floränia and
5.10 in Monco. Tenants have slightly larger families than small
landowners, who, in turn, have more live children than squatters.

          It is known that couples who control their fertility
tend to first allow for a given desired number of births and to
attempt prevention thereafter. This leads to profiles rather
similar in slope to natural fertility profiles (i.e., uncontrolled
births) in the early stages of the life cycle, and to flatter profiles


        40R.      Moran, "Socioeconomic Characteristics.. ." Table   4.2,   p.4.4

        41Children   alive were allocated to appropriate age intervals
            according to their own and their mothers' ages. Averages
            were then calculated, based on the number of women who had
            achieved a given age interval. The number of observations
            in each column consequently decreases with advancing age:
            both young and Old women are represented in the early age
            brackets, but only older women are represented in the latter
            age   brackets.

        420ne   possible test for the significance of possible differences
            between younger and older  cohorts within each age bracket,
            precluded due to the time constraints on this paper, would be
            to regress observed fertility on (0, 1) dummies for women
            under, and over,          30 years of     age.


                                                                                     9
                                                                         IPEA — 2?
$IC(TAA Di P!.*NLJAMENTO 0* PRt3DNCIA 0* RIPUSUCA
                                                                               17
INSTITUTO Di PI.ANtJAM(NTO (CONOMICO £ SOC,*1.   (IPC*




 in   later years. One possible test for the presence of active
birth control in a given population, therefore, is the degree to
which fertility profiles flatten out relative to the maximum
births attainable (natural fertility) . In order to better interpret
the figures presented in Table 1, its first four rows are graphed
 in Figure 1 and compared to Henry's average natural fertility
 profile.43

                  All profiles in Figure 1 lie well below the natural
fertility case (H), except for children born to Floränia woman
when they were 20to 25 years old. The Flornia schedule (F) is so
much higher than the schedules for Caicô and Moncão (C and M) that
one suspects that differences in subsample composition may be at
 play. Accordingly, after regrouping the sample according to tenure
 classes in Figure 2, one sees that tenants have uniformly higher
 child survival rates; small landowners and squatters cross in the
 30 to 35 age bracket.


           The fact that these profiles lie everywhere below Henry's
 may either indicate widespread birth control — an unlikely
 supposition for the Brazilian Northeast - or higher child mortality
 than in the control group. In order to correct for child mortality,
 estimated age-specific child death rates44 were added to the
 surviving birth rates, yielding an estimate of age—specific total
 live births. The results are presented in Table 3 and Figure 3.




      43Louis      Henry,       "Some Data on Natural Fertility", Eugenics
         Quarter,           Vol. 8, N9 2, pp. 81-91, Table        p. 84.
               approximation           to age—specific child mortality rates was
         calculated inthe following way. Total deaths reported by
         women in each age group were divided by duration of marriage
         and then regrouped into five-year Intervals. These fractions
         were added in succession, with increasing woman's age. Thus,
         contrary to the case of surviving births, the child deaths
         estimated are more heavily weighted by the child mortality
         experience of younger women. This approximation was made
         necessary because information regarding age at death was not
         adequately coded for children who were more than one year old
         when they died.




                                                                             IPEA — 27
     UCR(TARI* OC MUAM!J4TO Dl •lt3DNCIA DA mUUSUCA                                        18.
     IN*I1IUTO   DC PI.HLJAMCNTO £CONÔM1CO I SOC4M. (IPIA)



                                                 ure 1
                           Surviving Children in Each Location
10
      Nuiiber
        of
      children
 9



                                                                                                      H

 8                                = Total Sample
                           C=         Caic
                           F = Floränia
 7
                           M = Monço                                                             -
                           B = Henry                                                 a

 6
                                                                               /
 5                                                                                        ——M


 4
                                                                      /
                                                             //
                                                                  /
 3
                                       I             //
                                               / /
 2
                              /
                              /         //
                                             /
                          /       /
 1                  / //
                      /                                               Mothers' Age


                                                                                     40   45          c
     15               20                   25           30                35
                                                                                          IPKA — 27
      $(CRCTAIA O PI.AICJAMEI4fO 0* II(SI0NC1A 0* NU8UC*                             19.
      PNSnTUTO 0 P*MLJAMCNTO £GONOMICO   £   SOCIM. UPtA)




                                       Figure 2
10
                         Surviving Children by Tenure Class

        Number of
        Children

                                                                                           H
 8
                     Sh = Tenants
                     Si = Small land owners
                     Sq = Squatters
 7                   H =Henry

                                                                                            Sh
 6


                                             .4.                                            El
 5
                                                                                            Sq



 4




 3




 2




                                                                      Mothers' Age
 1.




           15             20                 25             30   35         40             45

                                                                                      I?EA — 31
                  DC A$CiAMZ'4T0 0* pq(3l0ClA 0* LpuaLIcA
                                                                               20.
           eNUITUTO DI tAI.JAMLNT0 MIC0

                                              Figure 3
10
                                Total Live Births by Tenure Class

      j'   Number   of
           Children
 9



                     Sh = Tenants
 8                   Si = Small land Owners
                     sq = Squatters
                     H=     Henry
 7




 6
                                                                                     sq




 3




 2




 1


                                                                Mothers' Age
 Sh
 sq
 Si           20           25               30              3    4         4          50

                                                                                IPA   — 27
$ICRCTA*I* 01 PI.ANCJAMENTO 0* PlUI0tNCA 0* RtPUII•ICA
INSTITUTO DC PtANCJAM(NTO CCONOMICO C S0CAl. (IPC*
                                                                                        21



        Even     though appropriate confidence intervals have not yet been
estimated        for the profiles in Figure 3, their appearance is
suggestive of several important implications. First, fertility
among tenants is outstandingly high by any standard.45 Secondly,
the    fertility profile for small landowners is apparently quite
similar to the natural    fertility case (H); i.e., small landowners
do   not seem to control fertility either. According to the estimated
profiles, squatters are the group most likely to be excercising
some form of control, though they need not be conscious of doing
so. Their nomadic life—style in itself may cause frequent
separation among spouses and                    other    unintended restraints to the
number of births per woman.

                 Table 4 shows the             percentage    of each tenure group -
tenants, small landowners, others (squatters plus part—time share-
croppers) — who justified their family size preference in terms of
cost, in terms of benefits,or in terms of other considerations
regarding children. Health costs are taken to be a response that
either explicitly refers to the physical health strains of child
bearing or that refers to "psychic cbsts" such as pain, fear of
childbirth etc. Economic costs occur when the interviewer says



        45
             Given the method by which Tables 2 and 3 were calculated,
             one should bear in mind the possibility that the slopes of
             the profiles will be overestimated if:
                i) presently older women had,in the past, relatively
                   more surviving children than younger women within
                   each age bracket; or, alternatively,
               ii)   presently younger women had,in the past, more child
                     deaths than older women within each age bracket.

             Neither appear to be the case in this sample or in other
             Brazilian rural, regions. The city of So Paulo, in the
             South of the country does seem to have very high infant
             mortality rates for teen—age mothers compared to older
             mothers, but this seems to be related to specifically
             urban problems. See Dr. Ruy de Laurenti, "Alguns Aspec-
             tog...", Table 7, p. 88.




                                                                                  IPEA — 27
SCCMT*I* 01 tMCJAMCNTO 0* PIUI0NCIA 0* PIj,L                                         22.
INITITUTO 06 P.MIUAMUT0 LC0N6M0 I $0CM. UPI*J




he  or she is too poor to have a large family. Labor benefits are
 recorded if the respondents say they want children for their labor
 ("para trabaihar"). Pension benefits refer to the expressed wish
 for security in old age. "Enjoyment" refers to interviewees who
wanted  many children because "its nice to have them". Fatalistic
 allusions to God's will and all other responses are added together
in the "Others" column.

             The importance of Table 4 is that fathers and mothers
were    interviewed separately, by male and female enumerators,
 respectively. This led to a                    high incidence of omissions for
 fathers, apparently due to the male interviewers' forgetfulness,
 and possible hidden distaste about such "women's questions".
Nonetheless, Table 4           presents valuable evidence of different views
concerning children by mothers and fathers, as we•ll as systematic
tendencies among tenure classes.

               The majority of respondents have clear conceptions
 of the      costs     or benefits associated           with having    dildren.
  It is noteworthy that the pension motive is almost
 entirely     absent and, when cited, concerned only women. Tenant
 parents refer to benefits more than three tines as frequently aa
                                                                                              )
 any other. Tenant fathers mostly want children's labor, while
 tenant mothers frequently say they just like to have children.
 Tenants perceive child cost much less frequently than small
 landowners or squatters do. The economic costs of children are
 perceived most frequently by squatter mothers. The health costs
 of child bearing are most emphasized by small landowner mothers.
 Nontenant fathers seem to be rather indifferent to children.

               These responses are              in
                                 accordance with the fertility
profiles seen above. Tenants apparently have more children
because they want more children than do small landowners or
 squatters.  Moreover, tenants apparently expect to benefit more
 from child labor and to have fewer economic constraints to child
 rearing than nontenants.


              'If     expectations              are formed by    surrounding




                                                                                  IPLI — 21
$rCRtI*IA Of PUSIVAMf1O 0* Uf3IOtNCIA 0* UIPUC*
IN$TI7U?O   DC P.ANIJAMCNTO £CGMÔMICO C SOC&A. (tPC*
                                                                         23.


example46, then Tables 5-8 suggest that tenants indeed are
realistic in counting more on their children's contribution
to household labor than do other tenure classes. Older tenant
families have more resident children (Table 5) and, consequently,
more workers (Table 6) than the other two groups. In addition,
tenant children put in longer hours than the children of the
others (Table 7) and contribute proportionately more to household
income (Table 8).

                   The poor showing in Table 4 of the "pension motive" for
wanting children is also justified by prevailing practices. In
economies characterized by a large proportion of subsistence
consumption (Table 9) , inter-household remittances are too
cumbersome and inter-generational income transfers in kind are
effected primarily within the household. Accordingly (Table 10),
gifts, pensions and other forms of income not produced by house-
hold members are a small percentage of total family income. They
appear to be primarily a matter of local institutional availability
(e.g. of rural workers' unions,) rather than a matter of age or
tenure. No significant life cycle pattern in the relative ages
of non—nuclear family members was found, even though a vaguely
"U" shaped pattern discerned in Table 10 may indicate that young
wives frequently live in households where there are older
pensioners.
                   The preceding set of     tables was intended to be illustrative
of    the economic           contributions of children to the distinct groups
of   parents         interviewed in the sample. However, as noted earlier,




      46The formation of expectations about children is a complicated
        matter that depends on mobility aspirations, former experiences,
        the choice of peer group and many other factors frequently
            discussed in the literature on fertility. In the tJ.S.,adolescent
            experience may be crucial in setting up the aspirations
            future parents, for themselves and/or for their children of
            thereby influencing their subsequent fertility behavior.
            Rural-urban migrants in Latin lunerica, on the other hand
            ususally move before marrying and may then experience
            neighborhood   effects and copy the fertility behavioursurrouii.ig
            them in urban areas.




                                                                         IPEA —
UCIC?A* 0* .AU*MUSTO OA PflI0tNC1A
INITITUTO   0* R.NILJAM(NTO (CONOMICO £ $OCA. tlflA                                    24



in    presenting Table 4, parents explain desired family size not
only with regard to expected benefits from children, but also
from the point of view of expected costs. The fact that tenants
dc—emphasize child costs, while small landowners and squatters
stress them, suggests that children may be "cheaper" for tenants
than for nontenants.


             discussed in section 3 above, the main child—cost
                  As
to parents,in the bare subsistance conditions of rural areas in
the Brazilian Northeast,is the cost of food. Food, in its turn,
may be relatively cheaper for sharetenants — due to the
availability of consumer loans extended by landlords — than for
others, whose ties to the local "credit-worthy" elite are weaker.
Accordingly,'cheaper"children for tenants would imply that they
borrow more for food consumption than do. others. This expectation
is supported in Tables 11 and 12.

                  Table 11 shows a strikingly different pattern of
indebtedness between tenants and small landowners. Whereas
tenants exhibit a constant ratio of indebtedness throughout the
life cycle, small landowners concentrate their debts in the
period when child-dependency is greatest. Table 12 shows another
important difference in the indebtedness patterns of tenants and
nontenants. Nontenants have a relatively balanced "portfolio" of
creditors, including banks, while tenants are highly dependent on
landlords for credit and have no transactions with banks whatsoever.
Table 12 also indicates that tenants borrow proportionately more
for    consumption purposes than nontenants.47

                  Thus, landlords seem to be financing the consumption
requirements of their tenants' large families. Moreover, to the
extent that fertility is food-cost-elastic, landlords appear to
be creating an incentive for their tenants to have many children,
by cheapening the interest-cost of food. Finally, aside from
having many children and putting them                 to   work, their seeming
eneligibility to institutional credit presents a serious obstacle
 to   tenants' accumulation of productive assets, other than children.

      47Consumption loans in Table 12 cover food, medicine, general
        household and travel. Food was the most frequent case.




                                                                                 IPEA — 27
$ECC?*RI* 01 tANIJAMCNTO 0* PE3IDNCI4 0* LPOUUCA
INSTITUTO    01 PL*$U*MEMO (CONOMIGO I SQCI*i. IC*
                                                                       25.




                    if tenants are credit-worthy enough to
                   However,
repetitively merit so many loans from their landlords, their
lack of bank-credit becomes suspiciously sugestive of collusive
activity in the local credit market. Perhaps landlords derive
special advantages from the credit monopoly they enjoy vis--vis
their tenants. This advantage, however, need not be limited to
usurers' income from the interest rate charged. In stipulating
that the debt be paid in terms of the local cash—crop (cotton
in the case of Caicô and Monção, rice in the case of Monçäo), the
landlord-creditor is able to derive supplementary income by later
marketing the debt portion of the harvest (along with the
contractual share, in the case of landlords). Aside from preventing
debt repayment in money, by monopolising the local labor market as
well, landlords inhibit rtney earning activities from diverting
household labor away from the cash crop.


               In the long run, chronic consumer indebtedness
by tenant families provides their landlords with a growing.
and captive labor force, specialized in cash crop production.
The         sharing mechanism itself ensures landlords of
the future income flow to be derived from current financing of
tenant fertility. These conjectures are supported indirectly by
Tables 13 and 14 which show that tenants and their children are
more specialized in cash crop production than small landowners
or squatters.




      481n       fact, landlords appear to excercise a four—fold monopoly
            over their tenants: in the    land market in the product market,
            in   the labor market and in the credit market. According to
            Keneth J. Arrow in "Toward a Theory of Price Adjustment",
            The Allocation of Economic Resources",Stanford University
            Press, Palo Alto, pp 41—51, the greater the degree of
            concentration       in any side of a market, the greater the
            price—fixing power that side will have. Accordingly, the
            high land prices and interest rates paid by small farmers
            and the low wages and product prtces received by them are
            all  suggestive that landlords do indeed excercise the
            monopoly power they posass in these markets.




                                                                           IPL   —
 $Lc(r*m* OC .ANCJAMI$T0 OA PRCSIONCIA 0* ISLP(J.USA
 IRIT1TUTQ Dt tA*LJAMVflQ £CONOM,GO i so (IPtA                                     26.


          The other two components in the differential cost of
food between tenants and nontenants are its production and retail
cost, discussed briefly in section 3 above. The production cost
rises quickly for small landowners, as their family size increases,
due to diminishing returns on their own xniniscule plots. Because
of   diminishing returns, small landowners are forced to seek part-
time sharecropping, wage employment and                other   income earning
activities in order to support their families. As may be seen
in Tables 13 and 14, thiS need is most pressing during the late
twenties and early thirties, when children are small. Tenants, on
the other hand, are sai4 to be spared the incidence of diminishing
returns due to the practice whereby landlords allot land according
to family size. This is yet another way In which landlords may
be cheapening the food—cost of children for their tenants, in this
case its production—cost. For their part., by stimulating family
labor on their land, landlords would also be ensuring themselves
of increasing utilization of their notoriously under utilized
properties in the land—abundant — labor-scarce Northeastern
agrarian economy.

                Finally, the retail cost of food is also said to be
largely under the control of landlords, who alledgedly force                                )
tenants to buy from the farm—store, thereby deriving retail income
from the tenancy arrangement. This aspect cannot be analysed
within the present sample, since the origin of purchases was not
enquired. The sample does, however, provide some support concerning
landlord monitoring of the production—cost of food for tenants,
via elastic supply of land to larger families.
           Table 15, which shows acreage farmed by tenure class
and age group, provides some support, albeittenuous, for the
supposition that older (larger) tenant families receive more land
than younger tenants. Before 30 years,of age tenant plots are
smallar than those of small landowners and squatters, but become
much larger by the ages of 45 and over. These older tenant family-
heads sometimes command the agricultural labour of one or two sons
and four or five grandsons, all working their plots in the same
property and all living together in the same house. According to
Table '16, these are the highest income' households in the sample.
In fact, they may constitute the ideal which all others strive




                                                                                IPEA — 37
         01 .AN1*MENT0 0* ,(SIOtNCI* 0* UURUCA                         27.
IN$TtTUTO 01 PANLJAM(NTO CCONOMICO £ $0CM. UPEA




to attain. Abundance is generated by pooling the production of
many workers into one large consumption urtit, even though
individual      consumption levels may be low.

                The attainment of the large successful tenant family
may be a deliberate objective,served by low food cosprovided by
landlords and high fertility behaviour practiced by tenants. It
does not seem to be an unintended outcome of unconscious social
practices, since Northeastern rural households belong to the saxte
cultural—ethnic blend of whites, blacks and indians. There does
not even seem to be any consistent difference in age of marriage
among tenure classes (Table 17) , even though early marriage would
evidently serve the pro-natalist advantage of tenants and     late
marriage would serve the opposite interests of small landowners
and squatters. Quite the contrary, the large tenant farni ly
appears to be a goal that is set upon early in life, toward
which parents work by moving less than other rural households
(Table 18), establishing permanent ties of social and economic
dependence upon their landlords, having as many children as
possible and working them as much as they can.49

Conclusions

     Northeastern share—tenancy is an institutional arrangement which
regulates a specific set: of transactions between tenants and
landlords. Landless peasants  gain access to land and food-
storage services during destitute periods. Landlords gain access
to family labor from the overlapping life cycles of individual
members. Intrinsic to this relationship is food—consumption-cum-
crop-lien indebtedness. Its short-run effect is to provide an
incentive toward increasing household labor effort and specialization
in the cash crop. Its long—run impact apparently stimulates
increasing family size: both by boosting the benefits of larger
families and by reducing their cost. Thus, share—tenancy seems




          had expected that tenant children would also put in fewer
        hours in school than those of small landowners and squatters.
        But the very spotty evidence collected in the sample
        (Table 19) does not lend support to this supposition.




                                                                     IPEA — 37
IiCMra** DI AhCJAML*TO 0* .I3I0tNCIA 0*    LPUIUCA
?N$TITUTO DL   A*LJAMLNT0 IC0OM$CO £ $QG,A (IPCA
                                                                      28.

to   be linked to high fertility.50
                 This is a very new hypothesis and merits further
investigation. In subsequent papers, the food-cost and labor-
benefits of children in a tenant-landlord economy will be contrasted
with those of a wage-labor agrarian economy. These elements will be
incorporated into a fertility model, which will be tested on the
rural portion of the nationwide household survey collected by the
Estudo Nacional da Despesa Familiar (ENDEF—FIBGE).

                 In Brazil, rural fertility rates have declined significantly
during the past decade. Meanwhile, the recent and rapid transformation
of share—tenants into a wage labor force has coincided with
increasing under—e'irloyment and labor — surplus conditions in the
urban economy. Since worstening urban employment prospects
progressively dampen the migratory threat, new commercial farm-
enterprizes may no longer feel the need to boost the reproduction
of the rural labor force or to tie workers to the land, as
slaveowners used to do by force and as traitiorial landlords
still do by indebtedness. The empirical evidence presented In this
paper suggests that the decline in rural fertility in Brazil, may
signify not a "modernization" of the rural labor force, but its
conscious adjustment to the loss of fertility inducements experienced
previously under tenancy.
                                                                                 D




     50Aside from crop— lien
                             indebtedness sharecropper speci ali zation
       in cash—crop production was also a common and much maligned
       phenomenon in the post-bellum South of the United States. A
       more
       viewrecent
             of thisand veryisinteresting
                     paper                finding from the point of
                               that non—landowning   rural blacks also
       seem  to have had larg families than small landowners.
       this regard,                                               In
                     see S. Parnell, "The Effect of Emancipation on
       the Fertility of Black Americans", paper,
                                                 Economicsl3o,
      Stanford University, December, 1976, p 12.
      With  regard to the statistical significance of the negative
      effect of land-ownership on fertility in the sample  described
      here, see also Dov Chernichovsky, "Some
      p. 13.                                    Socioeconomic Aspects...




                                                                     IPZA — 2?
 APPENDIX
              .4

TABLES 1-19
                                                     TABLE 1
                                     DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSEHOLDS   IN THE SAMPLE




1Sharecroppers + Sharetenants.
2Part—time Sharecroppers   or Sharetenants.
3Squatters.
                                                        TABLE 2

                                               NUMBER OF   CliiiDREU   ALIVE


                                                                                                           COMPLETED
          MOTHERS AGE                           20-24      25-29   30-34       35-39   40-44   4549
                                       15-19                                                           -

Total                                   .51      1.73       3.12       4.24    5.07     5.57   5.70           5.70

  Caic                                  .34      1.34       2.62       3.89     5.09    5.59   5.76           5.76

  Floränia                              .67      2.45       3.93       5.32    6.04     6.71   69l            6.91
                                        .55      1.66       3.05       4.00    4.61     5.05   5.10           5.10
  Monçäo

Tenants1                                .63      2.18       3.50       4.81     5.71    6.24   6.39           6.39

  Caic6                                 .42      1.88       3.48       5.48     6.88    7.21    7.21          7.21

  Floränia                              •75      2.63       3.99       5.36    6.15     6.75   6.97           6.97
  Moncäo                                 -        -          -          -        -       -      -              -
Small Land Owners                       .38      1.47       2.81       4.04     5.13    5.50    5.61          5.61

  Caicö                                 .13       .33       1.71       2.90     4.40    4.70    4.92          4.92

  Flornia                               .00       .67       2.00       3.67     4.17    5.17    5.17          5.17

                                        .61      1.85       3.16       4.44    •5.24    5.61    5.61          5.61
  Moncäo



  Others                                .58      1.84       3.22       4.20     4.82    5.31    5.40          5.40

    Caicã2                              .62      2.00       3.18       4.63     5.51    6.18    6.35          6.35
    Florinia2                           .60      4.60       6.93       8.60     9.60   10.60   10.60         10.60

                                        .58      1.81       3.20       4.03     4.56    4.95    5.02          5.02
    Monço3


1Sharecroppers and Sharetenants.
2Part-time   Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

3squatters
                                        TABLE 3

                             ESTIMATED TOTAL LIVE BIRThS



  MOTHER'S AGE      15-19   20-24    25-29   30-34   35-39   40-44   45-49



Total                 .51    2.73     4.97    6.63    7.83    8.66    9.19

  Caic6               .34    2'.84   4.35     6.37    7.95    8.45    8.62

  F1ornja             .67    3.45    6.38     8.10    9.47   11.14   12.22

  Monço               .55    2.09    3.81     5.25    6.05    6:75    6.99


Tenants1              .63    2.78    5.92     7.73    8.88   10.01   10.94

  Caic6               .42    2.08    3.93     6.63    8.39    9.72    9.72

  F1ornia             .75    3.63    7.34     9.04   10.00   11.80   12.80

  Monço

Small Land Owners     .38    2.47    2.98     5.43    7.17    7.54    7.86

  Caic6               .13     .33    1.71     4.23    5.98    6.28    6.50

  F1ornia             .00     .67    2.00     3.67    5.55    6.55    6.55

  Monço               .61    1.85    3.66     5.94    6.87    7.24    7.77


Others                .58    3.14    4.96     5.36   6.25     7.05    4.44

  Caic62              .62    6.50    7.68     9.13   10.43   11.10   11.27

  F1ot-nja2           .60    5.60    8.93    10.60   11.60   13.40   14.57

  Monço3              .58    2.24    4.04    5.29    6.03    6.70     6.90




1Sharecroppers +    Sharetenants
2Part-time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

3squatters
                                                                 (




                                                                 TABLE       4

                               JUSTIFICATIONS GIVEN FOR FAMILY SIZE PREFERENCES



                        NO                       COSTS                           BENEFITS                               TOTAL
                      ANSWER                                                                  .         OTHER     RESPONDET.iTS2
                                Health              Economic     Labor            Pension
                         %           %                   %           %              %       EnJorent      %
                                 •
Total                    48          10                  10          13             0             14          5   100           352
  Mother                 21          21                  21          14             1             20-         2   100           176
  Father                 71              0                   0       13             0              8          8   100           176

                                             •
Tenants                  34              1                   5       26             0             28          6   100            96
  Mother                 22              2                   8       19             0             43          6   100            48
  Father                 44              0                   2       33             0             15          6   100            48


Small Land Owners       64               6                   2           9          1             13          5   100            84
  Mother                45           12                      5       14             2             17          5   100            42
  Father                80               0                   0           5          0             10          5   100            42


Others1                 54               8               16              8          1              6          7   100           172
  Mother                20           16                  32          10             3              9      10      100            86
  Father                87               1                   0           6          0              3          3   100            86


1Malnly squatters.
       number of fathers and mothers interviewed
                           NUMBER OF RESIDENT CHILDREN*



    MOThER'S AGE   15-19   20-24         25—29   30—34   35—39   40—44   45—49   3 50



Total                3.0    2.3           3.6     5.0     5.3      5.8     6.9    6.5
    Caic6                   2.5           2.0     2.6     4.7       .0    11.0    5.8
    Florinia                3.3           3.1     5.4     4.2      9.5     6.0    9.0
    Monço            3.0    1.4           4.4     6.1     6.5      5.7     6.9    6.7

Tenants1                    2.0           3.0     3.7     4.6      5.0     5.7    8.2
    Caic6                       .8        3.5     2.0     3.0       .0            9.0
    Flornia                 3.2           2.8     5.4     5.7     10.0     57     8.0

    Monço

SmailLandOwners     6.0     5.0      .    3.2     4.3     4.4      1.0    10.]    5.2
    Caic                    5.0            .5     3.5     6.0             11.0    4.7

    Flotinia                                              2.0                     9.0

    Monço           6.0                   4.5     6.0     6.0      1.0    10.5    5.5

Others              1.5     2.3           4.5     6.0     6.2      6.4     5.7    6.5
    Caic2                   4.5                   4.0     5.3                     4.9
    Flornia2                4.0           5.0                      9.0     7.0     .2

    Monço3          1.5     1.4           4.4     6.1     6.7      6.2     5.4    7.1



1Sharecroppers + Sharetenants
2Part-time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants
3Squatters
*
"Resident children" may belong to a previous marriage of either spouse. They are
not necessarily the offspring of the mother who was interviewed.
                                                 TABLE 6
                                                                                 *
                        AVERAGE NUMBER OF WORKING MEMBERS PER HOUSEHOLD



 MOTHER'S AGE                      20-24      25-29   30—34      35—39   40-44       45—49   50



        **
Total                                4.0        3.9        3.8    4.3      3.7         5.0   5.3

     Caic                            3.9        4.8        3.6    4.0      2.0         4.0   5.0
     Flornia                         4.2        2:1        4.2    5.0      7.0         7.0   5.8

     Monço                                       -          -      -        -           -     -

Tenants1                             3.7        2.4        3.7    5.6      5.5         7.0   6.0
     Caic6                           2.8        3.5        3.2    3.0      2.0          -    6.6
     Florinia                        4.6        1.8        4.2    7.3      9.0         7.0   5.7
     lloncao                                               -       -        -           -     -

SmailLand Owners                     4.0        4.0        4.0    5.6                  4.0   3.9
     Caic6                           4.0        4.0        4.0    6.0                  4.0   4.2

     Flornia                             —       -         -      4.0                        3.0
        — ***
     Monçao


Others                               .-                    -       -                          -
     Caic62                          6.5                   5.0    4.0                        4.7

     flornia2                        2.0        4.0                        5.0         7.0   9.0

     Monçao                                      -                          -           -     -


 1Sharecroppers + Sharetenants
2Part-time       Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

*Includes       all   "domestic"   and    non market work recorded.
**      —
 Caico and Florania only.

 This information was not collected in Monçao.
                                            TABLE 7
                                                                    *
                               AVERAGE_YEARLY HOURS PER WORKER




  MOTHER'S AGE                   20-24    25-29   30-34     35-39       40-44   45-49      50




Total                              2.6      1.9       2.6    2.6          2.4       2.8    2.2

  CaicE                            2.7     1.2        2.5    2.6          2.2       2.9    1.8

  Flornia                          2.3     3.4        2.7    2.5          2.7       2.5    3.1
          - **                     -        -                              -    -    -      -
  Monçao


Tenants1                           2.2     2.4        2.6    2.0          2.0       2.3    3.2

  Caic                             2.3     1.3        2.4    1.1          2.2        —     2.7

  Flornia                          2.2     3.7        2.7    2.2          2.0       2.3    3.7
            **                     -                          -            -         -
  Monco

SmallLandOwners                    4.4      1.8       2.8    2.0                    2..9   2.1


  Caic                             4.4      1.8       2.8    2.2                    2.9    1.9

  F1ornia                             -     -          —     1.9                     —     2.6
            **                        -
  Monçao


Others                             3.0      2.1       2.3     3.0         3.9       31     2.3

  Caic62                           2.6      -         2.3     3.0                          2.5

  F1ornia2                         3.9      2.1                           3;9       3.1    2.2

  Monçao
            3 **                      -                                    -         -      -


1Sharecroppers      ÷ Share tenants

2Part-time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

3Squatters
 *
     In   1 000 hs per year.
     NB: 10 hs per day x 6 days per week x 52 weeks per year = 3 120 hpy.
**
     This information was not collected in Monço.
                                       TABLE 10

                   PENSIONS AND TRANSFER PAYMENTS, INCLUDING GIFTS,
                      AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL HOUSEHOLD INCOME

                                            (%)



    MOTHER'S AGE             20-24   25-29        30-34   35-39   40-44   45—49     50




Total                         6.9     1.2         3.7     2.7     5.7     5.7     11.4

    Caic6                    lS2       .7         6.4     5.4     55.7      .0    14.3

    Flornia                    .7     2.7         1.9     1.7      1.9    10.6     309

                              2.6      .4         2.1      .9      3.9     1.2     6.0
    Monco

Tenants                       3.3     2.2         11.6    2.4     15.7    5.0      8.4

    Caic6                     6.5     1.2         0.5     3.8     55.7             8.8
    Flornia                    .1     2.6          1.9    1.7      3.4     5.0     2.7

    Monço

SmaliLandOwners               2.5      .0          2.9    4.6      2.6     2.3    17.3

    Caic6                     2.5      .0           .0    15.4              .0    19.3

    F1ornia                                         —
                                                          1.9                     14.0

    Monço                              .0         13.2    1.2      2.6     3.6     5.8

Others                        9.7     0.7          6.8    2.0      3.3     7.0     9.9

    Caicó2                   30.0                 33.6     3.9                    14.9

    F1ornia2                   .0     3.3                           .0    22.1     7.0

    Monço3                    2.7     0.5          1.6      .8     3.9     6.2      .6



1
    Sharecroppers + Sharetenants
2
    Part-Time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

    Squatters
                                         TABLE 11

                        CROP-LIEN DEBTS AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL
                                      HOUSEHOLD INCOME




                                        25-29   30-34     35-39   40-44                        50
     MOTHER'S AGE             20-24                                          I




                                         .15     .15       .15     .19               .14       .24
Total                          .09

                                         .08     .05       .12     -                 -         .04
     Caic                      .0?
                                                                   .21               .14       .35
     rlornia                   .15       .16     .22       .21

                               .06       .14        .15    .07     .15               .14       .30
     Monco

                               .15       .17        .14    .18     .12               .20       .17
Tenants1
                               .07       .12        .08    .07     .00               -         .O
     Caic6
                               .18       .20        .19    .25     .15               .20       .27
     F1ornia
                               -         -          -      -       -                 -         -
     Moncäo                                                                                           .4.


                                .00      .23        .24     .08    .00               .00       .20
Small Land Owners

     Caic                       .00       .07       .00     .00    -                 .00       .02

     F1ornia                   —         —          —       .19    -                 —         .40

                                -         .66       .30     .00     .00              .00       .16
     Monço

                                .05       .01       .11     .10     .16                  .13   .23
Others
                                          -                 .19     -                -         .07
     Caic2                      .00                 .00

     F1ornia2                   .00       .00       -       -          .27               .00    .56


                                .06       .02       .15     .07        .15               .14    .29
     Moriço3
                                                                                 ,
     —
 1
     Sharecroppers + Sharetenants
 2
      Part-Time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

      Squatters
                                                    TABLE 12
                        PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL LOANS OWED TO DIFFERENT TYPES OF CREDITORS

                                                                    .
                                 — ——                                                  I
                                            BANKS AND       COMMERCIAL                     FAMILY, FRIENDS
    LOAN. UTILIZATION          TOTAL                                       LANDLORDS                          TOTAL
                            TRANSACTIONS   COOPERATIVES   INTERMEDIARIES               lAND     NEIGHBORS I
                        .
     ..                                         %                                                 %             %



Total                           173             7              16             45                 32            100
   Consumption                 130              1              13             35                 26             75
   Production                   43              6               3             10                  6             25

Tenants                         80              —
                                                                8             69                 2].           100
                                68              —               7
   Consumption                                                                56                 20             85
   Production                   12              —               1             13                  1             15

Small Landowners                25             12              16              4                 68            100
                                19              —
   Consumption                                                 12              4                 60             76
   Production                    6             12               4              —                  8             24

Others: Total                   68             15              26             28                 31            100
                                44              —
   Consumption                                                 21             19                 24             64
   Production                   24             15               5              9                  7             36

Others: Squatters
                                                —              13
  Consumption                   20                                             1                 21             41
  Production                    20             15               5              3                  5             30
                                       TABLE 13

                     NON-CASH-CROP INCOME AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL
                                   HOUSEHOLD INCOME




     MOTHER'S AGE                    20-24    25-29   30-34   35-39   40—44   45-49    50



Total                                 63       76      74      66      83      68     66

    Caic6                             77      69       69      42      84      96     71

    F1ornia                           10       57      54      42      60      38     19


    Monço                             97      92       90      87      91      96     76



Tenants1                              30       54      58      39      81      37     47

    Caic6                             55       55      60      46      84       -     59

    F1ornia                           13       53      54      41      80      37     15

    Monço                              -          -     -       -       -       -      -

Small Land Owners                     88      96       87      60      94      97     88

    Caic6                             88      95       89      67       -      96     89

    F1ornia                            -          —     -      46       -       -     49

    Monço                              -      98       80      78      94      98     22



Others                                81.      90      90      69      83      79     73

    Ca1c52                            96          -    88      58       -       -     6
    F1ornia2                           6       95       -       —
                                                                       35      42     44

    Monço3                            95       89      91      90      91      95     94



1
    Sharecroppers + Sharetenants
2
    Part-Time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

    Squatters
                                             TABLE 14

                      PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL HOUSEHOLD LABOR NOT DEVOTED TO
                                       CASH-CROP PRODUCTION

                                                 (%)




      MOTHER'S AGE               20-24     25-29       30-34   35-39   40-44   45-49    50
                          —
    Total                        60         65         60      45      44       81     54

      Caicó                      68         66         68      44      43       98     59

      Fio,inia                   46         63         45      48      48       47     44

      Monco*
                                  -          —          —       -

    Tenants1                     50         58         57      38      49       46     55

      Caic6                      56         53         68      29      43        -     68

      F1ornia                    44         57         45      46      56       46     45

      Monco*
                                  -          -

    Small Land Owners

      Caic6                      94         71         65      40               98     54

      Florinia                   94         71         65      26               98     54

      Moriço *                    -                            56                -     55
                                       .


    Others                       64        100         73      56      42       51     51

      Caic2                      66          -         73      56       -        -     54

     'F1orinia2                  56        100          —       -      42       51     37
             —   3*               —          -                                          -
      Monçao




1
     Sharecroppers +    Sharetenants
2
     Part-Time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

     Squatters
*
     Information not collected in Monço
                                       TABLE 15

                                    ACREAGE FARMED




     MOTHER'S AGE                    20-24    25-29   30-34   35-39   40-44   45-49      50



Total                                 9.23     4.3    4.9      3.7     3.5    5.9     7.7

    Caic6                             2.1         -   4.0      3.4     1.2    0.3     9.7

    Floränia                          6.6         -   5.2      5.5    6.6     8.3     8.2

    Monço                            20.2      5.1    5.2      3.0     3.2    5.4     4.1


Tenants1                              2.6      3.8    4.8     6.6     2.4     8.7     15.3

    Caic                              1.7     4.0     4.4     5.1      1.2     —
                                                                                      18.4

    Flornia                           3.6     3.7     5.2     7.7      3.6    8.7     12.3

    Monçäo


Small Land Owners                     4.0     4.3     2.0     2.7      1.2    3.2     5.4

    Caic6                             4.0     5.0     1.7     1.0       -     0.3     6.45
    Flornia                            —
                                                              2.2
    Monço                              -      4.0     2.4     3.9      1.2    4.7     2.0

Others                               18.1     4.8     5.5     2.8     3.8     5.9     4.6
    Caic62                            2.0      —
                                                      6.6     3.0       -      -      6.1

    Florinia2                        22.0     0.6      -       -      9.6     7.0     2.0

    Monçio3                          20.2     5.3     5.4     2.7     3.3     5.7     3.5


1
    Sharecroppers + Sharetenants
2
    Part-Time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants
    Squatters
                                                TABLE 16

                                      TOTAL HOUSEHOLD INCOME*



    MOTHER'S AGE                       -24        25-29    30-34   35-39   40-44   45-49   3 50


Total                                    6.8        4.9      4.9     4.4     5.2     5.9    6.3
    Caic                                 6.8        5.9      6.6     4.9     4.1     3.5    7.9
    Flornia                              7.3        5.3      6.4     5.9    12.0     8.6    6.0
    Monço                                6.4        4.4      3.5     3.2     4.4     4.7    3.8

Tenants1                                 5.1        6.1      6.9     6.4     8.6     7.7    9.4
    Caicä                                4.3        7.6      7.4     5.5     4.1     -     10.7
    Florinia                             5.9        5.6      6.4     7.1    13.2     7.7    8.0
    Monço                                 -         -         —       —       -      -       -

SmalilandOwners                         10.9       42        2.9     3.7     1.9     3.3    5.1
    Caic6                               10.9       4.2       3.3     3.9      -     3.5     5.7
    Florir.ia                             —         -         —
                                                                     4.4      -      -      1.5
    Monço                                 —
                                                   4.2       1.9     2.8     1.9    3.2     4.1

Others                                   8.1       4.4       4.0     3.8     5.0    6.3     5.6
    Caic                                11.0        -        9.6     4.7     -              8.6
    Flo,ihia2                           14.1       3.8        -      -      10.8   11.3     4.2

    Monço3                               6.4       4.5       3.6     3.3    4.6     5.3     3.4


1Sharecroppers +     Sharetenants
2Part-time      Sharecroppers or Sharetenants
3Squatters
*
Cr$ 1 000 of 1974 — US$ 166
                                              TABLE 17

                                   AGE OF MARRIAGE OF MOTHERS




         MOTHER'S AGE         15-19      20-24    25-29    30-34   35-39   40-44        45-49   >50



Total                          16.3       18.5      12.6   18.5    21.2     21.2         23.6   25.4
  Caic                             -     21.5      21.5    23.7    22.3        nm        21.0   26.8
  F1ornia                      -         17.3       17.3   18.0    17.8     18.0    .    18.7   21.2

  Monço                        16.3      18.3      18.3    17.8    22.2    27.1     - 25.0      23.1

Tenants1                           —
                                         18.7      17.7    21.3    20.0    28.0          19.0   23.3
  Caic6                        -         19.8              24.0    25.5        nm           -   23.6
  F1ornia                      —
                                         17.6      17.3    18.0    16.3    16.1          19.0   23.3

  Moncäo                       -         -         -       -       -       -            -       23.0

Small Land Owners              15.0          na    20.0     na     19.8    28.0          18.7   24.8

  Caic                          -         na       24.0     na     17.0        -        21.0    24.9

  Flornia                       —         —         -       -      20.0        -         -      20.0

  Monco                        15.0       -        18.0    15.0    21.0    28.0         17.5    22.5


Others                         17.0      17.7      18.3    18.3    22.8    20.1         26.3    24.1

  Caic2                         -        18.0       -      22.0    23.0        -         -      25.0

  F1ornia2                      -        17.0      17.0     —       —      20.0         18.0    16.0

  Monço3                       17.0      17.7      18.5    18.0    22.7    26.1         28.0    24.3



1Sharecroppers + Sharetenants.
2
  Part-time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants.
3Squatters.
na -   information   not available
nm -   never   married.
                                           TABLE 19

                           HOURS OF SCHOOL PER YEAR PER CHILD



    MOTHER'S AGE                     20—24          25—29   30-34          35-39    40-44    45-49      50



        *
Total
    Caic6*

    Flornia*                           .       .




    Monco*

            1*                                                     .
Tenants

    Caic6                              0             0      174.55           0        0               136.00

    Flornia                            0             0      29.23          230.00   112.00   80.00    167.50


    Monço
                                                      -        -              -        -        -        -

Small Land Owners*

    Caic6                                  0         0         0           180.00      -     128.00    59.17

    Florir.ia
                                                                                       -        -        0

    Monço                                          118.29      0           221.54      0     221.40      0



Others
        *                                  —



    Caic62                                 0          -     320.00         404.25      -        -     132.50

    F1ornia2                               0        96.00      -       j
                                                                              —     600.00   44.44     40.00

    Monço3                                 0          0     136.50          31.76   125.22   193.85    58.91




1Sharecroppers +     Sharetenants

2Part-time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

3Squatters
*
    Totals were not calculated due to a systematic nature f response.
                                              TABLE 18

                  PERCENTAGE OF HUSBANDS WHO HAVE EVER LIVED IN ANOTHER STATE



  lIOTHER'S AGE               15-19   20-24   1   25-29   30-34    35-39   40-44   45-49     50



Total                          66.7    42.9        39.1    42.9     42.1    23.5    58.3    31.6

  Caic6                         -      25          25       12.5    50       0     100      29.6

  F1ornia                       -      50          42.9    80       60       0      50      60

  Monço                        66.7    57.1        41.7    46.7     25      28.6    57.1    25


Tenants1                        —
                                       40          37.5    50       60       0      33.3    22.2

  Caicó                         -      20          50      20       50       0       -      20

  Flornia                       —
                                       60          33.3    80       65.7     0      33.3    33.3

  t1onço                                —           -       -        —.      —       —
                                                                                             0


Small Land 0'iners            100     100          33.3    33.3     40     100     100      53.3
  Caic5                         -     100           0       0        0       -     100      33.3
  Floijnia                      —       •           —       —
                                                                    50      -        —
                                                                                           100

  Monço                       100      -           50     100       50     100     100       0

Others                         50     40           44.4    40      33.3     21.4    50      35.3

  Caicö2                        —
                                       0            —
                                                            0      66.7     —        -      28.6

  F1ornia2                      -      0          100       -       -       0      100     100

  Monço3                       50     57.1        37.5     42.9    16.7    23.1    40      33.3




1Sharecroppers +     Sharetenants
2Part-time Sharecroppers or Sharetenants

3Squatters
