 THE WELFARE COST OF PERMANENT INFLATION
  AND OPTIMAL SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC POLICY

            Martin Feldstein
       NBER and Harvard University


      Working Paper No.       201




NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, Inc.
          1737 Cambridge Street
     Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138




             September 1977




This paper has not undergone the review
accorded official NBER publications; in
particular, it has not been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.
           THE WELFARE COST OF PERMANENT INFLATION AND OPTIMAL

                        SHORT-RUN ECONOMIC POLICY

                            Martin S. Feldstein*


     It was not so long ago that most economists regarded the Phillips

curve as a stable menu of policy options.   A permanent reduction in

unemployment appeared to be possible if the nation were willing to pay

the price of a permanently higher rate of inflation.   Even rather

pessimistic estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve suggested that

the price was well worth paying.

     Today most economists reject this view in favor of Friedman's

conclusion that the observed Phillips curve is only a short-run relation-

ship and that the long-run equilibrium rate of unemployment is independent

of the rate of inflation.   This new understanding has radically trans-

formed the perception of the policy problem.   Since a permanent increase

in the rate of inflation buys only a temporary reduction in unemployment,

deciding whether to pursue an expansionary macroeconomic policy requires

comparing the present value of the perpetual welfare loss caused by the

increase in inflation with the welfare gain of the temporary reduction
                   1
in unemployment.



     *Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
I am grateful to the National Science Foundation for financial support of
this research.

     lThis view of the policy problem is developed in Phelps (1970); see
also Hall (1976), Modigliani (1977) and Tobin (1976).
                                         -2-



     Most economists who have considered this dynamic optimization problem

have concluded that the welfare loss of fully anticipated inflation is

so small that there is a strong case for using expansionary macroeconomic

policy to lower unemployment rates even if this results in a permanent
                                     l
increase in the rate of inflation.         The present paper shows that the

analysis leading to this conclusion involves a fundamental error.

     The analysis developed here emphasizes that a vertical long-run

Phillips curve may quite plausibly imply that the cost of reducing

unemployment exceeds its benefit.        When this is true, the analysis has

the further implication that the benefit of increasing unemployment

exceeds its cost (as long as the inflation rate is above its optimal

level).   In an important general case, it pays to deflate the economy

in order to reduce inflation no matter how large the required temporary

increase in unemployment.   Even when this is not true, a very large

increase in unemployment may be justifiably incurred to achieve a small

permanent reduction in inflation.




     lHall (1976) presents an explicit calculation of the optimal path
of unemployment and concludes that the unemployment rate should initially
be depressed below its equilibrium value and then allowed to rise over a
10-year period to its steady state equilibrium; he calculates that the
short-run output gains outweigh the permanent increase of two percentage
points in the inflation rate. Tobin (1972, 1976) does not develop an
explicit present value calculation but notes that the cost of an extra
percentage point of inflation is "very small ••• at most 1/1200 of GNP"
(1976, p. 6 ) and emphasizes the desirability of reducing unemployment
even if inflation is increased. Solow (1975) and Modigliani (1977) also
stress the small size of the welfare loss of anticipated inflation and
the probable gain from an inflationary expansion policy.
                                     -3-



1.   Some Preliminaries

     Before turning to the central issue of this paper, it is necessary

to discuss briefly some of the assumptions on which the analysis is

based.

     Posing the question of whether the gains from an expansionary macro-

economic policy outweigh the losses entails the assumption that policy

can be at least temporarily effective in reducing unemployment.      The

present analysis thus implicitly rejects the original conclusion of the

rational expectations approach that monetary and fiscal policy cannot

influence the rate of unemployment (Lucas, 1972).      Even within the strict

rational expectations framework, we can accept the current short-run

efficiency of monetary policy on the grounds that the public does not yet

know the decision rule of the monetary authority and can therefore be

fooled by a monetary expansion.   Moreover, when long-term contracts or

fixed investments constrain   ind~vidua1   adjustment, monetary policy can

continue to be effective in reducing unemployment by raising the rate

of inf1ation. 1   Without dealing more fully with these issues, the present

paper will assume t4at expansionary policy can reduce unemployment

temporarily but not permanently, i.e., that the Phillips curve is ver-

tical in the long-run but not in the short-run.

     In a perfectly competitive economy that was free of all distortions

there would be no gain from reducing unemployment below its steady state



     1See Fischer (1977), and Phelps and Taylor (1977) for a development
of this view.
                                       -4-


 equilibrium.    The value of the extra output that would result would be

outweighed by the value of the lost leisure, non-market production and

 investment in search activity.     But with our actual system of taxation,

unemployment insurance and other market distortions, the equilibrium
                                                  l
rate of unemployment exceeds the optimal rate.        I will therefore assume

that a reduction in the unemployment rate from an initial value at or

above its equilibrium represents a welfare gain.

      It is important to distinguish the two quite different types of

welfare loss that result from an increase in the rate of inflation.       In

the short-run, the change in the inflation rate is at least partly

unanticipated while in the long-run the new higher level of inflation

becomes fully anticipated.    The extent of the short-run welfare loss

depends on the speed with which the actual inflation rate adjusts to

its new equilibrium value and the speed with which the public adjust
                                2
their inflation expectations.       Since the focus of the present analysis

is on the long-run welfare cost of the permanently higher level of

inflation, I will not examine the temporary cost of the change in
             3
inflation.


      IOn these distorting effects, see Baily     (1976), Feldstein (1973,
1976a) and Gordon (1973).

     2See Flemming (1976) and Phelps (1972) for a discussion of the
welfare costs associated with the adaptation to uncertain inflation and
Frenkel (1976) for a discussion of the welfare cost of adaptation to an
incorrectly perceived inflation rate.

     3The short-run costs of the change in the inflation rate have not
been explicitly recognized in the optimizing analyses cited above.
Although an instantaneous adjustment of both the actual and anticipated
inflation rates to the new equilibrium value could eliminate the welfare
cost of the transition, this might also prevent any reduction in unem-
ployment.
                                    -5-



     In the long-run, any permanently maintained rate of inflation will

Qecome generally anticipated.   Market participants will adjust their

behavior but these changes cannot be sufficient to avoid all the adverse

effects of inflation.   A permanent welfare loss occurs because govern-

ment policies do not adjust fully for inflation.   The most commonly cited

example of this is the reduced demand for money that results from infla-

tion because interest is not paid on money balances.    As Baily     (1956)

and Friedman (1969) emphasized, the supply of real money balances can

be increased without social cost; it is therefore in principle optimal

to eliminate the opportunity cost of holding money balances.       This

requires paying the same real interest rate on money balances as on

other capital assets.   Since nominal interest rates on currency are

fixed at zero,this can only be achieved by deflating the price level

at a rate equal to the real rate of return on capital (Friedman, 1969).

The effect of inflation is to move the economy further away from this

optimum.   Inflation imposes an implicit tax on money balances, increasing

the difference between the real yields on money and other assets and

thus depressing even further the demand for money balances.

     Phelps (1972) has emphasized that Friedman's conclusion is correct

only in an economy in which non-distorting lump-sum taxes are available.

When all taxes involve excess burdens, an optimal system of excise taxes

is likely to require "taxing" money services as well.    This implies that

the opportunity cost of holding real money balances should exceed zero

or, equivalently, that prices should not fall at a rate equal to the real

rate of interest.   Of course, it does not follow that the optimal rate
                                    -6-



of inflation is positive.   In the analysis that follows, I will assume

only that the actual rate of inflation exceeds the optimal rate. 1

     Although the nature of this welfare cost of inflation is widely

recognized, its quantitative importance has been totally misperceived.

To stress the potential importance of this single source of welfare

cost, the present paper will focus exclusively on this distortion.      The

analysis that follows thus ignores the distortions of saving, portfolio

choice and real investment that occur because tax liabilities are based
                                                             2
on nominal capital- income instead of real capital income.       I also make

the optimistic assumption that a constant rate of inflation can be

sustained or at least that the variability of the inflation rate does

not increase with its 1eve1. 3




     1There is a further issue in an economy that taxes capital income.
This may distort portfolio choice toward an excessive demand for money;
some inf1at~on would then ~ffset this distortion. This is still con-
sistent with the view that the optimal inflation rate is negative. More-
over, as Tobin (1958) and Mossin (1968) have shown, a tax on capital
income may actually decrease the demand for money.

     2See Feldstein (1976b)and Fe1dstein,Green and Sheshinski (1977) for
an analysis of these distortions. Note that the mismeasurement of capital
income for tax purposes is a problem even with a proportional income tax
and is thus separate from the bracket rate distortion that occurs with a
progressive tax. This source of welfare loss could be completely elimin-
ated by rewriting the tax rules.

     31f a higher rate of inflation is also a more varied rate, the
increased uncertainty is an additional source of a permanent welfare cost.
                                      -7-



2.   The Welfare Loss of Permanent Inflation

      The first step in measuring the welfare cost of a permanent increase

in the rate of inflation is to evaluate the loss that occurs at each

instant of time.     The traditional measure of this loss is the value of

the liquidity services that society foregoes because of inflation, i.e.,

the area under the portion of the compensated demand curve that corre-

sponds to the induced reduction in real money balances.     This measure is

correct only if there are no other distortions in the economy.     It must

be modified to make the analysis consistent with the view adopted in

this paper that there are distorting taxes whose presence makes the

optimal inflation rate greater than Friedman's "full liquidity" rate of

deflation.     Since this modification is only tangential to the basic

point of the present paper, it is best to begin with the traditional

measure.     The more general framework will be developed in section 3.

     Figure 1 illustrates the traditional static analysis.     Curve DD

represents the instantaneous demand for real money balances (m) asa

function of the nominal interest rate (i).     In the absence of capital

income taxes or other distortions, the nominal interest rate equals the

real marginal product of capital (p) plus the rate of inflation (rr):

"= +
~  p rr. 1     The full liquidity optimum of Friedman requires the infla-

tion rate n*   = -p which implies i O = 0; this corresponds to the real


     lIn an economy with equity and debt finance, the real rate of
interest on deb.t (i - rr) will he less than the marginal product of
capital (p); a more complete analysis that allows for this would not
alter the conclusions. The taxation of interest income and deduct-
ability of interest expenses will complicate this analysis even if
there is not equity finance; see Feldstein (1976b)~
             -7a-


           Figure 1




Nominal
Interest
  Rate




     =a
                      Real Money
                        Stock
                                       -8-



money balances of mO.     Any greater rate of inflation implies a positive

rate of interest and therefore a welfare loss.      An increase in the

rate of inflation from TIl to TIraises the interest rate from i to i
                              2                                l     2
and thus reduces the real money balances held by society fromm to m •
                                                               l     2
When real balances are m , the value of the services provided per unit
                        2
time by an extra dollar of real balances is equal to the nominal rate

of interest iZ.   The value of the services lost when real balances are

reduced from ml to m is therefore the shaded area under the compensated
                    2
demand curve.

     The instantaneous welfare loss caused by any given increase in the

rate of inflation thus depends on the induced change in the real money

stock and on the prevailing rate of interest.     Stated in an equivalent

but more useful way, the instantaneous loss depends on the change in

the inflation rate, the elasticity of the real money demand with respect

to the rate of interest, and the size of the real money stock.      The

significance of this way of analyzing the loss is that the first two of

the determinants can be expected to remain essentially constant when

the economy is on an equilibrium growth path while the size of the real

money stock grows with the economy.

     The present value of a perpetual stream of such instantaneous

losses depends on two things:      (1) the rate at which the instantaneous

losses grow in the future, and (2) the appropriate rate at which to

discount future losses.    The fundamental error in previous discussions

of the deisrability of expansionary macroeconomic policy has been to

ignore this growth of the real money stock in assessing the present
                                                 -9-


value of the welfare loss that results from an increase in inflation.

Recognizing the growth of the real money stock and therefore of the

instantaneous welfare loss can change drastically the conclusions of a

dynamic optimization.

        When the growth of future losses is explicitly recognized, it is

quite possible that the present value of the losses associated with a

permanent increase in the rate of inflation is infinite; Le., the

present value grows without limit as a longer time horizon is taken into

account.     When the present value is infinite, the benefit of a tempor.;lry

reduction in unemployment cannot be great enough to outweigh the cost.

Similarly, the benefit of a permanent reduction in the rate of inflation

would then outweigh the cost of any temporary increase in unemployment.

        Let La be the instantaneous welfare loss when the equilibrium rate

of inflation increases.       Let this loss grow with time at rate g and let

the relevant discount rate be r.               The     pres~nt   value of the permanent

welfare loss is thus


(2.1)
                   ~
                   ~     =
                             f   00
                                      La e
                                             (g-r)sd
                                                       s •
                              a
It is obvious that this integral converges to a finite value only if

r > g; if not, the present value as of time zero of future losses continues

to grow at rate g - r.       To assess the practical importance of this possi-

bility, it is necessary to consider the appropriate values of g and r.

        The remainder of this section discusses the evaluation of g for the

simple case corresponding to Figure 1.                   The value of r is discussed in
                                                   -10-



se<;tion 4.        It is clear from equation 1 that, even when the present

value is finite, it can be very large if g is quite close to r.         Section

3 derives the value of LO in the more general case in which there is

a distorting income tax and shows that this extended framework does

not alter the relevant value of g.

        Consider now the value of the instantaneous welfare loss at time

s that results when the rate of inflation increases from TI to TI + dTI.
                                                                             l
Letting di/dTI = 1, the traditional welfare loss calculation implies


(2.2)                L       = _(am.s )      • i • dTI
                      s              a~



where am /a! is the slope of the compensated demand curve for real money
           s
               2
balances.          This can be rewritten as

                     L       = _   (am.s )   i
(2.3)                                        -. m
                         s           a~      m     s • dTI
                                              s

or

(2.4)                 L = mE. dTI •
                       s  s m~




     lThe approximation that di/dTI = 1 ignores the small effect of
increased capital intensity on the marginal product of capital as well
as the potentially larger effect of taxes on capital income. Since the
net of tax interest rate is the relevant avarriable, a capital income
tax matters only if the borrowers' and lenders' tax rate differ; see
Feldstein (l976b).

     2Note that this is the area of a trapezoid rather than a triangle
because we start with an initial distortion wherever TI > -po When TI =
- P, the relevant value of i is 0.5dTI and 2.2 becomes the familiar
triangle formula.
                                        -11-



If the elasticity of money demand is a constant, the instantaneous

welfare loss that results from an inflation increase of d7f is always

proportional to the real money stock.          The rate of growth (g) of the

instantaneous welfare loss is therefore equal to the rate of growth of

the real money stock.

        The standard assumption of all monetary growth analyses is that

real money balances grow at the same rate as real income, i.e., at the

sum of the rate of technical progress and the rate of growth of popula-

tion.        During the past 25 years in the United States, this rate of

growth has averaged 3.3 percent per year.         This has consisted of a

population growth of 1.3 percent and a growth of per capital real GNP

of 2.0 percent.        A continuation of this in the future would imply g    =
         1
0.033.

        Note finally that the question of whether g exceeds r is quite

different from the question of whether the economy is operating in the

inefficient range where the per capita growth rate exceeds the marginal

product of capital.        Since g is the growth rate of aggregate output, g

can exceed r even though r exceeds the per capita rate of growth.           More-

over, as section 4 explains, r is not the same as the marginal product

of capital and can be very much less.




     lThe recent fall in the birth rate may signal the beginning of a
lower rate of population growth for the indefinite future; if so, the
appropriate value of g would also be lower.
                                         ..".12....



3.   Distortionary Taxes and the Welfare Loss of Inflation

        To measure correctly the instantaneous welfare loss caused by

inflation requires tak.ing into account the            e~istence   of other taxes that

distort economic choice.         There are two aspects of this modification.

First, if the demand for money is not independent of all other               ta~ed


goods, the welfare loss caused by a change in the rate of inflation

depends on the other    ta~     rates and the cross elasticities of demand.

Second, the higher rate of inflation raises revenue which permits a

reduction in the other distorting        ta~      rates.   The current section

derives the appropriate measure of the welfare loss for an economy

with an income tax and shows that there is no change in the conditions

required for the present value welfare loss to be infinite.

        It is useful to begin with a completely general formulation.                The

economy can be described in terms of the quantity of real money, the

quantities of n-2 produced consumer goods, and the amount of leisure

that the individuals consume.         The instantaneous welfare loss is given

by the famous Harberger-Hicks-Hote11ing formula:

                        1   n     n
(3.1)               L=-Z     I IS .. T.T.
                            i=l j=l 1.J 1. J

where the S .. 's are the elements of the Slutsky           matri~   and the T.'s
              1.J                                                             1.
is the tax per unit of good i.         The unit tax is the difference between

the price paid by the consumer and the social cost of production.

        If the first good is regarded as the liquidity service of real

money balances, the corresponding tax is the rate of inflation plus
the real marginal product of capital:             T = 7f + p.       The tax system
                                                   l
is necessarily distorting because it is not possible to tax leisure,

i. e.,    Tn = O.      It is convenient to choose units for the other n - 2

goods so that their costs of production are all equal to 1.                   The tax

per unit of good i is therefore equal to the proportional ad valorem

tax rate t •        The loss in equation 3.1 can therefore be written as:
          i

                       1                         n-l                n-l n-l
(3.2)         L   =-   j Sll(7f + p)2 - (7f + p) I SiJ.t . -
                                                 j=2    J
                                                                ~   I
                                                                     2
                                                                         r S .. t.t ••
                                                                         2     ~J ~ J


         The change in the instantaneous welfare loss can be regarded as

the sum of the direct effect of the increase in 7f and the indirect

effect of the reductions in the tax rates that are made possible by the

extra revenue raised by inflation.             It will now be shown that this

welfare change is proportional to national income and therefore that

it will increase at the economy's growth rate, g.              With as many dif-

ferent tax rates as commodities, there is no obvious way to specify

how the extra revenue from inflation would be used to reduce commodity

taxes.      It is therefore useful at this point to introduce the simpli-

fying assumption that the existing tax system is a proportional tax on

all consumption (or, equivalently, on labor income) so that all of the
                                           I
t.'s are equal to a common value t.             It is clear from the form of the
 ~




     IAnotherpossibility would be to assume that the ti's would be
reduced to minimize L with the given 7f. It is clear that the alterna-
tive assumption that I have adopted is not only simple to analyze but
is probably a better approximation of reality.
                                                           -14-


following analysis that the conclusion that the change in welfare is

proportional to income could be obtained with any more general speci-

fication of commodity taxes and commodity tax reductions.

        With all of the commodity tax rates equal, the effect of inflation

on the instantaneous welfare loss can be written:

                               dL = aL + aL dt
(3.3)                          d1T  a1T  at d1T

where:     dt/d1T is the change in the tax rate required to maintain constant

total reve:p.ue when the revenue from inflation increases because of the

higher rate of inflation; aL/d1T is the partial effects on welfare of the

inflation rate with the commodity tax rate constant; and aL/at is the

corresponding partial effect on welfare of a change in t.                                                To obtain

these partial derivations, note that equation 3.2 with all the tils equal

becomes:

                     1                       2                      n-1                 1     2 n-1 n-l
(3.4)        L = -   "2      S11 (1T + P )       - t (1T    +P)      L S""
                                                                     2 ~J
                                                                                -       "2   t I L SiJ"
                                                                                                   2      2



This and 3.3 together imply

                                                     n-1                                    n-1
            dL
(3.5)       -= - S
            d1T              11
                                  (1T + p) -     t    L     S" •
                                                             ~J
                                                                   - {<1T   +       )        L    S" •
                                                                                                   ~J
                                                      2                                      2


                              n-1 n-1
                                                     dt
                     +   t        L L     Sij        d1T
                                  2   2          }


The second and third terms represent the generalization of the traditional

result of section 2.
                                                -15-


          Notefi~st    that   dt/d~     is independent of the scale of the economy

and is thus a constant in the               long-~un.    To see this explicitly, note

that tX is the tax revenue per period (where X is total consumption)
      o                                                           0
and M/p is the revenue from money creation (where M is the change in

the nominal money stock).               Since the inflation rate is the difference

between the growth rate of the nominal money stock (M/M) and the growth

rate of real income (g), the revenue from money creation can be written


                                   C1
(3.6) .
                                   p
                                        =   m(1T + g).


Thus total revenue is tX + m(1T + g).               If X and m were constants, dt/d1T

would equal m/X.Allowing for the effects of 1T andt on both m and X

yields the more general expression:

                       M      M           a ln m     a ln X
              dt       X + X (1T    + g)    a1T  + t   a1T
(3.7)         -   =-
              d1T             1 +    a ln X+ m a ln m
                                  t    at       x at

Forgiven values of 1T, t and g, the value of dt/d                     therefore tends to

an   equ~ ~"lObr~um
                "   constant. 1

          The effect of inflation on the welfare loss can be rewritten from

equation 3.5 with the compensated cross-derivatives replaced by the
           "
correspond ~ng cross-e1 " " i es: 2
                      ast~c~t




     lThis is clearly true if all of the proportional derivatives in 3.7
are constants; it is also true in the long run if these derivatives
approach any limiting value including zero.

     2Recall that the producer prices are all equal to 1 so that consumer
prices all equal 1 + t. Note that Xi is the value of expenditure on good
i at the producer price.
                                               -16-




(3.8)
             dL
            -=
             d1T   -m   {Ell + 1+t
                                     t     L E..
                                           j  1.J +   ~H  P
                                                      1 + t   L Eij
                                                              j




                   +1 + t
                         t
                             L L E..
                             i   j1.J          f:J] :~ }.
Since inflation is by assumption above the optimal rate, dL/dTI is

necessarily always positive.             Because the entire expression is propor-

tiona1 to the real aggregate money supply, the incremental welfare loss

will increase at the economy's rate of growth, g.

        The present value of the welfare loss will therefore be finite

only if g is less than the relevant rate of discount r.               We turn
                                                                  1
immediately to consider the relevant measure of r.




     1Note that if g < r so that the loss is finite, the explicit
optimization requires evaluating an expression like 3.8 subject to 3.7
and not just the simple expression (2.2) that is only correct if t is
zero. The analysis of Hall and others is inconsistent in assuming that
the optimal inflation rate exceeds -P while ignoring the effects of
the other tax rates in evaluating the welfare effects of changes in TI.
                                     -17-


4.   Discounting the Future Welfare Losses

     What rate of discount should be used to calculate the present value

of the additional welfare loss that occurs in future year T because the
                                              1
inflation rate is permanently increased?          Since the additional welfare

loss is evaluated as the increment to consumption that would be required

to compensate individuals for the net adverse effect of the higher rate

of inflation, choosing the discount rate is equivalent to measuring the

marginal rate of substitution between future consumption and present

consumption.   It is therefore useful to distinguish two questions that

are potentially quite different.     First~   how should we compare consump-

tion by a single individual at two different times?        Second, how should

we compare consumption by members of successive generations?

     The appropriate rate at which to discount additional consumption at

different times by the same individual is the real net rate of interest

faced by that individual.     Since the incremental welfare losses that are

to be discounted are assumed to be known with certainty, the appropriate

discount rate should also be as close as possible to a riskless rate.           It

is difficult to select a market rate with which to measure this riskless

rate of substitution without also being influenced by the degree of

liquidity of the asset.     The rate of return on time deposits or treasury

bills would represent a riskless rate but would presumably understate the



     1The analysis of this section obviously applies equally to the
welfare gain from a reduction in inflation.
                                        -18-



intertemporal suhstitution rate because of the liquidity premium commanded

by these assets.   To be conservative and evaluate future welfare losses

with a relatively high discount rate, I have selected the yield on long-

term corporate honds.        For the past 25 years, the nominal rate of return
                                               1
on such honds has averaged 5.3 percent.            These interest rates were

subject to personal taxation at marginal tax rates that varied between

14 percent and more than 90 percent.        If we use a relatively low marginal

tax rate of 20 percent, we will continue to overstate the relevant dis-

count rate; this tax rate implies a net nominal rate of interest of 4.2

percent.   During the same 25-year period, the consumer price index

increased at an average rate of 3.2 percent.          The real rate of return

after tax was therefore only 1.0 percent.          This method of evaluating

r clearly implies that r is less than the real growth rate of nominal
                         2
income of 3.3 percent.




     lThis is the average of the current yields on Aaa bonds in each year
from 1952 to 1976. Since nominal yields rose, an investor over this
period would have experienced a capital loss that lowered his nominal
return. This is ignored in the current calculation as a further step to
obtain a relatively conservative estimate of the relevant discount rate.

     2This low real net rate of return is not the result of the recent
high rate of inflation. During the subperiod with the most stable prices
(1960~64), the inflation rate averaged 1.2 percent and the real yield on
corporate honds after a 20 percent personal tax was only 2.3 percent.
This represented more than an equilibrium yield since it reflected an
anticipation that the inflation rate would again rise. Feldstein, Green
and Sheshinski (1977) show that, with our current tax rules, a very low
real net rate of interest is consistent with a substantially higher real
marginal product of capital.
                                      -19-



     It is not uncommon to use a rate of discount estimated in this way

to aggregate the consumption of members of different generations as well

as the consumption by a single individual in different years. 1             Its

justification presumably rests on the implicit proposition that the

generations are linked to each other by a "dynastic altruism" which.

causes the current generation to allocate consumption between itself

and future generations and that the preferences of the current genera-

tion are the ethically appropriate basis for a social welfare evaluation.

If this view is accepted, the riskless real net rate of interest is the

relevant value of r.     The evidence that r   = 0.01   while g   = 0.033   would

therefore imply   ~hat   the present value of the welfare loss caused by a

permanent increase in the rate of inflation is infinite.          No temporary

reduction in unemployment, no matter how large or long-lasting, could

justify a permanent increase in inflation.

     There is of course a quite different way of aggregating incremental

consumption in different generations that uses an explicit social welfare

function instead of the assumption that the generations are linked by

an ethically appropriate dynastic altruism.      The usual procedure in

optimal growth theory implicitly assumes that each generation lives for

only a single year and that the social welfare function is additive.

In this context, the marginal utility of consumption by successive

generations declines because technical progress increases per capita



     l See , for example, Harberger's discussion of cost-benefit analysis
(1974) and of the welfare cost of capital income taxes (1964). Friedman
(1969) uses this rate to evaluate the gain from achieving the optimum
quantity of money.
                                     -20-



consumption. while the marginal utility of consumption varies inversely

with per capita consumption.     More specifically, if per capita consumption

grows at constant rate y and the elasticity of the marginal utility with

respect to consumption is E, the marginal utility of consumption delcines

at rate Ey.   This implies that increments to consumption can be aggregated

by discounting at the rate Ey.

     This approach can be extended to recognize that individuals within

each generation live for more than one year.    The consumption in different

years by the same individual can be combined by using the real net rate

of interest faced by the individual.    Thus each individual's stream of

changes in consumption is converted in this way into an equivalent change

in consumption in the first year of his economic life.    These "equivalent

consumption changes" are then aggregated over generations by using the

time preference ratederived from the social welfare function, i.e., by

discounting at Ey.

     When the problem is viewed in this way, it should be clear that the

welfare losses caused by a permanent increase in the rate of inflation

will be finite only if Ey > g.    The intragenerational discount rate will

influence the magnitude of the present value for any finite horizon but
                                                                       1
not the convergence of the perpetuity of incremental welfare losses.



     lThis point is particularly important for readers who reject the
conclusion that the individual's rate of discount is less than g. Even
if individuals use a very high discount rate, the intergenerational
present value may be infinite.
                                           -21-



         Since the growth of aggregate income (g) is the sum of the per

capita growth rate (y) and the rate of growth of population (n), the

convergence condition can be written £y > Y + n or E - 1 > n/y.             This

condition cannot be checked empirically because E is inherently an

unobservable parameter of the social welfare function.            However, for

n   ~   0, convergence obtains only if E > 1.        The familiar logarithmic

utility function implies     E =   1 and therefore that the perpetuity of

welfare losses does not converge to a finite value.           More generally,

with the values of n     = 0.013   and y   = 0.020   that were observed during

the past 25 years, convergence requires E > 1.65.           Although this

cannot be ruled out, it might well be regarded as implausibly high;

it implies that in the past 25 years the marginal utility of a real
                                                                            1
dollar's worth of consumption has fallen by more than 55 percent.                If

such a rapid decline is rejected, the elasticity of marginal utility

is judged to be less than 1.65; with the observed growth rates, this

implies an infinite present value for the welfare losses due to a

permanent increase in inflation.

        Although this line of reasoning does not establish that the welfare

cost of increased inflation is infinite, it does show that such an

infinite cost is quite plausible in a growing economy.           More generally,

it shows that even if the cost of additional inflation is finite, the



     lThere is a different intuitive test: an elasticity of 1.65
implies that a dollar's worth of consumption by a family with $10,000
of income has the same utility value as 32 cents worth of consumption
by a family with $20,000.
                                   -22-



present value can be a very large multiple of the welfare loss during

the first year.   For example, if during the next 50 years g = r = .03

but then a drop in the birth rate makes r - g= 0.01, the present value

is 150 times the loss during the first year; the temporary reduction in

employment might have to be quite substantial to justify such a 10ss.1

     Similarly, the analysis indicates that a deflationary policy may

be justified if the inflation rate is above its optimum level.    If the

present value of the welfare effects of permanent changes in the inf1a-

tion rate is infinite, it pays to reduce inflation no matter how large

the required increase in inflation.   More generally, even if   ~he   present

value is finite, a very large deflation may be appropriate if it achieves

even a small permanent reduction in inflation.




     1
      If we use the simple expression of equation 2.4 to evaluate the
first year loss, we find that an increase in the inflation rate of 0.01
causes a loss equal to ita product with the real money supply and the
elasticity of money demand with respect to the rate of interest. The
relevant measure of the money supply includes inside as well as outside
money. With M1 equal to approximately $300 billion in 1977 and an
elasticity of demand of one-third, the first year loss is approximately
$1 billion dollars. The present value of the growing perpetuity is thus
$150 billion on the basis of the assumption stated above. This is more
than 8 percent of current GNP.
                                   -23-



5.   Should an Optimal Policy be Postponed?

     Deflating the economy now in order to lower the rate of inflation

imposes a cost on the present population while most of the benefits accrue

in future years.   It is natural therefore to ask whether it is ever

optimal to postpone a deflationary policy when deflation is warranted.

Postponement implies that the cost of deflation will be greater when it

occurs but also that the benefit in each year after the deflation will

be greater as well.   Can the growth rate, g, and the discount rate, r,

ever imply that a postponed deflation is preferable to an immediate

deflation?l   Similarly, in the opposite case in which the short-run

benefits of expansion exceed the long-run costs, it is natural to ask

whether it might ever be better to pos.tpone such an expansionary policy.

     The problem is analyzed most easily if we use discrete time and

assume that the entire loss (L ) due to increased unemployment occurs
                              O
                     2
in the first period.   The gain from reduced inflation begins in the

next period at level G and grows at rate g.   The effects of deflation

are thus characterized by the sequence




     lNote that the problem discussed here is not the optimal time path
of a deflation but whether the entire deflation should be postponed. The
optimal timing of deflation depends on the dynamic properties of the
short-run Phillips curve; see Phelps (1972).

     2see the previous footnote. Note that the value of LO may be
regarded more generally as the excess of the unemployment loss over the
concurrent gain due to reduced inflation.
                                                  -24-



(5.1)             -L         G          (1 + g)G
                       o

The current loss and the future gains are combined by discounting at rate

r.   Deflation is justified if either (1) g > r or (2) g < rand L           <
                                                                      O
G/(r - g).     Postponing the deflation changes the sequence from 5.1 to


(5.2)             o        -LO(l    +   g)            G(l + g)


With postponement there is no gain or loss in the first period.       The loss

occurs in the second period and is larger by a factor of 1 + g.       The

gain begins in the third period and is always larger by a factor of 1 + g.

        The net effect of postponement is the difference between these two

sequences or:

(5.3)                       -L (1
                                 o +      g)-G           o       o
Only the first two periods are affected; there is no difference in sub-

sequent periods.       The present value of this two-period time stream is

                                   LO(l      +   g)   + G
(5.4)            v =       L -
                            O
                                  ~-l-+-r-.-




                             1
                       =   1 + r [(r - g)L O - G].

Since deflation is optimal, we know that either (1) r < g or (2) r > g but

L < G/(r - g). If r < g, the value of V in 5.4 is clearly negative and
 O
postponement has a negative present value. Similarly, r > g and L < G/
                                                                 O
(r - g) also imply V < O.
                                   -25-


     Thus whenever deflation is optimal it should not be postponed.   A

similar analysis shows that when expansion is optimal it should also begin
               1
immediately.




     1These conclusions might be reached directly by the following
reasoning: If it pays to defer deflation from year t to t + 1, it must
pay (with constant g and r) to postpone indefinitely. This contradicts
the conclusion that it is optimal to deflate. Therefore it cannot pay
to postpone. The more explicit analysis of this section shows that the
validity of this conclusion is not affected by the convergence or noncon-
vergence of the present value integral.
                                     -26-

6.   The Welfare Gain from Optimal Liquidity

        In his analysis of the optimum quantity of money, Friedman (1969)

presented estimates of the instantaneous potential welfare gain and of a

corresponding present value.     He concluded that if the relevant interest

rate was 5 percent, the potential annual welfare gain for 1968 was between

$2.3 billion and $3.9 billion.     Friedman then treated this as a level

perpetuity and, discounting at 5 percent, concluded that the gain would

have a present value of between $46 billion and $78 billion, or roughly

eight     percent of 1968 national income.

        This estimate of the present value is a substantial understatement

because it fails to take into account the future growth of the economy.

With a growth rate of g = 0.033, the present value equals the initial

gain divided by 0.050 minus 0.033; i.e., 59 times the initial value.

This raises the estimated present value (as of 1968) to between $136
                                                                              l
billion and $230 billion, or roughly 25 percent of 1968 national income.

        This analysis of section 4 indicates that 5 percent may be much too

high as an estimate of the real net rate of interest.     A lower value would

imply a somewhat smaller instantaneous gain from a change to the optimal

money supply but a much larger present value.     If the discount rate is
                                                                                  2
less than the growth rate, the present value of such a change is unbounded.


     lFriedman's analysis should also be modified to reflect the existence
of other distorting taxes as outlined in section 3. This will lower the
potential gain but the correction is likely to be much smaller than the
effect of allowing for growth.

     2Friedman (1969) and Johnson (1971) noted that once the regulation
preventing interest on demand deposits and on the balances of the commer-
cial banks themselves were eliminated, the only gain from optimal inflation
would be in the quantity of currency. Johnson argued that this would be
too small to be of serious concern. This is clearly false in the unbounded
case if the costs of adopting an optimal inflation rate are regarded as
temporary.
                                    -27-



7.   Conclusion

     At a minimum, the present paper should serve as a warning against

too easy an acceptance of the view that the costs of sustained inflation

are small relative to the costs of unemployment.       If a temporary reduction

in unemployment causes a permanent increase in inflation, the present

value of the resulting future welfare costs may well exceed the temporary

short-run gain.    Previous analyses have underestimated the cost of a

permanent increase in the inflation rate because they have ignored the

growth of the economy and therefore the    g~owth   of the future instantaneous

welfare costs.    In the important case in which the growth of aggregate

income exceeds the social discount rate, no    reduc~ion   in unemployment can

justify any permanent increase in the rate of inflation.       Quite the

contrary, if the inflation rate is above its optimal level, the economy

should then be deflated to reduce the inflation rate regardless of the
                                           1
temporary consequences for unemployment.



     lIn addition to the liquidity effects that have been the focus of
this paper, inflation affects economic welfare by changing the rate of
saving. This effect is complex and depends on the particular form of the
tax system. With no taxes or an indexed tax system, inflation reduces
the yield on saving to the extent that a fraction of wealth is held in
the form of money balances. With our current system of taxes, inflation
also increases the effective rate of tax on capital income (Feldstein,
Green and Sheshinski, 1977) and is therefore likely to reduce the rate
of saving even more. Since the taxation of capital income causes the
marginal product of capital to exceed the rate at which future consump-
tion is discounted, any decrease in saving causes an additional annual
welfare loss. In evaluating an expansionary policy, the loss due to
this reduction in future saving and the g~J,n due to the extra saving
out of the temporarily higher income sho~Id both be taken'fhto account.
                                     -28-



     It should be clear that a vertical long-run Phillips curve and

an aggregate growth rate that exceeds the social discount rate l make

the whole question of rational expectations irrelevant for determining

the optimal direction for policy.     It is not necessary to regard the

short-run Phillips curve to be vertical to conclude that expansionary
                                                            2
policies are inappropriate and that deflation is optimal.

     The empirical issue that is central to the present analysis is

therefore the form of the long-run Phillips curve.     Is it really true

that any temporary reduction in unemployment requires a truly permanent

increase in the rate of inflation?    And can the rate of inflation be

permanently reduced by a temporary increase in unemployment?     Or is

every economy occasionally subjected to large shocks that effectively

eliminate previous expectations and restart the inflationary process?

I regard these as unsettled empirical questions.     The current paper

shows the importance of these questions for the appropriate direction

of short-run macroeconomic policy.

     Throughout the paper, I have purposely avoided the issue of

whether a steady positive rate of inflation could actually be sustained


     lRecall that this is not equivalent to production in the inefficient
range where capital intensity exceeds the golden rule values.


     20f course, policies to reduce unemployment by removing distortions
and adverse incentives may be optimal even when the appropriate macro-
economic policy is deflation; see Feldstein (1973 and 1976a). There is
a separate problem if the shape of the short-run Phillips curve changes
over time. For example, if a one percent change in unemployment alters
the inflation rate by more today that it would a decade from now, it may
be best to deflate now and reinflate in the future; I have ignored such
questions throughout this paper.
                                        -29-



The danger of attempting such a policy is that any attempt to increase

the mean rate of inflation may increase its variability and may cause
                                    1
an explosive spiral of inf1ation.        The annual welfare cost of such

unstable and uncertain inflation would be substantially greater than

the welfare cost of fully anticipated inflation.      Thus even with a high

discount rate or an arbitrarily shortened horizon, the welfare loss of

increased inflation could outweigh the temporary gain of reduced

unemployment.   Here again, the appropriate macroeconomic policy depends

on the answer to a currently unsettled empirical question.




     lAs Okun (1975) pointed out, a steady rate of inflation may be
difficult to achieve because individuals regard any inflation as an
indication of the government's inability to limit price increases and
therefore encourages expectations of a further increase in the rate
of inflation.
                                   -30-



                                REFERENCES

Bailey, M. J., "Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance," Journal of

        Political Economy, Vol.64 (April 1956), pp.93-ll0.

Baily, Martin N., "Unemployment Insurance as Insurance for Workers,"

        Econometrica, forthcoming, 1977.

Feldstein, Martin S., "Lowering the Permanent Rate of Unemployment," A

        Study prepared for the use of the Joint Economic Committee,

        Congress of the United States, August 1973.       Washington:   U.S.

        Government Printing Office, 1973.

----------,             "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment,"

        Journal of Political Economy, 1976a, Vol.84,No.5, pp.937-57.

----------,             "Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of Interest:

        A Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review, Vol.66, No.3,

        December 1976b, pp.809-820.

----------,             Jerry Green, and Eytan Sheshinski, "Inflation and

        Taxes in a Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal

        of Political Economy, forthcoming 1977.

Fischer, Stanley, "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the

        Optimal Money    Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy,

        Vol.85, No.1, February 1977, pp.19l-205.

Flemming, John S., Inflation.     Oxford:    Oxford University Press, 1976.

Frenkel, Jacob A., "Some Dynamic Aspects of the Welfare Cost of Inflationary

        Finance" from R. I. McKinnon (Ed.), Money and Finance in Economic

        Growth and Development, Essays in Honor of Edward S. Shaw.          New

        York:   Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1976.

Friedman, Milton, "The Optimum Supply of Money" in The Optimum Supply of

        Money and other Essays (ed. M. Friedman).       Chicago:   Aldine

        Publishing Co., 1969.
                                  -31-



Gordon, Robert J., "The Welfare Cost of Higher Unemployment" in
        Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol.l (1976), pp.133-205.
Hall, Robert E., "The Phillips Curve and Macroeconomic Policy," The
        Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Vol.l of the Carnegie-Rochester
        Conferences on Public Policy, a supplementary series to the       Journ~l


        of Monetary Economics, Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer (eds.), 1976,
        pp.127-l48.
Harberger, Arnold C., "Taxation, Resource Allocation and Welfare," in
        J. Due (ed.), The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes in the Federal

        Revenue System. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964.

- - - - - - - - - ',   Project Evaluation.    Chicago:   Markham Publishing

        Company, 1974.
Johnson, Harry G., "Is There an Optimal Money Supply?" in M. Intriligator
        (ed.), Frontiers of Quantitative Economics.       Amsterdam:   North-
        Holland Publishing Company, 1971.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal
        of Economic Theory, Vol.4, No.2, April 1972, pp.103-l24.
Modigliani, .Franco, "The Monetarist Controversy or, Should we Forsake
        Stabilization Policies?" The American Economic Review, March 1977,
        pp.1-19.
Mossin, Jan, "Taxation and Risk-taking:      An   Unexpected Utility Approach,"
        Economics, 35 (February 1968), pp.74-82.

Okun, Arthur M., "Inflation:    Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs," Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1975, pp.35l-390.
Phelps, Edmund S., Inflation Policy and Unemployment Theory.       New York:
        W. H. Norton   &Company, Inc., 1972.
                                -32":,



Phelps, Edmund S. and John B. Taylor, "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary
        Policy under Rational Expectations," Journal of Political Economy,
       Vol.85, No.1, February 1977, pp.163-l90.
Solow, Robert M., "The Intelligent Citizen's Guide to Inflation,"   The
        Public Interest, No.38, Winter 1975, pp.30-66.
Tobin, James E., "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk," Review
        of Economic Studies, 25 (February 1958), pp.65-86.

- - - - - - -,   "Inflation and Unemployment," American Economic Review,
       Vol.62, March 1972.
               , "Inflation Control as Social Priority," paper presented
-------'
        at Conference on the Political Economy of Inflation and Unemployment
        in Open Economics, Athens, Greece, October 21-23, 1976, unpublished.
