Reprinted from THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

Published for Harvard University. Copyright, 1979, by North-Holland Publishing Company
Vol. LXI, No. 3, August, 1979

SOCIAL SECURITY AND HOUSEHOLD
WEALTH ACCUMULATION: NEW
MICROECONOMETRIC EVIDENCE
Martin Feldstein and Anthony Pellechio*
T HE social security program will pay benefits
of more than $100 billion in 1978.1 Public
transfers on this scale are large enough to have
profound effects on the behavior of the U.S.
economy. The most important effect, although
not the only one, is likely to be the impact of
social security on private saving and aggregate

an actuarially fair social security program leaves
the budget constraint unchanged, there is also no
change in each year's consumption. The social
security tax that is paid each year therefore reduces private saving by an equal amount. For an

actuarially fair social security program, this is
equivalent to reducing the personal wealth accumulated before retirement by the actuarial
present value of future benefits.2
It has been common in discussions of social
security policy to reject this picture of rational

capital accumulation. The present paper contributes to the analysis of this issue by providing new
evidence on the extent to which the accumulation of wealth by individual households responds
life cycle saving.3 Individuals are instead viewed
to differences in social security benefits.
as myopic nonplanners who save in a haphazard
I. Social Security and Saving: The Theoretical way or not at all; as a result of such myopia, the
introduction of social security would have no
Indeterminacy
offsetting effect on private saving.4 We agree that
The traditional life cycle model implies that an there are some individuals for whom this picture

actuarially fair social security program unam- of irrational saving behavior is an appropriate
biguously reduces private saving. Within a more description but we do not believe that such be-

general framework, however, the effect of social havior is universal or even typical. Irrational savsecurity on saving is theoretically indeterminate. ing behavior among part of the population would

Only econometric evidence can determine the reduce the effect of social security on private
extent to which social security decreases saving. saving but would not eliminate it.5 The econoBefore turning to our new evidence, it is worth metric evidence presented below gives no supexamining the sources of the theoretical indeter- port to the view that such irrationality is very
minacy.
widespread.
Consider first the effect of social security in the
The extended life cycle model presented in
traditional life cycle model in which the time Feldstein (1974, 1977) showed a quite different
pattern of work and labor income is exogenously reason why individual life cycle saving might not
fixed. In this situation, social security can alter be decreased and might actually be increased by
the time pattern of consumption only if it changes the introduction or increase of social security
the household's lifetime budget constraint. Since benefits. The essential feature of the extended

life cycle model is that retirement and saving
Received for publication December 23, 1977. Revision accepted for publication July 27, 1978.
* Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research.
This research is part of the NBER program of Studies in
Social Insurance. We are grateful to the NBER and the National Science Foundation for support of this research and to
Robert Barro and participants in the Harvard social insurance
seminar for helpful comments. This paper has not been reviewed by the NBER Board of Directors.
The social security program is technically three separate
programs of old age and survivors insurance, disability insurance, and health insurance for the aged (Medicare). General
retirement, survivors and disability benefits alone will exceed
$100 billion.

decisions are made jointly. Any exogenous van2 The result is shown graphically for the two-period life
cycle model in Feldstein (1974) and derived explicitly in

Feldstein (1977).
See, for example, Myers (1965), Pechman et al. (1968),
Schulz (1974), and Diamond (1977).

Some have even suggested that the provision of social
security may actually cause some individuals to save more
because it serves as a reminder of the need to provide for old
age. See Katona (1965) and Pechman et al. (1968).
The irrational saving behavior of a small fraction of the
population might justify a compulsory saving program even if

it had a small aggregate effect on saving. This is a quite
separate question that will not be examined in this paper.

361 1

362

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

able can thus influence saving indirectly by alterIn this paper, we analyze a cross section of
ing retirement. Social security is likely to induce households and find that differences in future
earlier retirement and the resulting increase in social security benefits cause differences in ordithe expected period of retirement will, as such, nary saving. It should go without saying that no
increase total saving during preretirement years. single econometric study can ever be conclusive.
The net effect of social security on saving in this The current research should be seen as an áddiextended life cycle model is ambiguous. Whether tion to a growing body of new evidence on the
and to what extent social security reduces saving effect of social security on the accumulation of
depends on the relative strength of the traditional wealth.11
"wealth replacement effect" and the countervailing "induced retirement effect."6
II. The Econometric Specification
Even if we disregard the effect of social secuThe present study uses individual household
rity on retirement, there are at least four reasons
observations
to estimate the effect of social secuwhy rational savers might not regard social security
on
the
amount
of wealth that individuals
rity wealth and private fungible wealth as perfect

substitutes.7 First, social security provides an accumulate by the end of the normal working
annuity rather than a fixed sum at retirement and, life. The specification of our econometric equaeven before price indexing was formally incorpo- tion focuses on the stock of accumulated wealth
rated, adjusted benefits for rising prices. Because rather than the annual flow of saving. The current

of this "real annuity" character of social secu- section discusses our specification and the inrity, individuals might reasonably regard a dollar terpretation of the parameters in more detail.
It is useful to begin with the relation between
of social security wealth as a substitute for more
than a dollar's worth of fungible assets. Second, labor income and accumulated individual wealth
social security benefits are not a contractual obligation of the government but are determined by
legislation.8 Pessimists might therefore underestimate the value of social security wealth while
optimists overestimate it. Third, social security

that is predicted by the traditional life cycle

model in the absence of any social security. In its

most general form, the traditional life cycle

model implies only that each individual accumulates wealth during his working years to finance
is not an actuarially fair program, but alters consumption during retirement; further restriclifetime budget constraints; such changes in real tions are needed to specify an econometric equa-

lifetime resources will alter consumption and tion. Under the assumption that all individuals
saving.9 Fourth, the introduction of social secu- have the same tastes with respect to consumprity (or a change in an existing program) may tion at different ages, that each individual's netcause offsetting changes in private intergenera- of-tax labor income has its own level but grows at

tional transfers, thereby reducing the depressing the same exponential rate, and that intended bequests are either nonexistent or proportional to
effect of social security on private saving.10

the present value of the individual's labor in-

6 See Feldstein (1977) for a formal derivation of this.
We define 'social security wealth" as the present actuarial value of future social security benefits. The adjective
"fungible" is used to distinguish household wealth as traditionally defined from the total household wealth. The calculation of social security wealth is discussed in section III below
and in Feldstein (1974).
8 Until 1972 the law made no provision for future increases
in the schedule of social security benefits. Increases occurred
frequently, but required explicit acts of Congress.

This important aspect is developed in Kotlikoff et al.

(1977).

IS This idea is developed by Barro (1974) and Miller and
Upton (1974). Our econometric evidence deals only partially
with this issue. In particular, our evidence does not preclude

come, the traditional life cycle model implies that

in any age cohort the value of each individual's
savings. The direct evidence on the value of bequests by low
and middle income families is, however, contrary to the prediction of the Barro-Miller-Upton theory. For a more detailed

discussion of the reasons for believing that the effects of
offsetting intergenerational transfers is quantitatively small,
see Feldstein (1978). For those who remain agnostic about

the magnitude of offsetting bequests, our evidence can be
interpreted as quantifying the extent to which other reasons
cause a departure from the complete replacement predicted
by the traditional life cycle model.
II The studies to date include analyses of time series evi-

dence (Feldstein, 1974; Munnell, 1974; Barro, 1978; Darby,
1979), household survey data (Feldstein, 1976a; Kotlikoff et
liabilities on future generations could cause every household al., 1977; Munnell, 1976), and cross-country data on national
to raise its savings while the existence of benefits for the savings rates (Aaron, 1967; Feldstein, 1977). A brief survey
current generation of workers causes differential reduction in of the available estimates is presented in Feldstein (1976b).

the possibility that the existence of social security tax

SOCIAL SECURITY AND WEALTH ACCUMULATION
accumulated wealth is related by a unique function to his current net labor income. It has also

A, + SSW, =
YL,

been traditional to assume that this functional
relation is one of proportionality. Consumption

a1

+ a2

363

SSW,
YL,

+ a3YL,
(3)

during retirement is then proportional to the level where a3 > 0 if higher earnings induce a redisof consumption during the earlier working years. tribution of lifetime income in favor of older
This implies further that the value of accumu- age.'3 Multiplying both sides of (3) by YL, yields
lated wealth on the verge of retirement is propor- the basic specification that will be used in our
tional to that final year's earnings.
econometric analysis:
Social security provides each individual with
A, + SSW, = cx1YL, + a2SSW, + a3YL,2. (4)
an annuity when he retires. In the traditional life
cycle model, the present value of that annuity This specification can be modified easily to allow
should substitute for an equal amount of private for the possibility that social security induces

wealth at the time of retirement. The model changes in gifts from children to their retired
therefore implies that each individual's desired
accumulation of "total wealth" including "social
security wealth" will be proportional to his final
year's net labor income:
A, + SSW,
(1)
YL,

parents.
If children reduce their gifts to their parents in
proportion to the parents' receipt of social secu-

rity benefits, the value of the social security
wealth is reduced; total wealth should be written

A, + (1 —

a4)SSW,

rather than A. + SSW,.'4

where A1 is the value of individual i's ordinary Even if the induced changes in gifts from children
"fungible" wealth on the verge of retirement, to parents are ignored, we may wish to allow for

SSW, is the social security wealth (the present
actuarial value of the benefits to be provided by
social security), and YL1 is the net-of-tax labor
income in the final preretirement year.
The extended life cycle model begins with the

a difference between SSW and ordinary assets

because of such things as the real annuity charac-

ter of social security or its non-contractual
character. This suggests replacing SSW, in (4) by
some multiple of SSW,, say XSS W,, where X may

be either less than or greater than 1 but is not
basic fact that the age of retirement is an en- expected to differ from 1 by very much.
dogenous variable. The value of social security
Combining all of these effects yields the specwealth at some age at which retirement might be ification'5
contemplated (say, age 60) will influence the individual's retirement decision.'2 This implies A. + (1 — a4)XSSW, = a1YL + a2XSSW,
that the total wealth desired at age 60 will itself
+ a3YL12
(5)
be a function of SSW relative to YL:
or, collecting terms,
A, + SSW, = + a2 SSW,
—
YL,

a1

YL,

(2)

A, = a1YL,

pSSW, + a3YL,2

(6)

Since a higher value of SSW/ YL induces earlier where
retirement and therefore a larger desired stock of p. = (1 — a2 — a4)X.
(7)
total wealth, the extended life cycle model imThus, the traditional life cycle model implies p. =
plies a2 > 0.
The proportionality assumption can be relaxed 1, while the effects of induced retirement (a2)

to allow the possibility that the ratio of total

13 Feldstein (1977) presents evidence that the higher saving

retirement consumption to consumption during rate associated with higher income levels in cross-country
working years is a function of the individual's net data is really a reflection of the fact that retirement generally
earlier in higher income countries.
labor income. This can be approximated linearly occurs
The effect of SSW on retirement implied by a2SSW
by replacing (2) by
might also be changed to a2(l — cr4)SSW, but this implies a

'

12
Recall that benefits are paid only to individuals who are
essentially retired.

particular and perhaps less plausible behavior of parents. The
two specifications are empirically indistinguishable with the
current data.
One might argue for X — a4 instead of (1 — a4)X but the
distinction is essentially nonoperational.

'

364

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS

and offsetting child-parent gifts (a4) reduce this bias that has been a source of serious trouble in
value. The other factors included in A could previous tests of the traditional life cycle model
either lower or raise . Thus, a > 1 cannot be based on household data.16 The standard form of
precluded if, for example, there is little effect such tests has been to estimate a saving equation
through induced early retirement or changes in with a lagged wealth variable among the regresintergenerational transfers but there is substan- sors and observe whether its coefficient is negatial optimism about the size of benefits or a great tive.17 Since the most important source of unexpremium placed on the real annuity character of plained variation among households (the u1's of
equation (8)) reflects permanent differences in
social security.
It is, of course, unfortunate that the estimation taste and in risk aversion, the disturbance in a
of an equation like (6) cannot identify the relative saving equation will be positively correlated with
importance of each of the parameters in (7). An the lagged wealth variable. This is likely to cause
estimate of j is sufficient to answer the policy- a substantial bias that can account for the apparrelated question about the net effect of social ently poor performance of the life cycle hypothesecurity on private saving but knowledge of the sis in previous cross-section tests. Because the
individual parameters in (7) is required to evalu- current study focuses on the equilibrium stock of
ate the competing theories of behavior that were wealth rather than the annual savings flow and
discussed in the preceding section. Although uses an exogenous variable (SSW) instead of a
such individual parameter estimates cannot be lagged endogenous variable, this potential source
obtained, the value of a can be used to assess of substantial bias is avoided.
some of the extreme versions of these theories.
For example, the pure traditional life cycle model
Ill. Data and Definitions
=
1
while
complete
myopia
and
irraimplies
The data used in the present research were
tionality implies .t = 0. Similarly, completely
collected
in the Federal Reserve Board's Survey
offsetting changes in gifts from children to parents (a4 = 1) imply j.t 0. The estimated value of of Financial Characteristics of Consumers (Procan therefore in principle help to reduce the jector and Weiss, 1966) in which detailed balance
range of admissible theories about saving behav- sheets and income statements were obtained
from all participants. The survey was conducted
ior.
The use of a two-year average value of YL to in 1963 and refers to income in 1962 and wealth at
represent a lifetime history of net earnings and of the end of 1962. A follow-up survey obtained
bequests and gifts received rests on the formal data on income in 1963. The present study uses
assumption that net earnings grow exponentially the subsample of households in which there was
and that all other receipts are proportional to an employed man aged 55 to 64 who was covered

i

labor income. Because we are limited by the by social security. Households with very low

available data to only a two-year average for YL1, incomes (less than half of the median) and very
we add a random error and a constant term to high incomes (more than 2.5 times the maximum

equation (6) to indicate that (6) cannot be ex- covered by social security) were eliminated as
were those reporting substantial bequests.18
pected to hold precisely:
The dependent variable (A) that we have used
A, = a0 + a1YL1 — SSW1 + a3YL12 + u•. (8) corresponds as closely to household net worth as
This is the final estimation equation used in our is possible with the available data. Labor income
econometric analysis. It should be emphasized (YL) is defined to include all income other than

that our sample will be limited to households income from property. It is the average of the
with men between the ages of 55 and 64 so that A, sum of wage and salary income, income from
represents fungible wealth on the verge of the 16
See Projector and Weiss (1966), Modigliani and Ando
normal retirement age. The sample will also be (1957), and, more generally, the survey of studies reported in
restricted in other ways that will be described in
the next section.
In concluding this section, it is worthwhile to
note that equation (8) avoids a very substantial

'
'

Mayer (1972).
Alternatively a consumption function is estimated and a
positive coefficient is expected on the lagged wealth variable.
For more details of the sample, see section III of Feldstein and Pellechio (1977).

SOCIAL SECURITY AND WEALTH ACCUMULATION

sole proprietorships, and farm income in 1962
and 1963. The amount paid in income taxes for
the two years is estimated and subtracted from
total income from these sources to give disposable labor income.
The value of social security wealth was evalu-

ated for each observation in this sample. By

365

biased; since the measurement errors are correlated with each other and the two values of YL
and SSW are also correlated with each other, the
direction of the bias cannot be determined without further information. Finally, it should be remembered that the data refer to 1963 when the
social security program was much smaller and
newer than it is today; the response of individuals at that time cannot be extrapolated to the

definition, an individual's social security wealth
is the value of the benefits for which he will be
eligible at age 65 less the taxes he will pay until present without considering the changes that
then, discounted to the present with appropriate have occurred during the past 15 years.
adjustment for actuarial survival probabilities. A
married couple's social security wealth is defined
IV. The Parameter Estimates

in an analogous way. The survey data on the

separate earnings of the husband and wife and on

The basic parameter estimates presented in
their ages can be used to estimate the couple's this section imply that social security substansocial security wealth. The procedure has been tially reduces the accumulation of household

described in detail elsewhere (Feldstein, wealth as traditionally defined. More specifically,
1976a))9

Before turning to the econometric estimation
of the wealth accumulation equation, it is important to recall some of the limitations of the current data. First, we have no information on either
private pensions or life insurance. Our measure
of household assets therefore understates true
net worth and this understatement is likely to be
an increasing function of income and perhaps of
social security wealth as well. To the extent that
households substitute private pensions and life
insurance for other forms of asset accumulation,
the regression estimates will understate the effects of income on asset accumulation and overstate the effect of social security. These biases
are likely to be relatively small because pension
coverage was relatively poor for this age cohort
of men (born in the decade from 1898 to 1907).
Second, the labor income variable bases an estimate of lifetime earnings on information for only
two years. Although this would be appropriate if
each individual's earnings grew exponentially,
there is in fact substantial variation in earnings
from year to year. To the extent that this introduces random measurement error in the estimate
of both YL and SSW, their coefficients will be

the point estimates generally indicate that each
dollar of social security wealth reduces fungible
net worth by somewhat less than one dollar. The
standard errors are too large to reject the implication of the traditional life cycle model that there

is dollar-for-dollar replacement, but the estimates are also consistent with a rather wide
range of other replacement rates. In general,
however, the estimates are incompatible with the
hypothesis that differences among households in
social security wealth have no net effect on private wealth accumulation.
Before looking at the parameter estimates, it is

useful to examine some characteristics of the
sample and of the population that it represents.
Our final sample contains 126 married couples
plus 12 additional households with a man who
was not married at the time of the survey. The
sampling probabilities imply that these observations represent 4.5 million couples and a total of
4.9 million households. The mean net worth of

these 4.9 million households (as of the end of
1962) was $20,801 and the corresponding stan-

dard deviation was $32,054. Their average labor
income was $5,555 with a standard deviation of
$2,806; median family income (including nonlabor income) for the entire U.S. population was
A full description of the current method is described in then $6,100. Traditional net worth thus averaged
Feldstein and Pellechio (l977) see especially the appendix.
There are a number of technical improvements over the about four times income. The average value of
method used in Feldstein (l976a) but these do not alter the social security wealth was $24,017, about as large
general logic of the calculation presented there. The definition as all other household wealth; the standard deused here corresponds to the net social security variable
(NSSW1) in Feldstein (1974) but the disaggregated data per- viation was $7,709. Finally, the men in the group
mit the use of more detailed information.

had an average age of 59 years and 89% were

366

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS
married. The means and standard deviations of below the maximum social security earnings and
the income, wealth, and age variables are essen- less to the higher income families. If the equation
tially unchanged if attention is limited to couples parameters are not fixed numbers but vary

among individuals in a way that is related to

only.

The estimates presented below can be income, the coefficients derived in the weighted

classified in two ways. First, separate estimates regressions are more appropriate as measures of
are presented for married couples and for all the relevant average behavior of the population.
households. The results for the sample with only Moreover, since the sampling probabilities were
married couples are more reliable because the an increasing fraction of income, the method of
group of single men probably includes men who weighting is likely to produce estimates that are
recently became widowers but who had accumu- statistically more efficient by reducing the problated wealth to support a couple in retirement. lem of heteroscedasticity that arises because the
Combining couples and single men also raises the variance in the error of the household assets equa-

difficult problem of comparing the life cycle tion is an increasing function of income.
saving patterns of individuals and couples. NevEquation 1 of table 1 implies that each extra
ertheless, estimates for all households are pre- dollar of social security wealth reduces the acsented in order not to restrict the sample cumulation of ordinary fungible net worth by
unnecessarily; the combined estimates are not 93g. The standard error of the coefficient (0.42)
substantially different from the estimates for and the caveats about the variables themselves
couples only.
Second, each equation is estimated with the
unweighted sample of observations and with the
sample weighted by the inverse of the sampling
probabilities. Weighting in this way gives more
weight to the middle income families around and

that were noted in section III should both caution

against giving too much weight to this or any
other specific point estimate in table 1. Instead,
these estimates must be seen collectively and as
a part of the accumulating body of evidence
based on quite different types of data.

TABLE 1.—EFFECTS OF SOCIAL SECURITY WEALTH ON HOUSEHOLD ASSET ACCUMULATION

Equation
1

SSW

Weighta

Marriedu

U

Mar

—0.93

2

W

Mar

(0.42)
—1.26
(0.34)

3

U

Mar

—0.72

(0.44)

4

W

Mar

5

U

Mar

6

W

Mar

U

Mar

7

,

8

W

Mar

:
9
10
11

12

U
W

U
W

All
All

All
All

—0.69
(0.34)
—0.96
(0.46)
—1.12
(0.36)
—0.72
(0.49)
—0.58
(0.36)
—0.86
(0.79)
—0.51
(0.45)
—1.67
(0.65)
—0.82
(0.37)

YL

(YL)2 >< 10

AYL

MYL

3.49
(0.70)
2.93
(0.79)
—1.16

(3.03)
—9.56
(2.74)
2.06
(7.05)
12.01
(7.89)
—0.99
(7.28)
—1.66

(7.84)
7.84
(5.40)
—4.83

(3.51)
5.45
(5.28)
—5.86

(3.41)

0.29
(0.18)
0.86
(0.18)
0.025
(0.123)
—0.160
(0.138)

0.29
(0.19)
0.85
(0.18)
0.05
(0.33)
0.73

(0.24)
—0.10

(0.32)
0.64
(0.23)

—0.003

(0.123)
—0.137

(0.128)
—5.26

(2.90)
—2.54

(2.11)

Constant

R2

25,100
(10,600)
35,270
(8,840)
34,920
(12,200)
57,140
(9,380)
25,870
(11,300)
33,350
(8,990)
34,840
(12,600)
55,310
(9,530)
26,880
(20,200)
44,770
(11,200)
38,470
(19,300)
48,480
(10,700)

.158

Note: The dependent variable in alt equations is household net worth (excluding social securily wealth). Standard errors are shown in parentheses.
LI indicates anweighted regression; W indicates regression weighted by inverse sampling probabilities.
Equations 1 through 8 are restricted to the sample of married coaples.

.132
.168
.261
.151

.134
.161
.261
.151
.131
.081

.128

367
SOCIAL SECURITY AND WEALTH ACCUMULATION
Equation 2 repeats the same specification as but otherwise equal to zero; this is equivalent to
equation 1 but with the observations weighted by allowing a different equilibrium wealth-income
the inverses of the sampling probabilities. The ratio in equation (1) (i.e., a different value of a1).
coefficient of SSW becomes somewhat larger Equations 9 and 10 have the surprising implicathan 1 but again the standard error cautions tion that couples accumulate less wealth than
against focusing on the specific point estimate. single individuals, but the standard errors are
The homotheticity assumption is dropped and a large relative to the coefficients •20 The estimated
quadratic income term is added in equations 3 effects of SSW are generally similar to the
and 4. The estimated coefficients of the social coefficients for married couples only.

In the notation of equations (7) and (8) the
security wealth variables are now reduced to
about 0.70; by the usual formal criteria, the coefficient of the social security wealth variable
= (1 — a2 — a4)X, where (1) an induced
coefficients are significantly different from zero is

retirement effect of social security on saving imbut not significantly different from one.
Although the sample is restricted to men aged plies a2 > 0, (2) induced changes in child-to55 to 64, it is possible that variations in age within parent transfers that tend to offset the effect of
this range affect the accumulation of wealth. Our social security imply a4> 0, and (3) such differfailure to take this into account could in principle ences between social security wealth and ordibe a source of bias in the remaining coefficients. nary wealth as fungibility and inflation protection
Age can affect the accumulation of wealth in a imply It 1. The estimates of p approximately
rather complex way. The life cycle theory im- equal to I and significantly different from 0 indiplies that, because older men generally have cate that it is very unlikely that social security
worked longer and are closer to retirement, net induces changes in either child-to-parent transworth shall increase with an individual's age. fers or retirement plans that substantially negate
However, the relation between wealth and age the direct effect of social security on savings.
for a cross section of individuals should not be The specific combination of a's and A correthe same as it is over time for a single individual sponding to the estimated value of j obviously
or birth cohort. Even within the group of men cannot be identified on the basis of the available
aged 55 to 64, such events as the Depression and evidence.

World War II came at very different ages and
therefore could be expected to have different
V. Conclusion
effects on life cycle saving. For example, the
older men were in their early thirties when the
In conclusion, we wish only to reiterate that
Depression began while the younger men were
the parameter estimates presented in this paper
just in their early twenties; the resulting reduc- should not be seen in isolation but as part of a
tion in lifetime saving can therefore be expected
to be greater in the older age group. Equations 5
through 8 make a crude adjustment for the effect
of age by making the equilibrium ratio of wealth
to income (a1 of equation (1)) a linear function of
age. This is equivalent to adding a variable to the

larger body of evidence on life cycle savings be-

havior in general and on the effects of social

security on saving in particular. We are as conscious as anyone of the limitations of the current
data and of the problems of interpreting our reequation that is the product of the individual's sults. We believe, however, that the current esage and labor income; AYL = AGE x YL. The timates do support the validity of the life cycle
approach and of the specific conclusion that soestimates in equations 5 through 8 show no statistically significant effect of age and no substantial
effect on the coefficient of SS W of including the
age-income variable.
Equations 9 through 12 drop the restriction of
the sample to married couples and reestimate the

cial security significantly depresses private
wealth accumulation. Significant improvements

in microeconometric analysis of this question
must await the development of data combining
accurate records of lifetime earnings, social sebasic specification with the quadratic income curity wealth, and private net worth.
term. In the first two of these equations, a separate adjustment is made by adding a variable 20 The difference between couples and single individuals
(MYL) that is equal to YL for a married couple may also reflect the role of life insurance.

368

THE REVIEW OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS
REFERENCES

Aaron, Henry J., Social Security: International Comparison," in Otto Eckstein (ed.), Studies in the Economics

croeconometric Evidence," National Bureau of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 206, 1977.
Katona, George, Private Pensions and Individual Saving,

Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan, 1965.

of Income Maintenance (Washington, D.C.: The Kotlikoff, Larry, Anthony Pellechio, and Christophe ChamBrookings Institution, 1967), 13—48.
ley, "Social Security and Private Wealth AccumulaBarro, Robert, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?"
tion," mimeographed, Harvard University, 1977.
Journal of Political Economy 82 (Nov/Dec. 1974), Mayer, Thomas, Permanent Income, Wealth, and Consump1095—1117.

,"Social Security and Private Saving—Evidence from
the U.S. Time Series," in Studies in Social Security
and Retirement Policy, American Enterprise Institute,
1978.

Darby, Michael, 'The Effects of Social Security on Income
and the Capital Stock," mimeographed, American Enterprise Institute, 1979.
Diamond, Peter, "A Framework for Social Security Analy-

sis," Journal of Public Economics 8 (Dec. 1977),
275—298.

Feldstein, Martin, "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and
Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political
Economy 82 (Sept./Oct. 1974), 905—926.

"Social Security and the Distribution of Wealth,"
Journal of the American Statistical Association 71
(Dec. 1976a), 800—807.

"Social Security and Saving: The Extended Life
Cycle Theory," American Economic Review 66 (May
1976b), 77—86.

"Social Security and Private Savings: International
Evidence in an Extended Life Cycle Model," in Martin Feldstein and Robert Inman (eds.), The Economics
of Public Services, an International Economic Association Conference Volume (New York: Haisted Press,
1977).

tion: A Critique of the Permanent Income Theory, the
Life-Cycle Hypothesis, and Related Theories (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1972).
Miller, M. H., and C. W. Upton, Macroeconomics: A Neo-

classical Introduction (Homewood, Illinois: Irwin
Publishing Company, 1974).

Modigliani, Franco, and Albert Ando, "Tests of the LifeCycle Hypothesis of Savings," Bulletin of the Oxford
University Institute of Statistics 19 (May 1957), 99—
124.

Munnell, Alicia H., The Effect of Social Security on Personal
Savings (Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing Company,
1974).

"Private Pensions and Saving: New Evidence,"

Journal of Political Economy 84 (Oct. 1976), 1013—
1032.

Myers, Robert J., Social Insurance and Allied Government

Programs (Homewood, Illinois: Richard D. Irwin,
1965).

Pechman, Joseph A., Henry J. Aaron, and Michael K. Taussig, Social Security: Perspectives for Reform (Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1968).

Projector, Dorothy S., and Gertrude S. Weiss, Survey of
Financial Characteristics of Consumers (Washington,
D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1966).

"Social Security and Private Savings: Reply to Schulz, James, et al. Providing Adequate Retirement Income: Pension Reform in the United States and
Abroad (Hanover, New Hampshire: Published for
Brandeis University Press by the University Press of
and Household Wealth Accumulation: New MiNew England, 1974).

Barro," in Studies in Social Security and Retirement
Policy, American Enterprise Institute, 1978.
Feldstein, Martin, and Anthony Pellechio, "Social Security

