                   NBER Working Paper Series




              AN ECONOMIC THEORY OF SELF—CONTROL


              H. M. Shefrin* and Richard Thaler**




                 Working Paper No. 208 revised




        CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
                    AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

          National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
       204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305



                       revised July 1978



                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only. They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official NBER
publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for
approval by the Board of Directors.

Thaler's research was supported in part by a grant to the National
Bureau of Economic Research from the Kaiser Family Foundation.
The authors thank Tom Russell for his helpful comments on an
earlier draft. Of course, he should not be held responsible for
any remaining weaknesses.

 *University of Rochester and University of Santa Clara.
**Cornell University and National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper 208
                                                           July 1978




                  AN ECONOMIC THEORY OF SELF-CONTROL

                   H. M. Shefrin and Richard Thaler


                              Abstract



        Although many economists, most notably Strotz, have discussed

dynamic inconsistency and precommitment, none have dealt directly with

the essence of the problem: self—control. This paper attempts to fill

that gap by modeling man as an organization. The Strotz model is recast

to include the control features missing in his formulation. The organi-

zational analogy permits us to draw on the theory of agency. We thus

relate the individual's control problems with those that exist in agency

relationships.




                                         Richard Thaler
                                         Graduate School of Business
                                           and Public Administration
                                         Cornell University
                                          Ithaca, NY 14853
           The idea of self—control is paradoxical unless it is
           assumed that the psyche contains more than one energy
           system, and that these energy systems have some degree
           of independence from each other.

                                             Donald McIntosh [1969]




Introduction

     Although economics has been applied to more and more kinds of problems

in recent years, the title of this paper may still raise more than a few

eyebrows. Why do we need an economic theory of self—control? What is

wrong with our traditional theories? Why should self—control be of

interest to economists? This introduction will try to answer these

questions and provide some information about the contents of the rest of

the paper. The answers to the questions involve several points.

     1. A significant portion of consumer behavior is characterized by

the presence of self—control problems. It shouldn't be difficult to

visualize the importance self—control might have in understanding savings

behavior. This alone would justify its investigation. Yet we believe

that problems of self—control will be present to some degree in all

consumer decisions that involve intertemporal tradeoffs. This paper

is a first step toward a positive theory of intertemporal choice.

     2. Our current theories are inadequate. A simple result from

standard constimer theory is that a consumer cannot improve his welfare

by restricting his choices. Yet people engage in such activities

frequently. In fact, savings behavior is nearly dominated by

institutions that reduce the individual's flexibility. Some examples
                                      2



are Christmas clubs, mandatory pension plans, social security, payroll

savings plans, whole life insurance policies, and piggy banks. Christmas

clubs have always been a real puzzle for economists. For many years

Christmas clubs paid no interest and were seemingly dominated by other

forms of saving such as simple savings accounts. It is obvious that

their popularity was due to their value as a self—control device. We

claim that the popularity of the other institutions cited is also

related in varying degrees to the same attribute.

      3. Our proposed theory is simple, uses standard economic tools,

and yet describes actual behavior. Our basic advance is simply the recog-

nition of self—control as a problem. Our model explicitly deals with

consumer choice as a control problem. As the quotation above suggests,

self—control seems to necessarily imply the existence of a controller

and a controllee. Individuals are thus assumed to behave as if they

possessed two separate sets of preferences. These two aspects of their

personality are referred to as the planner and the doer. By modeling

behavior in this way we seem to have taken the only reasonable course.

Once this formulation is adopted it becomes apparent that Individuals

share many of the control problems found in organizations. The resulting

analogy can be exploited to test the model. If individuals are like

organizations facing control problems, then they should adopt many of the

same strategies for solving these problems. In fact, we observe that they

do.


      The plan for the paper is as follows. The economic literature that

has come closest to discussing self—control is that which has followed

the classic paper by Strotz. We thus begin our paper in Section I with a
                                    3




statement of Strotz's theoretical problem. Section II contains our justifi-

cation for adopting a two—self model. We draw heavily in this section on

the work of Donald Mcintosh. Section III presents our formal model. We

show that standard economic tools can be used even if the unified self is

dropped. Section IV describes a control problem in an organization to

illustrate the techniques that can be used to reduce the costs arising from

conflicts of interest. Section V shows how the same techniques are used by

individuals to deal with their problems of self—control. Section VI dis-

cusses some empirical implications of our model. Section VII contains a

short summary.
                                          4



I. Dynamic Inconsistency and Self-Control                                     S
       Why do people impose constraints on their future behavior? This

is the question which motivated us to write this paper, and it is a

question which has attracted the attention of economists since the

seminal paper by Strotz [1955]. Strotz's answer hinges on the obser-

vation that most peoplets tastes change over time in a systematic way.

While Strotz's discussion contains many useful insights into the problem,

he fails to deal directly with self—control, and this we feel renders

his model inadequate. We will begin by summarizing his argument.

       Strotz considers an individual with a nonnegative stock K(O) of

an exhaustible resource at time 0. The individual must decide on a con-

sumption plan c(.) by which he will deplete the resource over a finite

time interval [0,T]. Let U[c(t), t] be the utility accruing at a time t and

A(t, T) the rate of discount applied to U[c(t), t] when viewed from time

T. At time 0, the individual is assumed to choose a plan c*(.) to maxi-

mize

                             I   A(t,0)U(c(t),t)      dt
                                                                     (1)

subject to

                             I   c(t)dt   < K(0)                     (2)


In following a plan c(.), the amount of resource used up between times 0

and T is just fTc(t) dt. Consequently, the amount of the resources

remaining at time T is simply

                              K(i) =   K(0)   -
                                                  fc(t)dt           (3)

       The plan c*(.) that maximizes the above problem is called the

original          Notice   that A(t,0) is the rate of discount applied to

U[c(t), t] in the determination of c*(.). Of course, the individualts         5
                                    5


tastes may have changed at T because he will discount at rate A(t, T)

and not A(t,O) (if X(t, T) is not independent of t). Will the individual

want to alter the original plan when his tastes change? That is, will he

want to reallocate the remaining amount K(T)? One of Strotz's conclusions

Is that the individual will not alter the original plan If X(t, T) Is

exponential in t—tI; otherwise he will. If the original plan Is altered,

then the individual is said to display dynamic inconsistency.

     This result is Illustrated in figure 1. Suppose an individual

must choose between a small reward x at time t and a larger reward y

at time t'. Time is measured horizontally with "today" at the origin.

The present value of either alternative is given by the height of its

respective curve at any point in time. Dynamic inconsistency is shown in

panel a.




                                                                        j
                  :igure la                                 figure lb

If the decision between x and y is made any time   before   t*, y will be

chosen. However, between t and t (the time just before x would be

received) x will be preferred to y. Thus, if the choice is made before

t*, the individual will want to change his mind once t arrives. If the

discount function is exponential, then the curves will never cross (as in

panel b) and choices will be dynamically consistent.
                                    6




    What will an individual do if he recognizes this inconsistency? One

strategy Strotz suggests is that of precommitment.

    Today it will be rational for a man to jettison his "optimal" plan of
    yesterday, not because his tastes have changed in any unexpected way
    nor because his knowledge of the future is different, but because
    today he is a different person with a new discount function——the old
    one shifted forward in time. Yet, it is also rational for the man
    today to try to ensure that he will do tomorrow that which is best
    from the standpoint of today's desires.2

Since the individual knows his preferences will change he precommits behavior

to enforce his current preferences on himself later. Strotz claims that this

is rational. Yet, while the change of preferences hypothesized by Strotz is

necessary for precommitment to be rational, it is not sufficient. Consider

the plight of a man with the following preferences: at 3:00 PM he prefers

fish over meat for dinner, while at dinner time, he prefers meat over fish.

If he does his shopping at 3:00 PM and knows that his preferences will

change, what should he buy? For it to be rational to buy fish, we must add

another condition which is implicit in Strotz's reasoning: namely, that the

earlier preferences are judged in some sense to be "right."

     Another example will illustrate the point. Suppose an individual

observes that whenever he goes to a restaurant the combination of his hunger

and the pleasant aromas emerging from the kitchen induce him to order more

than he can eat. He is aware of this tendency to order too much, but never

seems to overcome it. However, if he called in his order at 3:00 PM when

less hungry and away from the aromas, he would order the correct amount. In

this example, precoinmitment seems entirely sensible since it overcomes a

systematic bias which the individual recognizes.

     In fact Strotz's subsequent discussion demonstrates that he does view

the early preferences as "right." Dynamic inconsistency can occur whenever
                                       7




the discount function is not exponential, but Strotz has in mind a particular

shape of the discount function:

     Special attention should be given, I feel, to a discount function...
     which differs from a logarithmically linear one in that it "over
     values" the more proximate satisfaction relative to the more distant
     ones. . . .My own supposition is that most of us are "born" with [such]
     discount functions. .

     If    the instantaneous discount rate Is plotted over time, then Strotz is

hypothesizing a function which has the shape illustrated in Figure 2. In

choices between "now" and "later" the later option will be heavily discounted,


          Instantaneous
          discount rate




                                                            Time
                                  figure 2


but the rate applied to two "later" options will be much lower. Strotz is

not very explicit about why he supposes we are born with such discount func—

tions, but he cites Böhm—Bawerk who is explicit.

    It is one of the most pregnant facts of experience that we attach a
    less importance to future pleasures and pains simply because they are
    future... To goods which are destined to meet the wants of the future,
    we ascribe a value which is really less than the true intensity of
    their future marginal utility... Which of us has not been surprised to
    find that under the pressure of some momentary appetite, he was not
    able to refuse some favorite dish or cigar which the doctor had for—
    bidden——knowing perfectly that he was doing an injury to his health,
    which, calm consideration would tell him, was much more considerable
    than the pleasure of that trifling indulgence?... Any one who knows
    himself, and keeps his eyes open to what is going on around him, will
    find this fact of the underestimate of future pleasures and pains
    exhibited under a thousand forms in the midst of our civilized society.
    Of the fact then there is no doubt.
                                     8




Three reasons are given for this phenomenon: want of imagination, defect in

will, and the uncertainty of life. It is defect of will, however, which

leads B6hm—Bawerk to suggest a discount function of the shape illustrated in

Figure 2.

     I should like to call special attention, further, to the fact, that the
     undervaluation which results from these causes is not at all graduated
     harmoniously, in the subjective valuation of the individuals, according
     to the length of the time that intervenes.., On the contrary, the
     original subjective undervaluations are, in the highest degree, unequal
     and irregular. In particular, so far as the undervaluation is caused
     by defects of will, there may be a strong difference between an enjoy-
     ment which offers itself at the very moment, and one which does not;
     while, on the other hand, there may be a very small difference, or no
     difference at all, between enjoyment which is pretty far away, and one
     which is farther away.5

We agree.

     While Strotz never mentions self—control explicitly, he does discuss

the tendency of lower income people to "gorge themselves with food after

pay—day; overheat their homes when they have money for a bucket of coal;...

go on sprees on pay—day; engage in heavy installment buying.. "    etc.   all of

which he says "can be explained as a failure to cope intelligently with the

problem of the intertemporal tussle."7 What is the "intertemporal tussle"

if not the lack of self—control?

     Finally, consider Strotz's remarks on consumer sovereignty:

     I would have confidence in the judiciousness of a person today.. .to
     decide how much to save and how much to spend for the rest of his life
     starting a couple years from now... The real decisions to worry about
     are those where an immediate or proximate satisfaction is gained at the
     expense of still—more—future costs. Preconimitments may be regarded as
     either good or evil, depending upon whether the period of precommitment
     begins now or later.8

These remarks, while insightful and sensible, cannot be justified by Strotz's

model. What in Strotz's model leads him to the conclusion that some precom—

mitments are good and others are evil? Why are decisions whose impact only
                                    9




begins a couple years from now considered good? The remarks seem to be based

not on the model (in which it is always rational to do what is best given

today's preferences) but rather on Strotz's value judgment that the high

discount rates observed in the short run are inappropriate. To make the

model complete, however, it is only necessary to have the Individual share

Strotz's value judgment. Since delay of gratification is more difficult as

the object of desire draws nearer, observed discount rates become high in the

short run. Sophisticated Individuals will recognize this internal, systematic

bias and, like the man in the restaurant, they will rationally take steps to

reduce the costs of this bias. The contribution of this paper is to explic—

itly recognize these costs, and to show how they can be incorporated into an

economic model of intertemporal choice.
                                       10




 II. The Incoherent Self

         Strotz hypothesizes a non—exponential discount function which produces

 dynamic inconsistency. To complete the model all that is necessary is to

 incorporate the conflict which this inconsistency will inevitably produce.

Conflict arises because the individual recognizes his own weaknesses. Plans

made in advance are consistently broken because "temptation" becomes too

great. What the person knows to be his best long run interests conflict

with his short run desires. To model such conflict it is useful to assume

the individual acts as if he were influenced by two separate sets of prefer-

ences, in essence a two—self model. This idea is also advocated by Donald

McIntosh [19691 in a book which has strongly influenced our presentation.

In his chapter entitled, "The Psychology of Rational Action," McIntosh

evaluates utility theory from a psychological perspective. We will very

briefly summarize his ideas.

     Standard utility theory models man as a sophisticated, maximizing agent.

How does man acquire the skills necessary for him to act rationally?

McIntosh notes that individuals are born not with coherent purposes but with

drives or needs. The satisfaction of these needs requires the establishment

of certain relationships with the outside world. These relationships are

established as the individual matures. During this time, a coherent idea of

selfhood develops; however, a considerable amount of psychic conflict is

always present. This necessitates that some impulses toward drive satisfac—

tion be blocked because of the existence of a multiplicity of drive mecha-

nisms.

     The needs of the individual are not one but many; they are present now,
     but they will also be present in the future.
                                   11




     Short—term satisfactions must be weighed against longer—run results...
     In a word, self—control is needed.

     The idea of self—control is paradoxical unless it is assumed that the
     psyche contains more than one energy system, and that these energy
     systems have some degree of independence from each other.9

     The last sentence is precisely the position we take in this paper.

McIntosh continues by citing two situations in which traditional utility

theory cannot be applied. The first situation, which he calls discontinuity

of purpose, refers to intertemporal preferences that change over time. He

calls the second situation incoherence of purpose. Incoherence refers to

the presence of psychic conflict at a single point in time——which is to say

that the individual is influenced by more than one preference system. This

distinction cannot be overemphasized. In particular, the reader should note

that Strotz's model is based only on discontinuity of purpose. Yet, Strotz's

remark that "the real decisions to worry about are those where an immediate

   satisfaction is gained at the expense of.. .future costs," is entirely

consistent with McIntosh's statement about independent energy systems. The

major contribution of this paper is the incorporation of incoherence of

purpose into a formal model of individual behavior.

     We model incoherent purpose by treating an individual as if he contained

two distinct psyches which we will denote the planner and the doer. These

terms help stress the analogy between an individual with a self—control

problem and an organization with a principal—agent problem. We will exploit

that analogy extensively in Sections IV and V. The planner/doer framework

is developed in a formal model in Section III, but we should point out here

that it is consistent with McIntosh's view of the individual as a combination

of a system of coherent drives together with a coherent idea of self. The

doer corresponds to McIntosh's drives, being concerned only with "short—term
                                     12




satisfactions,"   while the planner corresponds to the coherent ideas of the
                                                                                .
self, it being concerned with the tradeoff between "short—term satisfactions"

and "longer—run results." Before turning to the model, there remain two

final concepts in McIntosh's discussion which will prove quite useful. They

are external autonomy and internal autonomy. Quite simply, external autonomy

refers to the best the individual can do for himself when he is fully

coherent while internal autonomy denotes the best he can do when some degree

of psychic conflict is present.




                                                                                .




                                                                                .
                                      13




III. Modeling Incoherent Purposes

      In this section we will elaborate on our description of the planner and

the doer, and will present a formal model of an individual with incoherent

purposes. We have several reasons for developing a mathematical formulation

of our model. First, the formal treatment makes explicit the role of the

planner and the doers. Second, by structuring our model to closely resemble

that of Strotz, we facilitate comparisons of our theory to the existing

literature.10 Third, the formal model makes transparent the close corre-

spondence between our theory and the theory of agency. We draw on this

correspondence in Section 4. Fourth, we show that the recognition of

incoherence and inconsistency does not preclude the use of the traditional

tools of economic theory. Finally, we hope to show that economic analysis

can be used to gain insights into what many may consider a purely psycho-

logical phenomenon.

      We will cast our model in a discrete time framework. Consider an

individual with a fixed income stream y =      [y1,   y2, ...   T1   The individual

is assumed to choose a nonnegative level of consumption c in period t;          call
c =          c2, ... c T a consumption plan.
      [c1,
      What features does McIntosh cite which are absent in Strotz? First,

McIntosh associates a set of independent energy systems or drives to the

individual; these correspond to the incoherent parts of the self. Second,

the self also has a coherent part. It is this part that in McIntosh's terms

attempts to balance off "shorter—term satisfactions" against "longer—run

results." Third, there remains present within the individual a degree of

psychic conflict. In other words, the individual is never completely

integrated.
                                      14



     How can these features be introduced into the Strotz framework?

We introduce these features by viewing the individual as an organization

unto himself. The organization consists of T+l components: T distinct

doers (one for each period) and a single planner. The period t doer is

assumed to exercise direct control over the period t consumption level

c. Doer t corresponds to an independent energy system. Its associated

drive is represented by a utility function Z(.).      Zt(ct) denotes the

degree of immediate or "short—term satisfaction" that accrues if c is

consumed in period t. Assume that Z is a strictly increasing concave

function.

     Strotz certainly recognized some of these features as is evidenced

by the following quotation:

            The individual over time is an infinity of individuals,
            and the familiar problems of interpersonal utility
            comparisons are there to plague us. The interpersonal
            aspect of the intertemporal problem becomes clear if we
            think of a similar problem involving a family of brothers
            where each has a utility functional depending not only
            on his own utility but upon a weighted sum of the
            utilities of all of them. Suppose the oldest brother
            always has the power to allocate the annual proceeds of
            an estate, but with it being foreknown that each year
            one brother will die off, the oldest next.

The basic difference between our model and Strotz's would seem to be that

Strotz considered an individual to be a system of doers with no planner.

In addition, each Strotz doer has some concern for the other doers whereas

our doers are completely selfish.12
     In our model incoherence results from the imposition of a present

value budget constraint13


                            T

                          t=l
                                c<t=ly=Y                           (7)
                                        15


Notice that this implies the existence of a perfect capital market. The

multiplicity of drive mechanisms [Z1, Z2, ...,
                                                 ZT] are in mutual conflict
as a result of (7). Consequently, the coherent part of the self must be

identified with the Individual's ability to express consistent preferences

over the achievement of his various drives. The planner effectively fills

this role. The planner's preferences are represented by a utility

function V(Z1, Z2, ...,   ZT).
     An individual is represented by his energy system [V, Zj, ...,
                                                                      ZTI.
We have now incorporated the first two McIntosh features described above.

The third and final aspect centers on psychic Integration. If the

individual were fully integrated, then the planner would choose a con-

sumption plan to


                     maximize V(Z1, Z2, ..., ZT)


subject to


                                  T

                                 t=l
                                       c<Y

In McIntosh's terminology, this refers to the achievement of external

autonomy. However, McIntosh asserts that external autonomy is not possible

in general because of the absence of full psychic integration. The best

the individual can hope to do is achieve internal autonomy. The impediment

to the achievement of external autonomy lies, of course, with the doers.

It is the period t doer, not the planner, that exercises control over

the period t decision c. In particular, doer t is oriented towards
                                    16




achieving   maximum short—term satisfaction     not longer—run gain V.    In
                                                                                  .
fact, an unrestrained doer 1 would borrow Y —        on the capital market and
                                                y1
therefore choose c1 = Y; the resulting consequence is naturally c2 = c3 =

    = CT = 0.    Such action would suggest a complete absence of psychic

integration.

    What can the planner do to exert some control over the doers? In

general he has two instruments he Can use. First, he can impose rules

on the doers behavior. The rules alter the doers behavior by changing

the constraints. One possible rule would be to purchase an annuity

which allocates each doer a specific consumption level. A less restrictive

rule would be to simply forbid borrowing.

     The second instrument available to the planner is to alter the doers

utility function directly. The goal would be to produce a new function

which has an internal maximum. In Figure 3 the original doer utility

function is labelled Z1. We assume that the only way to reduce the marginal



  utility                                                    zl




                                                                    consumption

                                  figure 3
                                              17




utility necessary for an internal maximum is to reduce the overall level

of arousal and thus total utility. So the altered utility function will

resemble Z2. Altering the utility function to Z3 such that satiation is

reached earlier while utility is increased is considered infeasible, as

is introducing a discontinuity at the desired level of consumption, such
    4
as Z

        To model the modification of the doer's utility function, we introduce

a modification parameter 0 =         (Gi'   e2, ...   °T   Henceforth, Z is assumed

to be a function of two arguments, c and                   If   =   0,    then the doer

is completely unrestrained. As O increases, both Z and                        are reduced
          2
                                                                          c
as in Z in Figure 3. To provide a specific example, 0 might be thought

of as a guilt parameter. The higher is O, the more guilt the doer feels

for any level of c.

        Define c(O) to be the consumption level doer t chooses to maximize

              when the planner picks O• If sufficient modification has
Zt(c,
                                                                              =Y —
taken place so that       has an internal maximum, then c <
                                                                                     s< t
                                                                                            c.
        We can now write down the planner's problem in the discretionary

mode. Let Z(c*(0),®) =                                                        Then the
                             [Z1(c(01),      0) ...    Z(c(0T),     0T1
planner wants to solve


                maximize V(Z(c*(0), 0)
                   0

                              T
                                            < Y
                subject to
                             t= 1
                                    c(0)
                                      18



The solution to this problem entails the usual sort of marginal conditions.

In this case the planner will increase       until the marginal loss to the

planner from the resulting decrease in doer t's utility is equal to the

marginal gain to the planner from the increases in utility to all future

doers. Both the gain and the loss have two     components.   Doer t is worse

off from a rise in       becausehe consumes less and because he enjoys each

unit   of   consumption less. Similarly future doers gain both because there

is more income remaining and because less future modification will be

employed.

       In the more general problem, the planner can choose not just 0 but

also the set of formal constraints (or rules) he wishes to impose on the

doers. We will present details of this more general problem in our next

paper on this subject. For our present purposes we will just move on

to discuss what actual devices individuals use in dealing with self—

control problems. We will begin by examining what organizations do when

facing similar problems.
                                    19

IV. Rules vs. Discretion: An Organizational Analogy

     We have modeled an individual facing a self—control problem as an

organization with a principal—agent or conflict of interest problem. If

this analogy is apt, then we should find that the devices used by organi-

zations to minimize the costs imposed by conflicts of interest are also

used by individuals in intertemporal choice situations. In this section

we will develop a specific example of an organizational control problem.

Its applicability to individuals is examined in Section 5.

     Consider the case of a bank that is run by an owner—manager. One

of the functions which the owner serves is that of loan officer. He

determines which applicants should be granted loans. Two kinds of pro-

cedures are used. The applicant fills out a report which Is coded and

run through a 'tcredit scoring" program which predicts the probability

of default. In our terminology the credit scoring procedure Is a rule.

This rule can also be supplemented or supplanted by the judgment of the

owner based on information gathered in a personal interview. The interview

judgment process is labeled discretion.

     Since the interviews are more costly to conduct, the owner would

rely completely on the credit scoring procedure if it were equally ef-

fective. However, the interview may permit the owner to gather informa-

tion which is difficult to obtain on a written application (such as

"appearance") or is difficult to process quantitatively (such as nervous-

ness in response to particular questions). The owner will utilize the

interview if the extra precision in granting loans results in sufficient

extra profits to cover the extra costs. Now assume that the owner hires

an employee to process loan applications. Suppose further that the owner
                                      20



used both the credit scoring procedure and the interview because the

additional accuracy of the interview more than made up for the extra cost.

Finally assume that the employee is just as skillful as the owner in

judging loan applications. While the production function does not appear to

have changed, it may now be profitable to abandon the interview. The

reason for this is that the incentives facing the employee may not be

the same as those facing the owner. The equal skill assumption means that

if the employee were the owner he would make decisions identical to

(or as good as) the current owner's, but as an employee who does not get

to keep the profits of his section, his decisions may differ. He may

become careless, lazy or even dishonest. This will create an incentive

to adopt rules. The situation described is now analogous to that of an

individual facing a problem of self control. He (like the owner) knows

what he should do, but can't get himself (the employee) to do it.

     Agency costs can be defined as the difference between the profits

of the firm that would occur if every agent had the same objective

function as the owner and the actual profits (or the difference between

external autonomy and internal autonomy).15     Organizations will choose

a mix of rules and discretion designed to minimize agency costs. Rules

are used to reduce the opportunities for the employee to misbehave.

Discretion must be combined with appropriate incentives. Some specific

strategies for the bank example will illustrate the basic techniques.

     If no interviews are permitted then the bank is using a pure rule

strategy. Two   techniques   can be used to introduce a limited amount of

discretion. First, the bank might have the credit scoring program produce


                                                                              .
                                      21




a cardinal score (rather than a zero or one). This score might be the

estimate probability of default, p. A pure rule would be to grant loans

only if p <   p*.   Limited discretion could be added by allowing the program

to be overruled over a certain range. So, for example, all loans with

scores less than p — S, would be approved and all with scores greater than

p* + S would be rejected, and over the range p* — 5 to p* +     tS   the employee

would decide.

     Second, certain classes of decisions may   be   removed from discretion.

Thus, the owner might feel that some loans are particularly likely to be

associated with large divergence between the interests of the employer and

the employee. Examples might be loans to friends and relatives, or very

large loans. These particular decisions might be removed from the employee's

discretion. Which decisions to remove will depend not just on the proba-

bility of malfeasance but also on the cost of determining when the rule

should apply. So abolishing discretion for "attractive clients" might be

advisable in theory but infeasible because of the difficulty in defining an

attractive client. Once any discretion is permitted the bank will try to

reduce the agency costs by creating an environment in which the employee's

interests are as close as possible to the employer's. Three basic methods

can be used to alter the employee's incentives. First, the employer can

monitor the employee's inputs, or the decisions themselves. A random

sampling of interviews with appropriate penalties for incorrect decisions

is an example. Second, the employer can monitor outputs. Setting up the

loan department as a profit center with the employee's salary determined

by profits would be a strategy of this type. Third, the owner can try to

alter the employee's interests through moral suasion. Many profit—sharing
                                   22




arrangements may be based on this concept. Most profit—sharing systems
                                                                               .
provide very little actual incentive to any employee since his share of

marginal profits is minute. But, by "giving the employees a share of the

profitst' the firm changes the way employees think about the firm. Though

moral suasion and social norms are typically sneered at by economists, they

explain a great deal of otherwise mysterious behavior such as tipping in

strange out—of—town restaurants and cleaning up campgrounds.

     The preceding analysis applies to any form of organization. The

organization should select some combination of rules and incentives to

minimize agency costs. The actual mix selected will depend on the relative

costs of each strategy. This observation has an interesting implication for

our understanding of the workings of government bureaucracies and other non-

profit organizations. A characteristic all such organizations share is that

output is difficult to measure. Because of this, the various incentive

strategies open to profit—making firms will be either awkward or impossible

to implement. The Army cannot, for example, set up a platoon as a profit

center! This implies that such organizations will be forced to rely on

rules to a greater extent than will firms. Since bureaucracies cannot

measure output they are forced to use rules to approximate the goals of the

organization and then monitor the adherence to these rules.




                                                                               .
                                       23



V. The Techniques of Self—Control

        Walter Mischel, a prominent psychologist who has conducted experiments

on self—control for over a decade, suggests that self—control should be

thought of as a two—stage process. In the first stage the individual

must choose to wait for the more preferred but delayed outcome. In

our model this corresponds to the preferences of the planner. The second

stage is the execution of the delay. During this stage it helps if "the

person can convert the difficult aversive 'self—control' situation into

one which he can master more easily."6 Thus the second stage entails

getting the doer to follow the plan. This section investigates the

techniques of self—control—--those strategies which the individual uses

to make the difficult easier. The techniques we describe are those

suggested by our model and by the bank analogy from the previous section.

        We have several objectives we hope to meet in this section. First,

we want to describe the kinds of behavior we should expect to observe

in self—control situations. It should be stressed that these are rational,

maximizing solutions to choice problems in a second—best world. In fact,

we show that individuals use the same strategies to deal with self—control

problems that profit maximizing firms use to deal with conflicts of

interest. The strategies are rational because the costs of self—control

are real (just as agency costs are real). Second, we can explain some

kinds of behavior which seem irrational. By rationalizing seemingly

irrational behavior we can make positive statements about when and where

we should expect to observe it. Third, we will try to indicate some of

the weaknesses in the neoclassical theory of intertemporal choice, again

pointing to the specific situations in which the theory is most likely to

fail.
                                   24


     We will proceed as follows. The two basic instruments the planner

can use in our model are rules and discretion. Rules operate by altering

the constraints imposed on any given doer. Discretion must be accompanied

by some method of altering the incentives or rewards to the doer. Ob-

viously, these incentives must have short run payoffs. Both rules and

discretion can be implemented either with external help or purely internally.

Furthermore, many strategies involve a combination of both rules and

discretion. We will describe each technique in turn: discretion (external

and internal), external (or pure) rules, and combined strategies (internal

rules—of—thumb and opportunity manipulations). For each strategy we

indicate its particular advantages and disadvantages and illustrate with

everyday examples usually taken from savings or dieting behavior. Where

possible we point to specific institutions which have arisen to meet the

demands for externally imposed self—control aids. We conclude the section

with a discussion of the desirable characteristics of rules—of—thumb.

     We hope this section will answer the following questions: Why do

people impose rules on themselves? What happens when no rule is used?

What characterizes a good rule? What determines the choice between rules,

discretion, and various combinations?

Discretion

     The essential feature of discretion is that the doer is allowed to

choose in an unconstrained way. Thus if behavior is to be altered, the

incentives facing the doer must be modified. We will describe how this

can be done.

     If external help can be used then the simplest strategy is to rearrange

the short—run rewards for a specific activity. An extreme example is the        S
                                   25



drug antibuse used by alcoholics. The effect of this drug is to make the

user sick iimnediately after taking a drink. Less extreme but more salient

to academics is the practice of agreeing to give a paper at a conference to

see that it will in fact get written. Again, this works because as the

conference draws near, failure to write the paper will result in immediate

costs (abuse from the organizer). Similarly, some college basketball

players who have signed professional contracts before graduating have

asked for special clauses to be included in their contract specifying

that a large bonus ($10,000) will be paid immediately upon graduation.

Since the returns to finishing will only begin after their basketball

career is over this acts to shift some of the reward forward. Finally,

some people simply make a bet with a friend: "I will pay you $200

if I smoke another cigarette."

     The same basic idea can be done purely internally. Thus some people

deny themselves some reward until they finish some unpleasant task. An

ingenious variation on this idea is Ainslee's "private side bet."17 The

essence of many self—control problems (smoking, dieting, saving) is that

each particular instance of restraint has only a trivial long—run gain.

Just one cigarette (donut, spree) will have no significant effect on

lifetime health (weight, wealth). Yet, at the time, the utility of the

immediate reward may loom very large. Compare the utility of a tanta-

lizing dessert with the loss in utility of weighing an extra gram!

Yet If all decisions are made on this basis, the individual will never

restrain, and the cumulative effects will be significant. To overcome

this Ainslee suggests that the individual might tie all acts of a specific

form of restraint together. In essence he bets with himself that he will
                                      26


never eat donuts. He will want to keep this bet as long as the utility

from eating donuts is less than the utility of the weight loss associated

with not eating donuts. If the scheme works it is because the individual

perceives that breaking the rule even once will jeopardize the entire

routine. Thus the cost of eating a donut would be viewed not just as

the weight gain from one donut but the weight gain from a lifetime of

donuts. If this perception is correct it seems like it must be based

on two aspects of the technology of restraint. First, good behavior can

be habit—forming. (The costs of restraint decline with continual practice.)

Second, such habits are very easily broken. Both aspects seem accurate

descriptions of human behavior.

       Two other internal incentive alteration techniques are worth men-

tioning: monitoring and moral suasion. Self—monitoring is simply the

process of keeping track of various activities. "Weight—watchers," a

diet club, uses this technique extensively, as its name suggests. Not

only are outputs monitored through weekly weigh—ins (with appropriate

reinforcement) but members are instructed to weigh and count carefully

everything they eat. It seems that in many self—control situations simply

keeping track helps cut down on the undesirable activity.

      Moral suasion can also be effective if short—run incentives can be

so altered. Essentially, moral suasion involves the adoption of some

norm. An example would be to view saving as a goal in and of itself. 18

If   the planner can convince the doer to adopt this norm then the doer will

save in spite of myopic preferences. Saving will provide positive current

utility. Guilt can work the same way, though in the opposite direction.

If overeating is considered bad in and of itself then the problem pointed

out by Ainslee is minimized.
                                        27




Pure Rules —   External   Enforcement

       .but you must bind me hard and fast, so that I cannot stir from the
     spot where you will stand me.. . and if I beg you to release me, you must
     tighten and add to my bonds.

     Strotz begins his article with the above well—known quote from The

Odyssey. The solution which Ulysses adopts to his self—control problem is

an externally enforced precomniltment. In general, precommitment can be a

very effective self—control strategy. Examples are pension plans, fat farms

(where you pay not to be fed) and even wiring one's jaw closed. The advan-

tage of these strategies is that once in place they require little or no

self enforcement. In terms of our model, if a pure rule is used then 0 can

be left at zero. This implies that the level of utility will not have to be

reduced. In some cases, precommitinent may be the only way to partake in an

activity. Gamblers, for instance, often bring only as much cash as they are

willing to lose, and like Ulysses instruct their friends in advance not to

loan them additional funds no matter what they may say later. Institutions

which sell precommitment services are very common in the areas of dieting,

saving, smoking and drinking. Of course, economically, the savings institu-

tions, especially pension plans, are most important.

     Strotz finds precommitment so compelling that he writes: "What needs

to be explained is not that people do precoinmit their future actions, but

that the practice is not still more wide—spread."19 Strotz offers one

reason, uncertainty as to future tastes and opportunities. "Because of risk

and uncertainty, people are also willing to pay for options permitting them

a greater range of choice at future dates... "20 Though this may in fact be

the most significant defect of precommitment, there is another reason why

alternative strategies will be used.
                                     28




       Pure rules require external help which may be either unavailable   or,
                                                                                 .
equivalently, too expensive. The expense may arise because actual physical

restraint is required, as in fat farms, and so the precommitment is only

feasible for short intervals. Alternatively, the expense may result from

the difficulty in defining the legitimate exceptions which occur in an

uncertain world. Of course Strotz may have failed to recognize the full

range of alternatives to precommitment which also help explain its limited

use.


Combined Strategies

       In the bank analogy, the owner could combine rules with some discretion

by limiting either the range over which the discretion could be exercised or

by limiting the domain of discretion to relatively "safe't decisions. Both

combinations are used by individuals as well. We will refer to these             S
strategies as internal rules and opportunity manipulation, respectively.

Internal Rules

       Our continual observations upon the conduct of others, insensibly leads
       us to form to ourselves certain general rules concerning what is fit
       and proper either to be done or to be avoided.

                                                           Adam Smith [1759]

       We have identified two extreme modes of savings behavior. Pure discre-

tion is characterized by the individual deciding in each period how much to

save without any self-imposed constraints. A pure rule eliminates all

choice, perhaps with the help of an annuity. Obviously there are many

alternative strategies which lie somewhere between these extremes. We call

these Intermediate cases internal rules because generally they are self—

enforced rules—of—thumb, rather than externally enforced precommitments.

Two points should be stressed here. First, almost any external rule can be
                                            29




used internally. Second, almost any external rule can be defeated at some

cost. Purchasing an annuity, for example, serves no purpose if the individual

is free to borrow at will. Thus the distinction between internal and external

rules is somewhat blurred. Which is chosen depends on a comparison of costs.

External rules usually have lower self—enforcement costs but higher monetary

costs and less flexibility.

       In the context of our savings model we can identify some likely rules—

of—thumb between pure discretion and a pure rule. Each rule alters the

budget constraint facing the doer. A natural first departure from pure

discretion would be to introduce a ban on borrowing. We maintain the nota-

tion that          is current income and Y is the present value of remaining

future income and we introduce St as the accumulated saving up to period t
       t— 1
                   —
 S =
       t=l
              (y       c)   .   Then on a no—borrowing regime the budget constraint is

simply c            + S. A somewhat weaker rule which seems common is to prohibit

borrowing except for specific purchases: say houses and automobiles. The

existence of such rules—of—thumb may explain some apparently irrational

behavior. Many students are eligible for subsidized loans at very favorable

rates and yet fail to borrow. Why? It Is unlikely that their rates of time

preference are less than the 3% interest charged on some of these loans, and

in any case the money could be placed in a savings account for a sure gain.

While some students do exactly this, many do not. Similarly, countries with

high rates of inflation and regulated Interest rates (like Israel) provide

strong incentives to bcrrow which many fail to take advantage of. An aversion

to borrowing p se seems the best explanation of these anomalies.

    Another simple rule—of—thumb is a prohibition on dissaving combined with

limits on borrowing. If borrowing is banned then the budget constraint
                                     30




becomes
          c       If   borrowing is permitted up to some level, say B, then the
                                                                                  .
constraint becomes c <
                          y + B. This rule-of--thumb may explain why many
people borrow and lend simultaneously in spite of a substantial difference in

interest rates. A particularly striking example is the institution of the

'pass book loan." This institution allows consumers to borrow money using

their savings account balance as collateral. While the interest rate paid is

less than for an unsecured loan, it is still higher than the rate paid on the

savings account. Thus the transaction seems dominated by the alternative of

simply withdrawing some of the savings. Self—control seems to play a crucial

role in explaining this institution. People find it attractive either because

they don't want to dissave or because they value the regularized repayment

plan associated with the loan, or both.

     Each of the above rules may be combined with a savings plan. An example

of such a plan would be to save at least s% of income in each period, with

the discretion to save more but not less. Here the budget constraint becomes

c < (1          until retirement. Institutions such as "payroll savings"

where a certain amount is deducted each pay period toward the purchase of

savings bonds or some other savings instrument are examples of this kind of

plan. Since the plan can be stopped at any time and the savings are very

liquid it is obviously an internal rule.

     Mandatory pension plans and social security are nearly pure rules since

both dropping out and withdrawing funds are difficult or impossible. How-

ever, they must still be complemented with no borrowing rules in order to be

effective.




                                                                                  .
                                      31




Opportunity Manipulation

     •   . . meanwhile I took a large round of wax, cut it up small with my
     sword, and kneaded the pieces with all the strength of my fingers.
     The wax soon yielded to my vigorous treatment and grew warm. . I took
                                                                      .


     each of my men in turn and plugged their ears with it...

                                                                   The Odyssey

     Since Ulysses' crew needed to have their hands free to row, he had to

employ a different strategy for them, so he filled their ears with wax.

Since the Sirens were seductive, pure discretion was also not feasible. In

general, seductive goods will require special consideration, as in the bank

example. This implies that c should be considered a vector, so we denote

the level of good i consumed in period t by cit. If 0 is also good specific
                _6c*.
then we can use        as a measure of how seductive good I is. If a good

is highly seductive then in utility terms discretion will be very costly.

The best alternative may be to avoid the good altogether. Thus dieters

refuse invitations to lavish dinner parties rather than go and try to stick
                                                                           s c*
to their diet. In the absence of outright prohibition, variations in

imply that the individual will appear more impatient with goods that are more

seductive. In other words, the discount function implicit in observed
                                                 Sc*.
behavior will be good—specific. Similarly if             depends on the situation
                                                    it
then even the implicit discount functions for specific goods will be dynam-

ically unstable.21

    A concept related to the seductive good is the addictive or habit—

forming good. One way to define an addictive good is that it becomes more

seductive as it is consumed. A possible measure of the degree to which a

good is addictive would then be                    It is easy to see that
                                   uc1t  it+l
addictive goods present a special problem in self—control, especially if the

good is seductive to begin with. Drugs such as heroin, alcohol, and
                                   32




tobacco are the obvious examples. The current doer receives all the benefits
                                                                                .
of consuming an addictive good while the costs, in terms of future attempts

to control behavior as well as harmful side—effects are all imposed on future

doers. Pure rules may be an attractive strategy, and could explain some of

the support for legal prohibitions we have observed over the years. For

those who find the good initially seductive, no other strategy is likely to

be successful. We conjecture that most people who manage to avoid becoming

smokers simply found the practice originally distasteful. Very few people

seem to avoid the temptation to "just try it." The costs of addiction to

heroin, on the other hand, are high enough to scare most people away.

     Of course "habits" can be both good and bad. For some goods it seems

likely that some modification today will make the good less seductive

tomorrow. This possibility underscores the value of giving children "proper

training."

    The correspondence between the individual's problem of self—control and

the agency problem faced by an organization is illustrated in Table 1 which

summarizes and organizes the ideas presented In Sections IV and V.




                                                                                .
 w

                                                         Table   1

                        Summary of Control Techniques for Organizations and Individuals
                                       •
     Category                Illustrations                                          Illustrations from
                                                                                       .
                                             from Bank Analogy
                                                                                    IndividualBehavior
Pure Discretion        • Employee makes decisions using interview         • Unconstrained doer maximization
                         and credit scoring program as he sees fit

Methods to Alter       . Check employee decisions through random         . Self—monitoring
Incentives               sampling and reinterviews                         -
                                                                             Weight Watchers
                   • Make the loan department        a   profit center   •   External incentive alteration
                                                                             — Antibuse
                   •    Moral Suasion              sharing
                                        — profit                             — Agreeing to
                                                                                           give a paper at a
                                                                               conference

                                                                         • Internal devices
                                                                           — private side bets
                                                                           — saving for its own       sake
Pure Rules                                                                                                   —
                                                                         •
                   • Use credit scoring program
                                                exclusively                  Externally Enforced Rules
                                                                             Precommitment
                                                                             —
                                                                                 pension plans   as exclusive
                                                                                 form of saving
                                                                             —   fat farms
Partial Rules      • Employee discretion over       a limited range      • Rules—of—Thumb
                     of credit scores                                      — no
                                                                                borrowing
                                                                           — no
                                                                                dissaving
                                                                           —
                                                                             savings plan
                   •    Employee discretion over a limited domain        • Opportunity Manipulation
                        of decisions                                       — not
                                                                                 using credit cards
                                                                           —
                                                                             keeping an empty refrigerator
                                     34




Desirable   Characteristics of Rules—of—Thumb
                                                                               .
     The preceding discussion has argued that people will sometimes use

internal rules of—thumb to resolve dynamic inconsistencies rather than

external precommitments or pure discretion. What form will these rules—of--

thumb take? We can identify several characteristics that are desirable:

     1.     Simplicity. A rule—of—thumb can only work if the doer decision

process is somehow by—passed. If a rule is too complicated and the doer has

to figure out how to apply the rule then its value will be lost.

     2. No Exceptions. The ideal rule has no exceptions. If exceptions are

necessary they should be very well defined cases. Again, if the doer has to

decide whether or not the rule applies, its value is severely diminished.

     3. Dynamic Stability. This is closely related to no exceptions.

Frequent changes in the rule are comparable to many exceptions.

     4. Plausibility. If the doer is convinced that the rule is reasonable

and even in his best interest then enforcement costs will be reduced.

     5. Myopic Desirability. Any rule, internal or external, must be ini-

tially adopted by the current doer. To get over this hurdle it may be

necessary to sweeten the pot. Thus some Christmas Clubs offer a free gift

for joining, and the Army has sometimes used the strategy of the pre—enlist—

ment bonus. As Thomas Aquinas said, "Lord make me good, but not now."




                                                                               .
                                   35




VI. Implications

Time Preference and the Rate of Interest

     A simple result from the neoclassical theory of intertemporal choice is

that individual rates of time preference will be equal to the interest rate.

In our model this result does not apply. First we agree with B6hm—Bawerk

and Strotz that most individuals' discount functions are not exponential.

Thus, it makes no sense to talk about a single discount rate. Second, rather

than seeking the equality between the marginal productivity of waiting and

the marginal rate of time preference, individuals in our model adopt rules

(both internal and external) to overcome their high rates of time preference

in the short run. The difference between our approach and the standard

approach is well illustrated by a study by Kurz, Spiegelman and West [1973]

(hereafter "KSW").

     KSW used survey techniques to try to measure the rates of time prefer-

ence of the participants of the Denver Income Maintenance Experiment. They

asked a sample of participants a series of questions of the following sort:

What size bonus would you demand today rather than collect a bonus of $100

in one year? Several different forms of this question were asked. KSW state

the standard theoretical result, and argue that different rates of time pref-

erence among groups imply different rates at which groups can borrow. To

assure that everyone in the sample was in equilibrium in the loan market

(rather than being rationed) they asked people whether they could borrow

$500 to make an installment purchase or $1000 in cash and only included

those who said they could. The results were striking. For Whites, the mean

rates of time preference implied by their answers varied from 36% to 76%.

For Blacks the rates varied between 40% and 122%. Different questions
                                     36



elicited   different mean rates but the consistent and surprising finding was
                                                                                .
that all the rates were much higher than observed interest rates. (Subjects

were asked at what rate they could borrow and most replied in the 5—20%

range.)

     The conclusion drawn by KSW is that: "The attempt to measure the rate

of time preference with an interview technique is upward biased."23 While

this conclusion may be correct, the model presented in this paper presents a

viable alternative. To us the high implicit rates of time preference are not

an anomaly. Most of the questions used offered a choice of "bonuses'1 or

"gifts." Subjects might reasonably view such choices as "exceptions" or

"special cases" and thus not governed by rules—of—thumb designed to control

myopic behavior. In fact KSW even provide some evidence for rules—of-thumb

on borrowing since 81.3% of the sample reported that they would not borrow

$1000 in cash even if they could do so at their perceived market rates of

interest (generally less than 20%). The results for Blacks seem hard to

explain only with the upward bias hypothesis. Why should the bias be 20

points higher for Blacks? On the other hand, if the responses are regarded

as true measures of underlying time preference, then the results are consist-

ent with the hypothesis advanced by Banfleld [1970] that Blacks have higher

discount rates.


Pensions and Saving

    A topic of current interest is the effect of social security on saving.

Since this effect is difficult to measure directly, some attention has been

given to the related issue of the effect of pension plans on individual

saving. Our model has a clear prediction here. Since a pension plan

reduces the cost of delaying consumption, we would predict that the
                                    37



 introduction of a mandatory pension plan will increase total saving. Put

 another way, if saving is divided into pension saving and other saving then

 the introduction of positive pension saving will produce less than a complete

 offset in other saving.

      It is difficult to test this prediction for several reasons. Most

 important, there is no clear neoclassical prediction to which it can be

 compared. Some writers have described the neoclassical prediction as a

 complete offset in other saving——i.e., no net effect. But as Feldstein

 [1977] has forcefully argued, this prediction is too simple—minded. For

example, since pensions receive preferential tax treatment, the rate of

return to pension saving is higher. This produces an ambiguous effect on

the rate of savings accumulation.
                                    Similarly the fact that pension benefits

are typically in the form of annuities may produce either more or less

saving depending on which of two effects is larger. Feldstein also
                                                                     points
out that even if the individual wants to completely offset his pension

saving it may be impossible (or very expensive) for him to do so. Feldstein

concludes that:

     It seems reasonable to believe at this time, on the basis of the
     theoretical analysis and the available evidence, that private
     pensions increase the total asset accumulation of the covered
     employees but by less than the full actuarial value of the pen-
     sions 2'-


     Since our theory just predicts that the offset will be less than the

neoclassical theory would predict (and that prediction is ambiguous) we can

do little more than present the estimates that are currently available and

let the reader judge for himself.
                                   38




     The first studies of this issue were done in the 1960's by Philip Cagan

[1965] and by George Katona [1965]. Although they used different data sets,

they produced similar conclusions. We will briefly summarize Cagan's results.

     Cagan used a sample of respondents to a survey conducted by Consumers

Union of its members. Saving was defined as the family's change in net worth

over the year. Saving was then broken down into discretionary saving, pension

saving and other contractual saving. The issue Cagan wished to investigate

was the effect of pension saving on the two other categories. His results

are summarized in Table 1. As can be readily seen, Cagan got the surprising

result that membership in a pension plan increases other forms of saving.

He attributes this increase to what he calls the recognition effect. That

is, membership in a pension plan increases awareness of retirement needs,

and thus increases other forms of saving.




                                                                                .
      w                                                       w                                                    w

                                                          Table   2



                                   Average Ratio of Components of Saving to Income and
                                     Estimated Rates of Substitution Between Them for
                                            Covered and Not—Covered Households


                                                                                        Rate of Substitution
                                               Average Ratios                                 Discretionary Saving
                                                 (per cent)                                          with

                                                                                  Other
                                                                               Contractual
                                                            Other              Saving with                 Other
         Sample                  Discretion—   Pension   Contractual             Pension      Pension   Contractual
       Households                ary Saving    Saving       Saving     Total     Saving       Saving       Saving
Excluding those with gains
    or losses over $1,000
  Covered                           2.8        3.2            11.6     17.6      0.25          0.10        —0.23
  Not covered                       2.3         ——                                 ——            ——
                                                               9.1     11.4                                —0.28

Excluding those with gains
    or losses over $1,000
    and extreme saving
   ratios
 Covered                            2.8        2.8              5.9    11.5      0.28          0.21        —0.73
 Not covered                        2.1         ——              5.7     7.7



               Source:   Cagan [1965] p.21
                                      40




     Cagan's study has been criticized in the literature, especially by
                                                                               S
Munnell [1974]. The most troublesome problem is one of which Cagan was

aware: selectivity bias. Put simply, people with a taste for saving may be

more likely to work for firms which offer a pension plan. This may be a

serious problem, but to our knowledge no one has dealt with it directly.

Munnell also criticizes Cagan on other grounds and replicates his study

using the same data. However, she uses a different measure of saving,

replaces before—tax income with after—tax income, and restricts her analysis

to a subset of the observations that are thought to be more reliable. Her

results are summarized in Table 3.


                                   Table 3

                 Effect of Pension Coverage on Ratio of
                       Nonpension Saving to Income

                                                   Model including
     Sample            Simple Model            Socioeconomic Variables

     Total                —0.005                       —0.008
                          (0.7)                        (1.2)

     Ages:
      30—40               —0.004                      —0.006
                          (0.4)                        (0.7)

      40—54                0.001                      —0.002
                          (0.1)                        (0.2)

      55—65               —0.02                       —0.03
                          (0.9)                        (1.2)

    Source: Munnell [1974] p. 92 (numbers in parentheses are t—values)

     The numbers in Table 3 are the coefficients of a pension dummy in a

regression in which the dependent variable was the nonpension saving rate.

As can be seen, the positive effect found by Cagan is no longer present, but

no significant offset is found either. The only remotely significant effect
                                   41



was in the 55—65 age group where those in a pension plan had saving rates

lower than nonmembers by 3%. Even here the t value is only 1.2. A reason-

able conclusion to draw from this study would be that (except for those near

retirement) pensions increase saving by their entire value. For those near

retirement the increase may be less than the total amount going into the

pension plan.

     These results are clearly consistent with our model. If the true offset

is nearly zero then this is clearly less than any prediction based on a neo-

classical model. Even the finding of a positive offset for older workers is

consistent with our theory. As retirement gets closer it will become more

salient and saving will become easier.   (Many find it easier to diet in the

spring since bathing suit weather is getting close)

     Another more recent study by Munnell [1976] finds larger offsets. How-

ever, this study has severe data limitations. The amount saved via pensions

is unknown, so a pension dummy must be used exclusively, and the sample is

limited to men over age 45. Furthermore the results are not robust. The

estimates are reported for two different time periods and differ greatly.

In fact the estimate for the latter period implies that those having pensions

reduce their other saving by an amount three times the average value of

pension contributions in the U.S. in that year. Also, the results change

dramatically when an alternative specification is used. These problems make

it difficult to evaluate Munnell's new findings.

     Perhaps future work on this issue will provide further evidence that

can be used to test our model. At the present time, however, we find the

results supportive.
                                                                               .
                                    42



VII.   __
       Summary

       We now briefly recapitulate our argument. We have Investigated inter—

temporal choice as a problem in the economic theory of self—control. The

paradox of dynamic inconsistency discussed by Strotz and others is obviously

a self—control phenomenon, as Strotz's discussion seems to imply. But as

the quotation that began our article states, self—control itself is paradox-

ical unless some kind of multi—self model of man is adopted. We have intro-

duced self—control to the formal model of intertemporal choice by modeling

man as an organization——with a planner and many doers. Conflict occurs

because the doers are myopic (selfish). This conflict is fundamentally

similar to the agency relationship between the employer and the employees,

and individuals use many of the same strategies that organizations adopt to

deal with their "conflicts of interest." These strategies can involve doer

(employee) discretion while their incentives have somehow been altered or

they may entail the implementation of preconunitment (a rule) to avoid the

doer (employee) decision process altogether.

       The close correspondence between the solutions to control problems

adopted by organizations and individuals provides strong support for our

model. Though our model has been nontraditional, our tools have been

strictly traditional. Formally, our model closely resembles that used by

Ross [8] in his study of the theory of agency. Finally, we note that ours

is a theory of rational behavior, just as Ross's theory is of profit maxi-

mizing behavior.




                                                                               .
                                      43



                                   Footnotes


     1There are precedents in the literature. Adam Smith [1759] used a two-
self model in his Moral Sentiments. His impartial spectator corresponds to
our planner. Bihm—Bawerk [1891] discusses self—control in his Positive
Theory of Capital. We cite some passages in Sectionl. More recently
Schelling used the notion of precoinmitment In a game theoretic setting in
his Strategy of Conflict [1960] and has very recently proposed a two—self
model quite similar to ours (Schelling [1978]). Buchanan [19751 has also
discussed the rationality of self—imposed rules in a collective choice
context. The planner/doer model was first proposed in an early draft of
Thaler [1977].

     2Strotz [1955] p. 173.

     3Strotz [1955] p. 177.

     4Bihm—Bawerk [18911 p. 253.

     5B5hm—Bawerk [1891] p. 257.

     6Strotz [1955] p. 178.

     7Strotz [1955] p. 178.

     8Strotz [1955] p. 179.

     9Mclntosh [1969] p. 122.

    101n addition to Strotz, this literature includes Blackorby, Nissen,
Primont and Russel [1973], Hammond [1976], Peleg and Yaari [1973], Pollak
[1968], and Yaari [1977].

    11Strotz [1955], P. 179.
    12
      It is not necessary for our doers to be completely selfish. We make
this assumption because it is the extreme case and it makes the analysis
simpler. However, the model can easily be generalized to allow for some
consumption externalities among the doers. The only essential feature is
that the doers value current consumption relatively more than the planner.

    '3For simplicity the interest rate has been suppressed. Its inclusion
would add nothing of substance to the analysis.
    14                                                             .
         Note that while
                     .
                         rules may be adopted either to save on decision-making
costs or to mitigate a control problem, it is usually quite easy to distin-
guish between the two cases. Could institutionalized saving be explained
simply as a device to reduce decision—making costs? No. If this were the
case then individuals who joined such plans would expect to save the same
amount, on average, as they would without the plans. But clearly people
join such plans expecting to save more. Has anyone ever joined a Christmas
Club because he always had too much money saved up for gift giving?
                                   44



    15For a discussion of agency costs see Jensen and Neckling [1976]. For
                                                                                .
a more formal treatment see Ross [1973].

    '6Mischel [1974] P. 287.
    17
         See Ainslee [19751.

    '8Thjs idea has been suggested by Scitovsky [19761. The importance of
norms in controlling individual behavior is also stressed heavily by Adam
Smith [1759], p. 326.
    19
         Strotz [1955] p. 173.
    20
         Strotz [1955] p. 173.

           point was also made by Böhm—Bawerk. "All three causes of our
underestimate of future utility.. .manifest themselves in extremely different
degrees in different individuals, and even in the same individual at differ-
ent times, according to differences of temperament and mood." B3hm—Bawerk
[1891] p. 257.

    22Scitovsky [1976] has argued that food is both seductive and addictive.
It is seductive in that one is tempted to start even when not hungry and
addictive in that once started it is difficult to stop. He suggests that
the institution of meals is used to deal with these problems. By eating
only at meals one can eat until satiation is reached ((sz = O)/(6ct)).
Fancy or expensive foods are similarly controlled through the institution of
feasts.

   23Kurz, Spiegelman and West [19731   p.   30.

   24Feldstein [1977] p. 17.




                                                                                .
                                      45




                                 References


    Ainslee, C., "Specious Reward: A Behavioral Theory of Impulsiveness
    and Tmpulse Control," Psycholcal Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 4, 1975.
    Banfield, E. The   Unliev ly C1        (Boston: Little Brown) 1970.

    BJackorby, C., Nissen, D., Primont, D., and Russel, R., "Consistent
    Interteinporal Decision Making," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 40,
    No. 3, 1973.

    Bóhm—Bawerk, E., The Positive Theory of Capital translated by
    W. Smart (London: MacMillan & Co.) 1891.

    Buchanan, J., "The Samaritan's Dilemma" in E. Phelps ed. Altruism,
    Morality and Economic Theory (New York: Russell Sage Foundation) 1975.

    Cagan, P., The Effect of Pension P]ans on Aggregate Savings (New York:
    National Bureau of Economic Research) 1965.

    Feldstein, N., "Do Private Pensions Increase National Saving" National
    Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Y186, 1977.

    Hammond, Peter, "Changing Tastes and Coherent Dynamic Choice,"
    Review of Economic Studies, Vol. XLIII(l), No. 133, 1976.

    Jensen, M., and Necking, W., "Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behav-
    ior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure," Journal of Financial
    Economics, Vol. 3, 1976.

    Katona, C., Private Pensions and Individual Saving Survey Research
    Center, Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan 1965.

    Kurz, M., Spiegeliman, R., and West, R., "The Experimental Horizon and
    the Rate of Tirne Preference for the Seattle and Denver Income Maintetiance
    Experiments: A Preliminary Study" SRI International Research Memorandum
    '2l, November, 1973.

Munnell, A., The Effect of Social Security on Personal Savings
(Cambridge: Ballinger) 1974.

-_____       "Private Pensions and Saving: New Evidence" Journal of
Political Economy Vol. 84, October J976.
                                46




                                                                        of
                                                                             .
McIntosh, D., The Foundation of Human Societ), Chicago, University
Chicago Press, 1969.

Peleg, B., and Yaari, N., "On the Existence of a Consistent Course
of Action when Tastes are Changing," Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. 40, No. 3, 1973.

Pollak, R., "Consistency Planning," Review   of   Economic   Studies,
Vol. 35, No. 2, 1968.

Ross, S., "The Economic Theory of the Agency: The Principal's Problem,"
American Economic Review, Vol. LXII, 1973.

Schelling, T., The Strategy of Conflict (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press) 1960.

____________    Egonomics, or the Art of Self—Management, forthcoming
Anerican Economic Review, May 1978.

Scitovsky, T., The Joyless Economy, Oxford University Press, 1976.

Smith, A., The Theory of Moral Sentiments (London: A. Millar) 1759.

Strotz, R., "Myopia and Inconsistency in Dynamic Utility Maximization,"
Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 23, No. 3, 1955—56.

Thaler, R., "Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Behavior," Graduate
School of Management, University of Rochester, Working Paper No. 7717,
1977.

Yaari, M., "How to Eat an Appetite—Arousing Cake," Center for Research
in Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, Hebrew University, Research
Memorandum, No. 26, June 1977.




                                                                             S
