               NBER Working Paper Series




                ALTRUISM IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

           William N. Landes and Richard A. Posner
              University of Chicago Law School




                   Working Paper No.     217




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                         November 1977



                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

Partial support for this research was provided by a grant to the
National Bureau of Economic Research from the National Science
Foundation (No. S0C77—15657). The views set forth herein do not
necessarily reflect those of the National Science Foundation.
                              ABSTRACT



       A classic example of external benefits is the rescue of the

person or property of strangers In high transaction cost settings. To

illustrate, A sees a flowerpot about to fall on B's (a stranger's) head;

if he shouts, B will be saved. A thus has in his power to confer a

considerable benefit on B. The standard economic reaction to a situa-

tion in which there are substantial potential external benefits and

high transaction costs is to propose legal intervention. In the example

given, this would mean either giving A a right to a reward or punishing

A if he fails to save B. Either method, we show, is costly and may

result in misallocative effects. These objections to using the law to

Internalize the external benefits of rescue would be much less imposing

were it not for altruism, a factor ignored in most discussion of

externalities. Altruism may be an inexpensive substitute for costly

legal methods of internalizing external benefits, though this depends

on the degree of altruisitu, the costs of rescue, and the benefits to

the rescuee. Although the general legal rule is not to reward the

rescuer (nor to impose liability), the law recognizes the fragility of

altruism and entitles the rescuer to a reward in certain instances.

These include rewards to professional rescuers on land (normally a

physician) and to rescuers at sea. In both instances the costs of

rescue are likely to be sufficiently high to discourage rescue unless

the rescuer anticipates compensation.

                                        —— W. M. Landes and R. A. Posner
                     ALTRUISM IN LAW AND ECONOMICS

                William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner*



    The use of economics to understand the legal system has been

growing rapidly. This new field of applied economics is worthwhile

for its own sake in that the legal system is an important part of the

social system. But it is also interesting for its potential feedback

into the analysis of economic problems in other fields. For example,

the analysis of the social costs of crime has led to a change in the

thinking of economists about the monopoly problem.1 And recent work on

private law enforcement appears to have broad implications for the prob-

lem of employee discipline within a firm.2 This paper will examine

another area where the economic analysis of law appears to have implica-

tions for broader economic questions; we shall discuss the economic

analysis of the law of rescue and explore its relevance to a variety of

economic questions not limited to the "law and economics't field.

    Economists have discussed altruism——which we will initially define

as any transfer that is not compensated——mainly irt relation to transfers

within the family, and secondarily in relation to gifts to charity.3

Another important area of altruistic activity, however, concerns the

rescue of the person or property of strangers. One reads in the news-

papers about the passerby who jumps into the lake to save a drowning

swimmer——and about the passerby who does nothing to assist the screaming

victim of a criminal assault. The question of how to explain either

kind of conduct from the standpoint of economics is a challenging one.

An examination of the legal regulation of rescue may provide clues to

its answer.
                                                                      —2—
                                    I.

     The peril that invites rescue provides a perfect example of

 external benefits. A sees a flowerpot about to fall on B's (a stranger's)

 head; if he shouts, B will be saved. A thus has it in his power to

 confer a considerable benefit on B. However, it is infeasible for A

 and B to contract for the rescue because of the lack of time for
                4
 negotiation.

     The standard economic reaction to a situation in which there are

 substantial potential external benefits and high transaction costs is

 to propose legal intervention. In the example put, this would mean

 giving A a right to either a public or private (presumably from B) reward

 for the service he renders in saving B; or punishing A if he fails to

 save B. Either form of intervention, however, is apt to be quite costly.

 Where, as in the example given, the rescuer is not engaged in the business

 of rescue, the appropriate reward, which from the standpoint of economics

 depends on the opportunity costs of A's time and his expected losses

 resulting from the dangerousness of the rescue, would be costly to

 compute. And if the optimal reward was low (because the rescue entailed

 little cost to A), the costs of computation and enforcement of A's legal

claim would exceed the pure reward component, resulting in misallocative
           5
effects.
    The costs of legal intervention are in one important respect reduced

under a system of liability for nonrescue (as distinct from a reward for

rescue), for damages need to be computed only in cases where the rule of

liability is violated and these occasions may be few if compliance with

the rule is widespread. In contrast, the reward approach would require

compensation in every case in which a rescue was effected. The liability

'approach, however, creates another cost: it operates as a tax on activities
                                                                     —3—


in which a person may be called upon to attempt a rescue, and like any tax

will cause people to substitute away from those activities. This could

result in too few potential rescuers, again leading to excessive safety

precautions by potential rescuees.6

    The foregoing objections to using the law to internalize the external

benefits of a rescue would be much less imposing were it not for altruism,

a factor ignored in most discussion of externalities. Altruism may be an

inexpensive substitute for what we have seen are costly legal methods of

internalizing external benefits——though this depends, of course, on the

degree to which altruism will actually motivate rescue.

    Becker's analysis of altruistic giving emphasizes wealth disparities

between the donor and donee.7 This emphasis follows from the principle

of diminishing marginal rates of substitution——i.e., the greater the donor's

wealth relative to the donee, the greater the amount the donor is willing

to give up at the margin in exchange for a dollar increase in the donee's

wealth. The rescue setting presents a dramatic, if unexpected, example

of wealth disparities. At the moment when the flowerpot is about to

crash down on B's head, and kill him, A, though he presumably does not

know what B's wealth was before the flowerpot toppled over, does know that

B's expected wealth is now very small and that his own wealth, however

slight, is almost certainly much greater than B's. Moreover, if the cost

to A of effecting the rescue is very small (the cost of a shout), A can

transfer wealth to B at a very low cost to himself. Thus, even though

A presumably values a dollar to himself much more highly than he values a

dollar to B, because they are strangers, the rescue may still be a

"profitable" transaction for A. Suppose that A considers a dollar to be
                                                                            -.4—




worth   a dollar in his own   possession   but only 1 cent in B's posses-

sion (though if it were not a rescue setting, i.e., if their wealth were

more equalized, A might value a dollar in B's possession at only .01 cent
instead of 1 cent). Nonetheless, if A can save B's life at a cost

of a dollar, and thereby confer a benefit on B that A can guess is

worth several hundred thousand dollars to B, the transfer will increase

A's utility though he receives no compensation from B or anyone else.

The "leverage"   that A obtains by being able to increase B's wealth
very greatly at little cost to himself is the counterpart to the matching
grant   in the conventional charity context, which reduces the cost of

a gift      to the donor below the dollar amount received by the donee.

    The above analysis fails to explain why A derives           utility from

the welfare of a complete stranger. This question has generally beerL

elided in economic discussions of altruism; it is assumed that family

members (say) have interdependent utility functions but the source of

the interdependence is not investigated. But once it is observed that

gifts are by no means limited to family members, the source of this

component of the utility function becomes difficult to accept as a

matter of pure assumption.

    The biologists have done more work on this question than the

 economists. They have shown that altruism may increase the likelihood

 of the altruist's genes surviving in the competition among populations.

 If insect A saves B from some peril, this means B will be alive to save

 A should he find himself in danger. This "reciprocal altruism" may enhance

 the survivorship of the group to which A and B belong relative to that

 of some nonaltruistic insect group.8 A closely related concept (call it
                                                                    —5—


"gene survival") comes into play where, say, A in our example dies while

saving B. A and B may share some of the same genes and B's survival may

contribute more to the chances for the survival of their common genetic

endowment than A's (e.g., if A is B's parent and A is no longer capable

of reproducing but B is).9

   Reciprocal altruism may explain some, but surely today only a very

small, fraction of rescues of strangers. In small communities, the person

you rescue, even if a stranger, may   indeed   be a potential rescuer. But

in modern urban communities the probability that you are saving someone

who will someday reciprocate will often be very close to zero, if he is

indeed a stranger. To be sure, the "stranger" may be carrying some of

your genes. But this possibility will often be as or more remote than

the possibility that he will someday rescue you. Thus, the likelihood

that the nonaltruist will be "weeded out" in the competition within or

among modern societies is slight.

    If we emphasize simply the large discount that the potential rescuer

will apply to a stranger's welfare in deciding how much cost to incur in

rescuing him, the biological analysis of altruism is helpful. But the

analysis seems to imply not only that the discount will be large, but that

normally it will be so large that only a small fraction of cost—justified

(i.e., where the costs to the rescuer are less than the benefits to the

victim) rescues would be attempted.

    A possible alternative to the biological approach is to emphasize

the recognition factor in rescues. The fact that most charitable donations

are not anonymous and, indeed, that many donors seem quite avid to obtain

publicity for their gifts (as where a university chair Is named after the

donor) suggests that the desire for publicity or recognition is an
                                                                —6—



important factor in charitable giving. Rescuers, too, get their names in

the newspapers and this may be the "real" reason why they rescue complete

strangers.

   But this analysis may appear merely to push the inquiry back one

step: why do donors, whether of money or services, receive favorable

public recognition? Presumably, this results from a public sense, however

dim, of altruism as an economizing force (i.e., a low—cost method of

internalizing external benefits, compared to legal intervention). Notice

that this analysis does not require that anyone be in fact altruistic

in the sense that he derives utility from making a transfer to a stranger.

Conceivably everyone who makes such a transfer does so not out of altruism

but to obtain a reward which consists of favorable publicity.

   The importance attached to the recognition factor is relevant to

shaping public policy toward rescues. If it is deemed a substantial

motivating force in rescues, this would argue against creating liability

for failure to rescue. One effect of liability is that the successful

rescuer will no longer receive as much favorable public attention, because

the public will assume he acted simply out of fear of liability. This

increases the tax effect of the liabiLity approach in discouraging

potential rescuers.

                                  II.

    Although the basis for altruistic impulses toward strangers in

peril is obscure, the existence of the impulse is verified by the numerous

instances in which rescues have occurred where neither reciprocal altruism

nor gene survival could provide a plausible motivation. The fragility of

such impulses——a clear implication of the biological analysis——has also

been recognized by the law. Generally the law does not rely on altruism
                                                                —7—


to internalize external benefits where the costs to the rescuer are great.

For if the rate at which the potential rescuer equates his costs to the

benefits to the person saved is very low (e.g., it takes $100 in benefits

to the person saved to compensate the rescuer for incurring a cost of 1),

it will follow that altruistic rescues are unlikely to occur in cases

where the costs of rescue are large.

    Two examples will illustrate the law's recognition of this point.

Although the ordinary rescuer is entitled to no reward, the professional

(normally a physician) is entitled to collect his standard fee from the

person rescued in the high transaction costs setting (e.g., no negotiation

is possible because the victim is unconscious). Not only is the physician's

opportunity cost of time higher than that of the average non—professional

rescuer, but, because of his greater knowledge of medical treatment, he is

expected to spend more time with the rescued person (treating him, as distinct

from simply calling an ambulance). Thus the total costs of rescue to the

physician are apt to be much higher than those borne by the non—professional.

(To some extent, however, the greater benefit normally conferred by the

professional rescuer's more extensive services may offset the added cost.)

The costs of computing the reward, moreover, are relatively slight because

the physician's fees for similar services are readily discoverable.

    The second example is rescue at sea. Normally this is undertaken by

commercial operators and (especially in cases where the vessel or its cargo,

rather than just passengers and crew, are salvaged) at substantial cost.

So one is not surprised that a successful rescue at sea entitles the rescuer

to a reward——and that the rescuer's right is most firmly established where

it is property rather than lives that is rescued (as mentioned, the cost of

pure life salvage is normally much less than that of property salvage and

the normally greater value of lives versus property increases the likelihood
                                                                      —8—



of an altruistically motivated rescue of lives).10 An additional factor

is that to the extent rescue is undertaken by firms operating in a competitive

market, and this is usually the case at sea, the costs of altruism to the

rescuer tend to be very great; the firm's very survival may be at stake

because altruism implies the bearing of uncompensated costs that a non—

altruistic competitor would avoid. A closely related point is that altruism

is not a trait with positive survival value in a competitive market. On

the contrary, competition will tend to weed out the altruistic seller,

just as it tends to weed out any other type of high—cost seller.

    Given that legal intervention and altruism are substitute methods

of encouraging the internalization of the external benefits of rescues

in emergency situations, the question naturally arises whether studying

the pattern of legal intervention in rescues might provide a clue to

variations over time or across societies in the level of altruism.

We have compiled a list (available on request) of the countries (and single

U.S. state——Vermont) that impose liability for failure to rescue,

by date of first imposition of liability. The task of explaining this

ordering is a formidable one and we are not able to offer more than

conjecture. It may, however, be significant that no law imposing liability

for nonrescue has been found prior to 1867. This may reflect the fact that

in a pre—urban society reciprocal altruism may provide an adequate sub-

stitute for legal coercion to rescue.

    Another suggestive feature of our list is the predominance of fascist

and communist states among the early adopters of liability for nonrescue.

Liability for failure to rescue is a form of conscription for social service

which would seem congenial to a state that already regards its citizens'

time   as   public rather than private, property. It is perhaps not accidental
                                                                   —9—


that the first (and thus far only) U.S. state to impose liability for non—

rescue is Vermont, which has the third highest tax rate (after Alaska and

New   York)   in the U.S.

                                   III.

      Thus far we have discussed altruism as a substitute for law in

internalizing external benefits. But why shouldn't it equally be a

substitute for law in internalizing external costs? Indeed, if we do not

need a law to compel rescues, why do we need, for example, a law to compel

drivers to avoid running down pedestrians?

      The reason would appear to lie in the significant discount the driver

is likely to attach to the pedestrian's benefits and the high cost of

accident avoidance (e.g., damage to one's car and personal injury, or the

cost of altering one's behavior at an earlier stage, such as driving at

a slower speed, to avoid situations in which an accident is imminent).

To be sure, when these costs are low, even a relatively small degree of

altruism will be sufficient to induce the driver to avoid the accident.

But when these costs are substantial, though not as large as the benefits

to the pedestrian, altruism is unlikely to be an adequate method of

internalizing the pedestrian's losses and hence a liability rule will

be required to generate optimal accident avoidance.

      Why, therefore, doesn't society impose liability only when the costs

of avoidance are high (though still less than the victim's benefits) and

rely on altruism alone to deal with low—avoidance—cost accidents? This

approach would be symmetrical to the treatment of compensation in the rescue

setting. However, the principal objections to compensation in the low—cost

rescue case——the cost of computing the reward, the cost of transacting

between the parties, and the possible use of costly legal proceedings to
                                                                —10—



enforce one's right to a reward——are not present when the question is

whether to impose liability in the low—avoidance—cost accident situation.

Here a liability rule, if effective, will be a relatively costless device

because the accident will be deterred.
                                                                 —11—

                               Footnotes


*professor of Economics and Professor of Law respectively, University of
Chicago Law School, and members of the Senior Research Staff, National
Bureau of Economic Research.


    This paper is based on a larger on—going study supported by the Law
and Economics Program at the University of Chicago Law School, and by a
grant to the National Bureau of Economic Research from the National Science
Foundation for research in law and economics.


1. See Cordon Tullock, "The Welfare Costs of Tariffs, Monopolies, and
    Theft," Western Econ J, June 1967, 5, 224—34 and Richard A. Posner,
    "The Social Costs of Monopoly and Regulation," J Pol Econ, August
    1975, 83, 807—27.


2. See Gary S. Becker & George J. Stigler, "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance,
    and Compensation of Enforcers," J Legal Studies, January 1974, 3,
    1—18.


3. See Gary S. Becker, "A Theory of Social Interactions," J Pol Econ,
    November/December 1974, 82, 1063—93.


4. Actually, the basic cause of the high transaction costs here is not the
    limited time but, as in more conventional high—transaction—cost cases,
    the number of relevant parties: there are simply too many potential
    rescuers for B to identify and negotiate with before he ventures on
    his walk.


5. If, for example, the gain to B from rescue was $10 and the optimal
    reward was $1 but the cost of computation $100 and was borne by B,
    B might be led to adopt excessively costly safety precautions to
    avoid being in the position of having to reward A for rescuing him.
    Placing the cost on the taxpayer would have different, but not
    necessarily less serious, misallocative effects.
                                                                  —12—




6. For a more complete analysis of the costs and benefits of compensation
      and liability rules in the rescue setting see William M. Landes and
      Richard A. Posner, "Salvors, Finders, Good Samaritans, and Other
      Rescuers: An Economic Study of Law and Altruism," J Legal Studies,

      January 1978, 7, (forthcoming).


7. See Gary S. Becker, supra note 2.


8. See Robert L. Trivers, "The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism,"
      Quarterly Review of Biology, March 1971, 46, 35—56, and for an
      economic model of reciprocal altruism see Mordecal Kurz, "Altruistic
      Equilibrium" in Economic Progress: Private Values and Policy.


.     See Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene (   ).

10.   For a detailed discussion of professional rescue and some empirical
      analysis of salvage awards see W. Landes and R. Posner, supra note 6,
