               NBER Working Paper Series




            TAXATION AND AGGREGATE FACTOR SUPPLY:
                    PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES

            Michael J. Boskin and Lawrence J. Lau*




                   Working Paper No. 221




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305



                         December 1977


                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

We would like to thank the U.S. Treasury Department, Office of
Tax Analysis, for support of this research through a contract
to the National Bureau of Economic Research. The research
assistance of Louis Garrison is appreciated.

*Harvard University, Stanford University and NBER; and Stanford
 University and NBER, respectively.
                                                            NBER Working Paper 221
                                                                 December 1977




    TAXATION AND AGGREGATE FACTOR SUPPLY: PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES
                 MichaelJ. Boskin and Lawrence J. Lau



                               Abstract



        This paper extends the analysis of aggregate factor supply to

a model which accounts simultaneously for the consumption/saving and

labor/leisure choices. A translog utility maximization model is used

to derive the set of consumption and leisure demand equations; these n

turn are estimated on U.S. aggregate time series data. The empirical

results are striking: we estimate (quite precisely) substantial own

and cross price elasticities for current and future consumption and labor

supply. The implied interest elasticity of saving is approximately 0.4.

The results suggest that previous studies of labor supply and/or consuinp—

tion which have ignored cross—price effects are misspecified. We also

strongly reject the hypothesis that implicit social security had no

effect on factor supply.
            Taxation and Aggregate Factor Supply:
                         Preliminary Estimates*


                   M.J. Boskin** and L.J. Lau**




1.   Introduction

      The life—cycle supply of the factors of production plays

a crucial role in the analysis of many important economic prob-
lems. Among these are the optimal tax treatment of capital
and labor incomes, the appropriate social rate of discount to

be used for public projects, and the construction of indexes

of economic welfare. Consider, for example, the simple model
      U = U (C ,
              w     C
                        r,
                             L
                                 w)                         (1)

where U is a well—behaved utility function depending upon C,

the annual flow of consumption during working years, Cr the
annual flow of consumption during retirement, and L, the
annual flow of leisure during working years.
       Tt then follows from recent analytical results1 that the
efficient (in the sense of minimizing the dead weight loss

from raising a given tax revenue) taxation of C
                                              w and Cr     (L
                                                                V
assumed inherently too costly to attempt to tax) requires
heavier taxation in the period in which consumption is a
weaker substitute for leisure. The tax rates on w
                                                C and Cr
will be equal only if utility is separable between goods and
leisure; in general, the tax rates will be given by11


           =   N21 + N12 + N23                                    (2)

               N21 + N12 + N13

where N1 is the compensated cross elasticity of demand of i

with repsect to the price of j (1 =    C,   2 =   C,   =
                                                           Lu).   Hence,

the optimal tax rate on capital income will be positive

(tw < tr) or negative (t > tr) as N13 is larger or smaller
than N23. Thus, the efficient taxation of capital income de-

pends crucially upon whether or not leisure and consumption

during working years are complements, or at least weaker sub-

stitutes, than leisure and retirement consumption.
      Consider next the appropriate social rate of discount.

Recently, Harberger [1968] and Sandmo and Dreze [1971] have

derived the result that the appropriate social rate of dis-

count is a weighted average of the gross of tax marginal
product of private capital and the net of tax rate of return

to saving, the weights depending upon the interest elasticities
of investment and saving, respectively. Since business and
personal income taxes cause the two rates to diverge sharply,

a positive interest elasticity of saving would result in a

much lower social rate of discount than the gross private mar-

ginal product of capital. In the framework discussed above,

the issue is the elasticity of C with respect to the forward

                                 —2—
              3
price of C.
     Also of interest is the almost total lack of attention

given to future consumption in the calculation of indexes of

economic welfare. For example, saving is generally ignored
in the calculation of constant utility index numbers, i.e.,
conceptually they often should be calculated as constant life-

time utility rather than constant instantaneous utility.

      Fortunately, the empirical analysis of factor supply has
received renewed attention in recent years. The seminal work

of Friedman [1957] and Modigliani [1954; 19631 on life—cycle
consumption and of Becker [1964; 1965] on labor supply broadly
construed to include human investment and nonmarket work re-

kindled interest among empirical economists on these issues.
Curiously, however, empirical studies of the role of interest

rates or forward prices on consumption are few and far be-
tween.4 Most such studies conclude that interest rates have

only a negligible effect on consumption or saving.   Boskin

[1976] has recently criticized must of this work, es-

pecially the structural interpretation of "Denison's—Law,"
the alleged insensitivity of the saving rate to any economic

variables (at full employment). He employed a variety of

data sources and advances in econometric techniques to

estimate an elasticity of private saving with respect to the
real net rate of return of approximately 0.4.


                            —3—
      The purpose of the present paper is threefold First,
to see if this sensitivity of saving with respect to the real

net rate of return continues to obtain when explicit account

is taken of leisure demand and also of the potential influence

of social security; second, to estimate the parameters of the

demand functions expressly derived from maximizing a utility

function of the form of (1); and, third, to begin to expressly

account for such life—cycle phenomena as changes in the age distri-

bution of the population. At a subsequent date we hope to be
able to use the estimates to draw some provisional conclusions

about the issues discussed above.
      Toward this end, we present In section 2 our basic model,

its properties and estimating equations.
      Section 3 discusses the data used in this study, i.e.,

the national income and wealth accounts developed by Jorgenson
and Christensen [19721 and estimates of forward prices, etc.,

developed by the authors.
      Section 4 reports our preliminary empirical results.
They are indeed striking. While many refinements are still

to be made, our preliminary results strongly reject the
structural interpretation of "Denison's—Law." Our estimates

suggest that the consumption saving choice is strongly in-
fluenced by relative prices including the forward price of

future consumption. Our estimates, which appear to be


                          —4—
measured quite precisely, suggest that leisure and future con—

sumption are much stronger substitutes than leisure and current

consumption.
      Finally, section 5 concludes with some provisos and a

long list of extensions, refinements and improvements we hope

to make relative to these preliminary results.




                             —5—
2. The General Model

        A. The Direct Utility Function:
        We assume that each consumer unit (an individual or a

household) has a utility function of the form:


                            t, A, D, T(A, t) — A, R(t) — A,   s)
U(L1, C1, L, C2, B
where     L1 =   quantity   of leisure in period 1.

          L2 =   quantity   of leisure in period 2.

          C1     quantity of consumption in period 1.

          C2 =   quantity   of consumption in period 2.

           B     quantity of bequest.
           t =   calendar   time.

           A = age.

           D     size of the household in equivalent adult con-

                 sumption units.

   T(A, t) =     life   expectancy of an individual (or head of

                 household) at age A in year t.

        R(t) = expected retirement age at time t.
           s = sex of individual or head of household.

As a first pass, we make three simplifying assumptions:
(1) R(t) is given exogenously, that is, it is not a choice

           variable of the consumer unit;

(2) L2
           is assumed to be fixed and equal to L, that is, the
           consumer unit supplies no labor in the second



                                    —6—
             (post—retirement) period.
(3) B and C2 will be treated as a composite commodity.



        B. Utility Maximization:

        The consumer unit is assumed to maximize utility with

respect to L1, C1, and C2,               subject to a wealth constraints



        pC1 + pC2
                           =        (1 —u)w1( — L1) +   + (1


where
             — wage rate.

         p —   effective    tax rate on labor income.

               price of consumption in period 1.
         c
               forward price of consumption in period 2.



        W = private      wealth.
         p

        W social security wealth.

         A     "discount" factor associated with social security

               wealth.

As usual, one can transform the budget constraint into the

canonical form:
                  c*           c*
        wL1 + p1 C1 + p2 C2 =            1


where


                                         —7—
      *—              (1 —
       =
      1
               (1 —1)w1i + W + (l—X)W5

                              C
      c*_                    p1
     p1 =                —
               (1 -1.t)w1L + W + (l-X)W9

                              C
       c*_                   p2
      p2 =
               (1 —)w1L + W + (l—X)W5



     C .     The Indirect Utility Function
      Under mild regularity conditions an indirect utility

function of the form:


      V(w ,      pC      C ,t               ,   A    ,   D   ,   T(A,t)   —   A, R(t) —A , s)

exists. If one specifies an indirect utility function, then

the demand functions are given through Roy's Identity as:




      L1 =
                        +
                                 vc*    c*
                                                +
                                                          c* P2
                                                                                     and
                                       P]
                 1




      ci —
           —
               ____w*+
               aw i          ,
                                 av    , c*
                                                i
                                                av


                                                +
                                                 c*

                                                         v c*
                                                                 r2
                                                                                     1= 1, 2




                                                    —8—
      If we assume that the indirect utility function has the

homogeneous translog form, we obtain the linear logarithmic
expenditure system of Lau and Mitchell [1971], which gives
the expenditure shares as:


      PXj =       i    + jk 13ij                        + 8t + 13iAA + 13iT(T, t) — A)



                       + 131R (R(t) — A)                 +                          1=1, ...        ,3

where the subscripts 1 through 3 stand for L1 , C1                                                  ,    and C2

      3                        3                                3                   3
and               =   1;               13.       0, -Vj;                 13it= 0;            13iA
                                                                                                    0;
      1=1                      i=l                              i=1        -        1=1

       3
            13
                 iT
                      =0   '
                                   3
                                         13
                                              iR
                                                 = 0;
                                                         3

                                                         il         is
                                                                         = 0 and 13.     .F.31,
                                                                                        13
                                                                                                          i,j.
      The homogeneous translog indirect utility function is
a homothetic utility function which implies that as total

full wealth increases, holding prices constant, all expendi-
tures will increase proportionally. Whether this is realis-

tic is, of course, an empirical proposition. However, this
assumption may be relaxed through the introduction of

nonhomogeneity parameters such ag and                                               which may be esti-

mated by iterative or search methods. On the first pass we
maintain the homogeneity assumption; however, we will relax

it In subsequent work.

                                                             —9--
     In order to implement econometrically the model as des-
cribed in Section 2, we need to be able to relate the current

consumption of each age cohort, which is directly observable,

to the annualized consumption flow during their working life.

One can then aggregate across age cohorts to obtain the aggre-

gate current consumption which is again directly observable.

Aggregate current saving then consists of two parts: planned
consumption during the remainder of the working life and

planned consumption (plus bequest) during the retirement
period, both aggregated across age cohorts. Aggregate cur-
rent consumption will then depend on the same variables

which affect the consumption choices of each age cohort and

in addition will depend on the age distribution of the
population in the economy. As a first pass we make the
simplifying assumption that the form of the aggregate cur-
rent consumption function is the same as the individual

age—cohort specific consumption functions in Section 2.    In

a subsequent paper we shall attempt to derive the aggregate
current consumption functions as the sum of individual age—

cohort specific consumption functions rigorously.




                             —10—
3. Data and Estimation Methods
       The data used in this study come from a variety of

sources reporting on aggregate U.S. time series from 1929 to

1969. Most of the data are derived from the complete—and—
consistent—accounting system for the private sector of the

U.S. economy developed by Christensen and Jorgenson [1972].
These data include information on private income, consumer

expenditure, labor compensation, property compensation, rates
of return on capital, etc. We exclude expenditure on durables,
and include the rental flow on durables, in consumption. We
also have developed series on average household size, average

retirement age, life expectancy, human investment, the age
composition of the population, the sex composition of the

labor force, etc.   We are using these data both to attempt to

generate more reasonable life—cycle variables than are usually

used in estimation of consumption functions; the results re-

ported below, as a first step, are intended only to compare
our estimation methods with the usual analysis. We will report
our estimates with the "life—cycle" adjusted variables in a

subsequent paper. We shall also report results which deal
explicitly with human capital accumulation. The results

reported here, like all consumption or saving function esti-

mates which are used to analyze aggregate capital accumulation,

implicitly assume arbitrage between human and nonhuman capital


                            —11 —
 formation.

          The definitions of the key variables used in the analy-
 sis are as follows:

          Current Consumption: As mentioned above, we exclude
 durabj.es expenditure and include their rental flow; in real

 per capita terms, as are all other aggregate values.

          Wealth: Ando—Modigliani market value of private non-
human capital stock.

          Social Security Wealth: Feldstejn's social security
wealth series, as used by Barro [1977].

       Wage rates: After—tax wage rates, adjusted for changes
in labor force composition; see Jorgenson and Christensen

[1972].

          Forward Price of Future Consumption: The forward price
of future consumption is defined as

                               -rT
                    P2 = P1e

where r Is the real after—tax rate of return on capital P1 is

the current price Index and T is the length of time between

saving and dissaving. BoskIri [1976] discusses alternative
estimates of the expected long—run real after tax rate of

return on capital. Alternative estimates yield results
similar to those reported below. In the results reported
below T is takaito be twenty years. The results are quite


                                —12—
robust vith respect to variations in T in the range ten to

thirty years.
         Leisure Consumption: Annual hours available minus

average hours of work. In the estimates reported below,
available hours are set at 4000; we also allowed this parameter

to vary in increments of 500 hours; the results were similar

to those reported below. Ideally, the hours available repre-
sent total hours in a year less time necessary to maintain

human capital (e.g. sleeping and eating). Further, we are
unable with these data to separate nonmarket work from true
leisure and this should be kept in mind in interpreting the

results below.
         Further recall that these are preliminary estimates.

Our goal, ultimately, is to develop and implement more
theoretically sound measures of the life—cycle variables under

study, including human investment, permanent income or wealth,

etc. In the present paper our goal is the much more modest
one of analyzing labor supply and consumption decisions
jointly. Since many consumption and labor supply functions
have been reported which ignore cross price effects, we hope
 to begin to examine the full set of own and cross—price
 effects. After all, one reason for working is to earn income

 in order to save for future, especially retirement, consump-

 tion.


                              —13-
       The estimation of the system of consumr demand
equations discussed in section 2 imposes several restrictions

on the coefficients. In particular, adding up


                          =o
                   j
and symmetry

                   ij =   ji
are implications of utility maximization. The latter restric-
tion constrains the same parameters in separate equations to the same

values. We employ an iterative search procedure to estimate
these parameters by least squares. Of course, the prices and

income are potentially endogeneous. Indeed, Boskin's [1976]
estimates of the interest elasticity of saving double when he

allows for such endogeneity. We shall report the results of
two stage least squares estimates of our translog demand sys-

tem In a subsequent paper.
       With these provisos concerning the data and estimation

methods in mind, we turn to a discussion of our empirical

results.




                               —14—
4. Empirical Results

       With the provisos mentioned above In mind, we present
in tables 1 and 2 our preliminary empirical results, estimates

of the parameters of consumer demand equations based on aggre-

gate U.S. time series data. Table 1 reports our results ex-

cluding any wealth effect of social security. The equations
perform quite well by conventional measures. The estimated
standard errors of each regression are a small fraction of the

mean values of the dependent variables. The parameter esti-
mates do not violate any restrictions of consumer theory. The
estimated standard errors for almost all of the coefficients

are less than one— tenth of their respective point estimates,

i.e., virtually all of the own—and cross—price effects and

expenditure shares are estimated quite precisely.
       Table 2 reports our results including full social

security wealth in the budget constraint, i.e., A = 0.   Again,

the estimated standard errors of the regression are a minute

fraction of the mean values of the dependent variables. Almost
all of the coefficients are estimated quite precisely. Com-
paring the coefficients in tables 1 and 2, we see that the

introduction of social security wealth does not change the

estimated own and cross price effects very much.

       It is instructive to test formally the hypothesis of no


                            -15—
social security effect on consumption or labor supply during
the period under study. This may be done via the usual likeli-

hood ratio test. As reported in table 2, the test of A = 1, no

effect of social security, versus A     0, is rejected with a

statistic twice the critical value. We also allowed A to vary

from 0 to 1 in Increments of 0.1. The maximum value of the

likelihood function occurred t A = 0.   While these data suggest

that social security did indeed influence aggregate factor
supply in the period between the 1930's and 1960's, two

cautionary notes are in order. First, our analysis suggests

that social security affected aggregate factor supply. Feld—
stein [1974a1 suggests that social security reduced private

saving. Boskin [1977] suggests it accelerated earlier retire-
ment. Our results do not distinguish between effects on labor
supply and consumption, and hence cannot be viewed as support

of either of these propositions.
       Second, and conceptually much more important, these

data refer to the period when social security was first

starting up and during which an enormous intergenerational
transfer of resources was made to the first few cohorts of

retirees under social security. It may well be that there

was a corresponding reduction in private transfers, as dis-

cussed, for example, by Barro [1975]. A large percentage of

                             —1 (; —
such transfers might well have occurred outside normal market

processes and hence escape the usual types of national income

accounting. More importantly, once the social security system
matures, it may well be that each cohort will get back in

benefits approximately its contribution plus interest and that

social security will have no effect whatsoever on private

savings decisions. Extrapolating from the transition phase

therefore may be quite misleading. The statement that social

security appears to have had an impact on aggregate factor

supply in this period is not the same as saying that it changed

the steady—state form of the saving function and is consistent
either with the view that it continues to affect private factor

supply or with the view that in the steady state it is neutral.

       Since the coefficients of the translog consumer demand

system are not easily directly interpretable, we present in
table 3 some of the more interesting own and cross price

elasticities.6 Note first that these are functions of the

parameters and we may thus compute their point estimates and
estimated asymptotic standard errors. Their estimated t—ratios
range from five to forty, so all are measured quite precisely.
       Note first that the forward price of future consumption,

which is developed from estimates of the long run expected real
net of tax rate of return on capital, has a substantial effect

on current consumption. When translated into the more usually


                           —17—
discussed net real rate—of--return elasticity of private saving,

our estimate is 0.4. This is quite similar to the estimates

obtained by Boskin [1976], who estimated consumption functions
only. While hardly enormous, it substantially exceeds the
commonly accepted conjecture in the "Denison's Law" tradition

of a zero elasticity of the private saving rate with respect

to any economic variable at full employment.
       Even this modest interest elasticity of saving has
drastic implications for such issues as the relative efficiency

and incidence of income and consumption taxes, the appropriate
social rate of discount, etc. These are discussed in some

detail in Boskin [19761.
       Note also the fact that future consumption is much more

price elastic than present consumption and that the cross
elasticities, while much smaller than the own elasticities,

are hardly negligible. While much more work remains to be

done, as discussed below, these results hint not only that
heavy taxation of capital is Inefficient, but that the optimal
tax rates (see Stiglitz and Boskin [1977]) may even call for

heavier taxes on current than on future consumption (i.e.,
a consumption tax combined with an interest income subsidy).

       We note also that the coefficients imply a slightly back-
ward—bending labor supply function. The total wage elasticity



                              —18—
is about —0.08. This estimate is somewhat less backward—

bending than the estimates of many others (see, e.g., Ashen—
felter and Heckman [1973] and Harberger [1964]). Of course,

the pure substitution elasticity is modestly positive even
in these aggregate data. This may be due to the corrections
for labor force composition; in view of the substantial

evidence of large labor supply elasticities estimated from

household data for wives and the elderly (see, e.g., Boskin

[1977], Rosen [1976], Heckman [1974], etc.), we shall not
push this point too far. Also note the non—trivial cross—
interest rate elasticity for labor supply. While it is
unusual to include interest rates (or forward prices of

future consumption) in labor supply functions, it is not

unreasonable to believe that many workers are earning a

substantial share of their marginal earnings in order to

save for future consumption. These results suggest that
previous estimates of both labor supply functions and con-

sumption functions have been misspecified since they exclude
the cross—price terms.




                              —19—
5.   Conclusions and Caveats


       Our preliminary results prove quite interesting and
promising. We cannot emphasize too strongly that these results
are preliminary. Our ultimate goal is to develop what might
best be called life cycle national accounts (as opposed to

current accounts), to incorporate human capital explicitly into
the analysis and to improve our analytic and econometric

procedures. We feel that we have made some progress in the
results reported here and that these are not without interest
in and of themselves. We are also in the process of dealing
with all of the following issues: better measurement of per-

manent income, consumption and saving in the face of changes in

the (age and household) structure of the population and (sex)
composition of the labor force which render current measures

of these variables suspect; the econometric problems of con-

sistent aggregation, treatment of serial correlation in

simultaneous equation systems, endogeneity of the prices (for
a first step in this direction, see Boskin [1976]); explicit

human investment functions; general nonhomogeneity; more
general models of expectations concerning future incomes; and,

hopefully, the endogeneity of retirement, and separating
bequests from future consumption.




                           —20—
                            Footnotes




       'See, for example, Atkinson and Stiglitz [1976].


       2See Harberger [1964]. If the two periods are of

different lengths (e.g., a work life of forty years and a

retirement life of twenty years), the formula would be
weighted to reflect this difference.

       31n the alternative approach which shadow prices public

investment funds and discounts at the consumption rate of

interest (e.g. Feldstein [1974b1)   ,   the shadow price depends
upon these elasticities.


       4Thus, Break [1974] notes "Unfortunately, empirical

evidence on the Interest elasticity of the saving rate Is
rare


       5See Lau [1977] for a discussion of aggregation across

consumers with different attributes.


       6Evaluated at 1955 values of the variable. The elas-

ticities are quite similar if evaluated at, say, 1969 values.
                                References


Ando, A. and F. Modigliani. "The 'Life—Cycle' Hypothesis of

    Saving: Aggregate Implications and Tests." American
    Economic Review, March 1963.

Ashenfelter, 0 and J. Heckman. "Estimation of Labor Supply

    Functions." In G. Cain and H. Watts, eds., Labor Supply

    and Income Maintenance. Rand McNally, 1973.

Atkinson, A. and J. Stiglitz. "Design of Tax Structure."

    Journal Public Economics, July, 1976.
Barro, R.     "Are Government Bonds New Wealth?". Journal of

    Political Economy, 1975.

________      "Social   Security and Private Saving: Evidence From
    U.S.    Time Series." Unpublished mineo, 1977.
Becker, C. Human Capital, Columbia, 1964.
________       "A Theory of the Allocation of Time." Economic

    Journal, September 1965.
Boskin, M.     "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest."
    National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.

    135, 1976; to appear In Journal of Political Economy,
   April, 1978.

_________     "Social   Security and Retirement Decisions."

    Economic Inquiry, January, 1977.




                                -22-
Break, G. "The Incidence and Economic Effects of Taxation"

    in A. Blinder et al, The Economics of Public Finance,

    Brooklins, 1974.

Christensen, L. and D. Jorgenson. "U.S. Income, Saving and
    Wealth, 1929—69." Review of Income and Wealth, 1972.

Feldstein, M. "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggre-

    gate Capital Assumulation." Journal of Political Economy,

    1974a.

______________   "Financing    in the Evaluation of Public Expendi-

    ture," in W. Smith, ed., Essays On Public Finance and

    Stabilization Policy, North Holland, Amsterdam, l974b.

Friedman, M. A Theory of the Comsumption Function. Prince-
    ton: Princeton University Press, 1957.
Harberger, A. "On Measuring the Social Opportunity Cost of
    Public Funds." In The Discount Rate In Public Investment
    Evaluations. Denver: Western Agricultural Economics Re-

    search Council, 1968.

___________       "Taxation,    Resource Allocation and Welfare,"

     In R. Due, ed., The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes In

     the Federal Revenue System, National Bureau of Economic

    Research, 1964.
Heckman, J. "Shadow Prices, Market Wages and Labor Supply."


                                   —23—
    Econometrica, 1974.
Lau, L. "Existence Conditions for Aggregate Demand Functions:
    The Case of Multiple Indexes," Technical Report No. 249,
    Institute for Mathematical Studies in the Social Sciences,

    Stanford University. Unpublished mimeograph, 1977.
Lau, L. and B. Mitchell. "The Linear Logarithmic Expendi-

    ture System." Unpublished mineograph, 1971.
Modigliani, F. and R. Brumberg. "Utility Analysis and the
    Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross Section

    Data," in K. Kurihara, ed., Post—Keynesian Economics, 1954.
Rosen, H. "Tax Illustion and the Labor Supply of Married

    Women."   Review of Economics and Statistics, May, 1976.

Sandmo, A. and J. Dreze. "Discount Rates for Public Invest-

    ment in Closed and Open Economies," Economica, November,
    1971.
Stiglitz, J. and M. Boskin. "Some Lessons From the New Public

    Finance." American Economic Review, February, 1977.




                             —24—
                                      Table 1



                           Preliminary Estimates of

                      Aggregate Factor Supply Equations

                  (Social Security Wealth Excluded; X=1)




Parameter                                             Estimated Coefficient
                                                  (estimated standard errors
                                                          In parentheses)


                                                              0.2138

                                                             (0.0196)


                                                              0.0875
    LL
                                                             (0. 0062)



                                                             —0.1697
Ll1L
                                                             (0. 012 6)



                                                              0.6138

                                                             (0.0467)


                                                              0.0270
    1l
                                                             (0. 0338)


log of likelihood function                                 105.08

N.B. L2 —         =          +
            82L                  2l
         12 21 =        8L1 + 1l


                                        —25 —
                               Table 2



                         PrelimLnary Estimates of
                   Aggregate Factor Supply Equations

                  (Social Security Wealth Included;AO)




Parameter                                     Estimated Coefficient
                                            (estimated standard errors
                                                in parentheses)


                                                     0.1762

                                                    (0. 0138)


                                                     0.0812
     LL
                                                    (0. 0041)

                                                    -0.1332
Ll       1L
                                                     (0.0106)

                                                      0.5271
     1
                                                     (0. 0529)


                                                      0.0353

                                                     (0. 0399)


log of likelihood function                          108.85

test of no effect of social security:
     — 2 ln X =   7.54   >     = 3.84

                                 —26—
                                Table 3


                       Est imated Elast icities*




                                                       Labor
                               C1             C2
With Respect to:

         w                    0.28           1.11      —0.08

                             (3.07)        (39.46)    (—15.64)


                             —0.89            0.28       0.18
         P1
                            (—6.75)          (3.79)    (10.88)

                              0.52          —1.49      —0.08
         P2
                             (2.87)        (—15.71)    (—3.93)


          R                  —0.54            1.54       0.08

                            (—2.87)         (15.71)     (3.93)




*
    t—statistics   in parentheses.
**
     Allowing
           income to vary with R. The elasticities with
respect to R holding full permanent income constant are similar,
but slightly larger in absolute value.




                                    —27—
