THE PRIVATE AND SOCIAL COSTS OF UNEMPLOYMENT

           Martin S. Feldstein
       NBER and Harvard University

       Working Paper No.     223




 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
           1737 Cambridge Street
      Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138




 This paper has not undergone the review
 accorded official NBER publications; in
 particular, it has not been submitted
 for approval by the Board of Directors.
                        ABSTRACT

     The Private and Social Costs of Unemployment

                   Martin Feldstein

     This short note emphasizes and illustrates two
basic points:
          (1) The private costs of unemployment, i.e.,
the costs borne by the unemployed themselves, vary sub-
stantially and are often extremely low. This low private
cost is an important cause of the permanently high un—
employment rate in the United States.
          (2) The social costs of unemployment, i.e.,
the costs of unemployment to the nation as a whole re-
gardless of how they are distributed, must be judged
by considering the specific policy by which a worker would
be reemployed. It is wrong to regard unemployment as
either without cost (because the unemployed enjoy the
opportunity for job search and leisure) or as having a
cost equal to lost output. Examples are given to show
that output may overstate or understate true social cost,
depending on the options available for reemployment.




     This paper was presented at the American Economic
Association meeting, 28 December 1977, in New York City.
           THE PRIVATE AND SOCIAL COSTS OF UNEPLOYMENT

                         Martin Feldstein*



     Ue do not need a careful quantitative analysis to establish that

the unemployment of seven million workers involves very substantial

private and social costs. Why then should we bother to think about

measuring the cost of unemployment? There are two quite different

reasons. First, by measuring the private costs of unemployment that

are borne by the unemployed themselves, we can better understand why

our unemployment rate is so high. Second, by examining the social

costs of unemployment (i.e., the costs of unemployment to the nation

as a whole regardless of how they are distributed), we can better decide

when the benefits of a reduction in unemployment outweigh the costs of

achieving it. The present paper considers both of these problems, em-

phasizing the conceptual issues rather than presenting specific estimates.

     Because unemployment is so often thought of in aggregate terms,

it is worth emphasizing at the outset that a proper analysis of the

costs of unemployment must begin by disaggregating. The private cost

of unemployment is very large for some of the unemployed but is quite

small for many others. The average private cost of unemployment is

therefore much less relevant than the distribution of such costs.

Similarly, in considering the social costs of unemployment, it is

important to distinguish several kinds of unemployment since the cost

of each type of unemployment and the costs of reducing that unemployment

differ significantly.


*flarvard University and the National Bureau   of Economic Research.
This study is part of the National Bureau's    program of research
on Economic Fitctuations. I am grateful to     the NSF and the NBER
for the support of my research. This paper     has not been reviewed
by the Board of Directors of the NBER.
                                   —2—




                            I. Private Costs



     The   cost   of unemployment that is borne by the unemployed person

himself varies from the overwhelming to the trivial. At one extreme

is the very substantial loss by those who experience a long period of

unemployment with little or no help from transfer payments. At the

other extreme, is the minimal loss of those who are out of work very

briefly and whose lost net income is fully replaced by unemployment

compensation. Although there is a wide range of experience, the typical

spell of unemployment is closer to the "low cost" extreme than to the

high cost extreme. Even now, more than half of the unemployment spells

last four weeks or less. Moreover, more than half of the unemployed

received unemployment compensation. I believe that the relatively low

cost of unemployment in these circumstances is a substantial cause of

our high permanent rate of unemployment.

     The principal reason for the low private cost of unemployment is

the interaction of our tax system and our system of unemployment com-

pensation. It is particularly important to consider these two together.

The income and social security taxes now imply a marginal tax rate in

the neighborhood of 30 percent for a worker in a median income family

It is therefore very significant that unemployment compensation is not

subject to tax.      The combination of a relatively high marginal tax on

earnings and no tax on unemployment compensation implies that unemploy—

iaent benefits replace a very high fraction of lost net income, typically

about two—thirds.
                                     —3—




      An example will illustrate how this occurs. Consider a worker

in Massachusetts in 1977 with a wife and two children. lUs gross

earnings are $140 per week while hers are $100 per week. If he is

unemployed for 10 weeks, lie loses $1400 in gross earnings but only

$279 in net income. Why does this occur? A fall in gross earnings

of $1400 reduces his federal income tax by $226, his social security

tax by $82, and his Massachusetts income tax by $75. Thus, total taxes

fall by $383, implying that net wages are reduced by $1017.

      Unemployment benefits are 50 percent of his wage plus a dependents'

allowance of $6 per child per week. The benefit is thus $82 a week.

Since there is an annual one—week "waiting period" before benefits

begin, nine weeks of benefits are paid for the ten week unemployment

spell. Total benefits are thus $738. The loss in net income is only

the $279 difference between these benefits and the fall in after—tax

wages. The $279 private net income loss is less than 20 percent of

the loss in output as neasured by the gross wage.

      Because of the one—week waiting period, the private cost of

uneraploynent is even lower for an additional week of unenpioyrent.

If he stays unemployed for 11 weeks instead of 13, he loses an addi-

tional $140 in gross earnings but only $16 in net income. Tue private

net   income loss is less than 12    percent of the loss   in output as
mcasiircd by the gross wage. If the individual values his leisure and
non—r.iarket work activities    at even 50 cents an   hour, there is no net

private cost of unemployment!

       The great   reduction   in the private cost of unepployment that results
from this interaction of higi taxes on earnings and the untaxed
                               —4—




unemployment benefits produce substantial adverse incentives that

magnify the cyclical volatility of unemployment and raise the non—

cyclical "baseline level" of unemployment. The most obvious effect

is to increase the average duration of unemployment spells. With

little or no personal cost of a longer period of unemployment, it is

rational for the individual to look for a new job until the potential

gain from additional search is extremely small or to use the low cost

time to do chores at home or just to enjoy a period of vacation. In

addition to increasing the average duration of existing unemployment

spells, the low private cost of unemployment also causes an increase

in the number of unemployment spells. Since workers who quit their

jobs are eligible for benefits in a number of states, the low private

cost of unemployment is responsible for many of the one million

unemployed who quit their last job.

     More significant, however, is the incentive for temporary layoffs.

Approximately half of the unemployment spells that are officially

classified as "job losses" are actually temporary layoffs in which the

unemployed worker expects to return to his original job. In inanu—

facturing, approximately 80 percent of those who are laid off do return

to their original jobs. Our system of unemployment compensation lowers

the cost of such temporary layoffs to both firms and workers, making

unemployment more attractive than accumulating inventories or cutting

prices.

     I have concentrated these comments on unemployment compensation

because this is the most significant program for reducing the private

costs of unemployment. Those who are not eligible for unemployment
                                —5—




compensation often receive other forms of income replacement such as

food stamps, social security and welfare. It is also important to

remember that a very large fraction of the unemployed who do not

receive unemployment compensation are young people who are supported

by their families.

     It is easy to see how our system of taxes and transfers dras-

tically lowers the relative private cost of unemployment and thereby

induces a higher unemployment rate. The real puzzle is why the low

private cost of unemployment does not result in a higher rate of

unemployment. What are the forces of self—restraint that limit the

public's w1llinness to exploit the full opportunities for subsidized

unemployment? And will they continue to be effective In the future?

Public attitudes about accepting transfer payments appear to have been

changing rapidly during the past decade, resulting in the rapid growth

of such things as disability insurance benefits, food stamps and health

insurance payments. The contaousness of social attitudes suggests that

this trend may accelerate in the future. It carries with it an ominous

prospect for unemployment.



                        II. Social Costs



     The social cost of an unertiployiient spell depends of the social

opportunity cost of the unemployed           time. In measuring the

social cost of unemployment, it is therefore crucial to ask "Unemployment

as compared to what?" As economists, we tend to define the opportunity

cost of any resource as its value in the best possible use to which it
                                         —6—




might   be put. But the relevant opportunity cost in the           current   context

is   not this "best allocation" of full employment general equilibriwn
theory. e are interested in the social costs of unemployment in
order to assess the desirability of particular unemployment policies.
Different     policies imply different         opportunity costs for the unemployed
workers.      In each case, we should      compare the particular net social
cost    of unemployment ——    i.e.,    the potential benefit of returning the

unemployed person to work ——          with the    cost of the policy itself.

        The   format of   this session   suggests that all policies to reduce
unemployment      entail increasing inflation,        implying that the relevant

comparison      is between the social costs of        unemployment and the social

costs of inflation. If this were true, the implication would              be quite
dismal    since most economists now agree that a permanent increase in

inflation cannot achieve more than a temporary reduction in unemployment.1

Fortunately,      there are policies for reducing unemployment permanently
that    do not involve increases in inflation. These policies may involve

such costs      as a reallocation of some workers from more productive to
less productive activities, as a reduction in unemployment insurance
protection,      or a redistribution of income with losses by some groups and

gains by others. A proper evaluation of available policies requires

quantifying the costs and benefits of each.

        Before looking at some examples of the social costs associated

with different types of unemployment, it is useful to comment on two

extreme but common views of the social cost o              unemployment. According


11n a growing economy, the present value of the social cost of a
permanent Increase in Inflation can be extremely large relative to the
gain    from a tempo'ary reduction in unemployment; see Feldstein (1977).
                                      —7—




 to one view, unemployment has no social or private cost. The indivi-

 dual's loss of wage income is at least offset by the value of his

 leisure and of the inforaation that he acquires by his job search

 activity. This conclusion is false even if we accept its premise that

 all unemployment is voluntary. The taxes and unemployment insurance

 described above imply a substantial gap between the individual's gross

wage and the value of his time when unemployed. The existence of the

rigidities    that cause involuntary unemployment only strengthens the
reason to reject this view.
     At the other extreme is the view that the loss in wage income
is equal to the social cost of unemployment. This ignores the value
of    the jiidividual's leisure   and of the   information   gained by searching
for a   new job. Iloreover, even if both of these were zero, it would be

wrong to regard the individual's normal or potential wage as a measure

of the    gain that would result from his reemployment without specifying
the   policy that would be used to achieve his reemployment.

       Consider, for example, the case of workers on temporary layoff.

As I noted above, some 80 percent of workers who are laid off by

manufacturing firms soon return to their original jobs at those firms.

Such temporary layoffs are almost completely unknown in Europe and

Japan. This important source of unemployment could be significantly

reduced    if the employer tax that is used to finance unemployment
compensation    were changed to eliminate the current subsidy of excessive

layoffs.     Uhile   I believe that this would he a worthwhile reform, the

benefit    of such a change should not be overstated.        The social cost of

the unemployment that would thereby be         eliminated is not the normal
                                    —8—




wage of these workers or even that wage reduced by the value of their

leisure. A reduction in temporary layoffs would mean more production

for inventory and more spells of below average productivity.

       This example also illustrates the familiar principle of welfare

economics that it may be possible to Identify a good policy in terms

of   the marginal conditions without explicitly evaluating the gains

from the policy. In this case, it seems clear that eliminating the

subsidy that increases temporary layoff unemployment would be a move

in   the right direction even though the value of the gain is unknown.
Although the theory of the second best cautions against this general
line of reasoning, an explicit partial equilibrium calculation    of the

gain   from reducing unemployment is unlikely to be an Improvement in
this regard. An explicit calculation of the social cost of temporary
layoff   unemployment would be of value primarily in deciding whether

the economic gains of the reform outweighed the political costs of

achieving   it.
       Although   the potential wage will generally overstate the social

cost of unemployment, there is an Important case in which it is art

understatement. For young workers, unemployment means not only the

loss of output and earnings but, more important, the missed opportunity

for on—the—job training and experience. The very high unemployment rates

among low skilled youth Is symptomatic of the more serious problem that

the jobs available to them generally offer little opportunity for

training or advancement. The social cost of youth unemployment thus

depends very much on the comtetnplated alternative. If we judge the

social cost of youth unemployment by the type of no—training jobs that
are currently available, the cost is relatively low. But if employ-

ment with useful on—the—job training is a feasible alternative, the

social cost of youth unemployment is substantially greater than the

immediate loss of output.



                            III. Conclusion



     In this short note, I have emphasized two basic points. First,

the private cost of unemployment varies substantially and is often

extremely low. This low private cost is an important cause of the

permanently high unemployment rate in the United States. Second, the

social costs of unemployment must be judged by considering the specific

policy by which a worker would be reemployed.

     In selecting these points for emphasis, I have ignored many of the

issues generally associated with measuring the costs of unemployment.

That is inevitable in a note of this length. In conclusion, however,

I want to call attention to two further costs of a chronically high

unemployment rate that are likely to be of great long—run importance.

     If we do not change the structural causes of our high unemployment

rate, we will face growing pressure to adopt the strategy of some

European countries that supress unenployment by denying firms the right

to lay off workers without government approval and by denying those

workers who lose their jobs the right to decide where and when they will

return to work. In addition, a chronically high unemployment rate will

create strong pressures for expansionary macroeconomic policies that will

serve only to exaccerbate inflation. The loss of freedom in labor
                               —10—




markets and the increase in inflation throughout the economy would
be an extremely high cost to bear for our failure to reform the
incentives and eliminate the barriers that create our unemployment
prol)leUS.
                                —11—




                           References



Feldstein, Martin. "The Welfare Cost of Permanent Inflation and

                   Optimal Short—Run Economic Policy," National

                   Bureau of Economic Research working Paper No.

                   201, 1977.
