   JOB SATISFACTION AS AN ECONOMIC VARIABLE

              Richard B. Freeman
          NBER and Harvard University.


           Working Paper No.       225




     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
               1737 Cambridge Street
          Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                   December 1977

I have benefited from discussions with Robert Pogel,
James Medoff, Larry Summers and from the research
assistance of Laura Nelson and Eric Seiler.
This paper has not undergone the review accorded
official NBER publications; in particular, it has
not been submitted for approval by the Board of
Directors.
     Job satisfaction, while the subject of popular attention, of an extensive

sociology and industrial psychology literature, and of theories of 'alienation,'

has been studied by relatively few economists (see Borjaa, Hamermesh, Flanagan, Straus

and Ulman). Partly, the neglect of job satisfaction reflects professional suspicion

of what may be called subjective variables: variables that measure "what people say"

rather than "what people do." Partly also, economists are leary of what purport to

be measures of individual utility.

     The purpose of this paper is to examine these concerns and evaluate the use of

job satisfaction (and other subjective variables) in labor market analysis. The

main theme is that, while there are good reasons to treat subjective variables gingerly,

the answers to questions about how people feel toward their job are not meaningless

but rather convey useful information about economic life that should not be ignored.

The paper begins with a brief description of the satisfaction questions on major

worker surveys, and then considers the use of satisfaction as an independent and as a

dependent variable. Satisfaction is shown to be a major determinant of labor market

mobility, in part it is argued because it reflects aspects of the work place not

captured by standard objective variable8. Satisfaction is also found to depend

anomolously on some economic variables (such as unionism) in ways that provide insight

into how those factors affect people.




The Job Satisfaction Variable

     To begin with, table 1 reproduces the job satisfaction questions and distributions

of responses from major surveys of workers. The satisfaction questions are quite

similar across surveys, asking for an overall evaluation of job satisfaction, and

invoked similar distributions of responses. Most persons report themselves as
highly or quite satisfied with their jobs, with only a distinct minority of about

ten percent reporting dissatisfaction. While there is some indication in the NLS

longitudinal tapes of declines in satisfaction over time, the Michigan Quality

of Work Surveys show no such pattern.                         -
                                                                            2



        The responses   to satisfaction questions (and other subjective variables that
 lack   a   definite metric) can be scaled in two possible ways in analysis. First,

 they   can be written as n—chotomous variables, taking the value 1 if the individual's
 response     fell into the given category and 0 otherwise. When satisfaction is an

 independent variable, the set of duinies has an a priori ordering of effects, with

 for example the third category having a larger effect than the second (relative to,

 say, the first) and the fourth a larger effect than the third. When satisfaction

 is the dependent variable1 the multinomial probability model can be used to predict

 the effect of various factors on the probability of giving a certain response.

Alternatively, the variable can be rescaled according to a specified symmetric

 probability distribution, such as the standard normal, With      the   unit normal trans-

 formation,     satisfaction becomes a z—score measuring the number of standard deviations
between a given response and the mean. This procedure yields a continuous variable
 that   can be entered as a dependent or independent factor in linear regressions, with

obvious computational advantages over a maximum likelihood multinomial analysis and

will be followed in ensuing empirical work.


Behavioral Consequences of Job Satisfaction

        Do subjective responses to job satisfaction questions contribute to explaining

objective economic behavior? If they do, a case.can be made for including subjective

variables in analyses of economic activity. If they don't, subjective variables can

be safely ignored.

        To determine the relation between job satisfaction and overt behavior, the effect

of job satisfaction ott the behavior most likely to be affected by it, quits, has been

estimated using the NLS and Michigan PSID longitudinal data tapes. These tapes have

the advantage of linking satisfaction in one year to future mobility, providing a fix

on lines of causality and on the predictive power of the variable that is not possible

with cross—section data. The impact of satisfaction and other determinants of
                                                                         3.
wbility is studied in terms ofa logistic probability function, linking the probability

(F) of quitting a job between years t and s to the characteristics of the person and

their initial job in t(Xi). including job satisfaction:

      (1) P(Q)    l/(l_exPEBixi)
The X variables include standard measures of the objective position of the worker

(age, race, sex education, wage, occupation in the initial job) and ignore for

simplicity (and to avoid simultaneity issues) the additional information from the

new jobs to which job changers move.

      Maximum likelihood estimates of the effect of job satisfaction, measured as

a standard normal variable, and of several objective economic factors on quits are

given in table 2, using the logistic form. All of the calculations are limited

to wage and salary workers who remained in the labor forcein the period considered

and who reported all the relevant information about their base year job. Column 1

records the frequency of quits in the three samples. Column 2 records the estimated

logistic coefficient for the Z—score of satisfaction, scaled so that positive values

reflect greater satisfaction; columns 3—5 give the coefficients for ln wages,

age, and years of tenure with an enterprise. Column 6 lists the other

control variables in the calculations, as specified in the table note, while column 7

records the fit of the equation in terms of minus the log of the likelihood function.

      The calculations show that, diverse other factors held fixed, the subjective

level of job satisfaction is a significant determinant of the probability of quitting,

particularly in the NLS samples, where it obtains large coefficients 4 to 5 times the

standard error. The magnitude of the effect of satisfaction on the probability of

quitting can be estimated by differentiating the logistic form (1) with respect to
the variable, yielding dP/dXi   BiP(1P) which makes the effect of change depend on

the level of P. At the mean level of quits, a one—standard deviation change in

satisfaction changes the probability by •03 in line 1, by .fl12 in line '! and by .040

in line 3, afl of which are siteable relative to the means.   Pot comparison, the

effect of a standard deviation in the variable most extensively studied by economists
                                                                       4


wages, can also be estimated. Multiplying the logistic coefficients in table 2

 by P(l—P) and the standard deviation of the variable yields the following impact

 parameters: .024 (line 1), .047 (line 2), and .067 (line 3). By this metric

 satisfaction has a much greater effect than wages on quits in the older male NLS

 data set and only a moderately weaker effect in the PSID and younger male sets.

     Estimates of the effect of satisfaction on two other measures of mobility;

 employer initiated separations and total separations, consisting of quits and employer

 actions,.were also made using the same equations as in table 2. The results

 showed.tn1y slight effects of satisfaction on employer initiated separations (the

 largest logistic coefficient was —.09 with a standard. error of .06 in the older male

 NLS), but effects on total separations similar to those in the table. By

 affecting quits, satisfaction alters the overall level of mobility.

      While predictive power, statistical significance, and magnitude of effects are

not the sole measures of the value of a variable, the evidence on quits in table 2 does

provide a clear answer to the question with which we began: it shows that subjective

expressions of job satisfaction, are significantly related to future overt behavior,

which makes satisfaction at least potentially analytically useful.


Objections and Evaluation

     Granting that satisfaction contributes to' predicting behavior and is not meaning-

less, objections can still be raised about itB value in social analysis. First, it may

be argued that satisfaction is largely a measure of intentions to'stay or quit (which

could be bettor captured by a direct "do you intend to quit" question) and thus that

the observed impact of the variable simply relates actions to intentions to act,

which does not greatly illuminate the causal forces at work. If mobility were

the only variable affected by satisfaction or if the effect of satisfaction were

ellminsted by inclusion of quit intention questions, this objection would have

merit. However, th. contrary appears true. The industrial psychology literature relates
                                                                            5


 job    satisfaction to such forms of behavior as mental health, absences and physical

 ailments (see Locke), suggesting that the variable affects a broader range of phenomena.

 Inclusion of a direct mobility variable (responses to "what would the wage or salary

 have to be for you to be willing to take [another job]?" codedi ifthe person

 responded at no "conceivable pay")barely reduced the coefficient of satisfaction

 in    the   NLS samples (a drop from .31 to .29 In the older male NLS, for example) and

 contributed less to the explanation of quits than did satisfaction, suggesting that

 the more general attitudinal variable has greater information content. Inclusion cf

 the variable "have you been thinking about getting a new job?" in the PSID, however,

did reduce the satisfaction variable in line 2 of table 2 (which was more weakly

 related to quits than the satisfaction variable in the tS) to insignificance, which

would support the objection if      the   intention varaible was unrelated to other forms

 of behavior.

        A related deeper problem is that as a measure of personal feelings, satisfaction

may lack systematic independent variation or links to social variables of concern to

economists. Assume, for example, that satisfaction depends only on standard measured

variables      and random noise but does not exhibit any socially identifiable exogenous

variation. •Then it would partition the effect of observed variables on mobility

 into direct and indirect (via satisfaction) routes but provide no information

about how mobility could be altered by changing satisfaction. In terms of path analysis,

satisfaction would be an endogenous intervening variable of little substantive impact.

Only the reduced form equation relating mobility to objective variables would yield

meaningful impact parameters.
         The response to this objection is that satisfaction does depend on socially

identifiable but missing or unobserved factors, which give it       systematic   exogenous

variation. On the one hand, detailed case studies link job satisfaction to a host

of    very specific aspects of the work place, such as mode of supervision, physical
work conditions, and so forth (Locke, Vroom) which are not generally measured on
large data files,      making satisfaction a potential proxy for those unobserved objectiye
                                                                        6



factors. On the other, lack of adequate information on the alternatives facing

individuals makes the variable a reasonable Indicator of alternative job opportunities,

if as seems reasonable those with good opportunities are less satisfied than those

with poor opportunities. Some insight into the relative fnportance of omitted

characteristics due to changes in the features of the current work place and of

alternatives might be garnered from longitudinal information on changes in the job

satisfaction and wages of mobile workers.

     The omitted variable argument can be developed further by assuming that mobility

depends solely on objective factors, including the omitted variables, and by

treating satisfaction as an indicator of the omitted factors. If, as seems reasonable,

the omitted aspects of the work place are correlated with the measured factors,

the coefficients of the latter will be biased. Consistent estimates could be

obtained by using satisfaction and other (subjective) variables that depend on

the unobserved work characteristics as proxies, Sing general unobservables models.

In this case, the satisfaction variable is needed to correct for econometric problems

in estimating the effect of the observed variables. Whatever model structure is

preferred, the link between satisfaction and objective but unmeasured variables

rescues the variable from what may be called the solipsism problem.

      Finally, even if the interpretative problems with job satisfaction measures cannot

be entirely resolved, the evidence that satisfaction is related to future mobility

and other overt behavior (wages and standard variables held fixed) does provide

useful clues to individual actions and to needed areas of research.   It suggests

that nonpecuniary factors are important in mobility and that additional effort be

devoted, to measuring and analyzing those factors.


Job Satisfaction as a Dependent Variable

      The definition of job satisfaction in industrial psychology as a "positive

emotional state resulting from the appraisal of one's job" (Locke, p. 1300)

highlights the principal.prob].em in interpreting reèponses to satisfaction questions:
                                                                          7



    that they depend not only on the objective circumstances in which an individual finds

    himself but also on his psychological state and thus on aspirations, willingness to

    voice discontent, the hypothetical alternatives to which the current job is compared,

    and so forth. Because Job satisfaction reflects both objective and subjective factors,

    it is more complex than standard economic variables and requires more sophisticated

•
    and careful analysis. By altering the way in which persons respond to questions,

    variables like education (which raises aspirations) or collective bargaining (which

    provides a mechanism for "voicing" discontent) could have very different effects on

    job satisfaction than on objective economic conditions. The impact of satisfaction on

    overt behavior could also differ among groups, depending on the importance of objective

    and subjective factors in responses.

          The distinct features of measured job satisfaction that result from its dependence
    on psychological as well as objective circumstances can be fruitfully analyzed by

    comparing the effect of variables on satisfaction with their effect on overt mobility

    behavior (satisfaction excluded as an explanatory factor). Assuming that overt

    mobility depends solely on objective circumstances while satisfaction is influenced

    by subjective as well as objective factors, marked inconsistencies between the effect

    of variables on the two outcomes could be interpreted as reflecting the dependence

    of satisfaction on the subjective factor.

          Estimates of the effect of various economic variables on job satisfaction

    (measured, as before, by a 2—score scaled so that positive values reflect increased

    satisfaction) and on the probability of quits (satisfaction held fixed) were made for

    the PSID and older male NLS samples. Because unionism was not available in the older

    male NLS until 1969, the calculations focus    on quits from 1969 to 1971. Table 3

    summarizes the results in terms of the coefficients on variables having markedly

    different effects on satisfaction and quits.

          The principal paradoxical finding is that trade unionism, which reduces quits

    significantly in the data sets, and this would be expected to raise job satisfaction,

    either reduces it significantly    (in the P5Th and in the 1971 satisfaction equation in   th
                                                                         8




older male NLS)or has little effect (1969 satisfaction in the older NLS). A negative

or negligible coefficient of unionism on job satisfaction has also been found in other

data sets (Hughes), including the younger male NLS, and has been documented, with a

different model, for the older male NLS           by Borjas. In the 1975 meetings, 1

suggested   that the inverse relation might reflect the role of unions as a "voice"
institution which   encourages workers to express discontent during contract negotiations

and to make formal grievances rather than to quit and which keeps the dissatisf led from

leaving the employer. If this view is correct, the satisfaction relation lends some

support to the exit—voice model of the union (Freeman, 1976). Since wages are included

in the calculation and since a negative relation is found for young as well as older

workers, it is difficult to account for the anomolous relation in terms of the flatter

age earnings profile of union workers, or related objective factors.

     The other variable with consistently different effects is tcnure, which is

associated with much lower quit rates (possibly because of selectivity) but which has

virtually no effect on job satisfaction. This could reflect the greater aspirations

of those in a company due to increased benefits with seniority; their greater

willingness to voice discontent due to job protection, or other subjective factors.

While there were other differences in the effect of variables on                and

quits in some of the data sets, there were no other clear patterns for all of the

samples. Most variables like age, wages, and a race dummy had the expected opposite

coefficients on satisfaction compared to quits.

     Overall, the results of comparing satisfaction as a dependent variable with quits

indicates that, consistent dth economists' suspicion, satisfaction cannot be treated

in the same way as standard economic variables. The divergent effects of unions

(and to a lesser extent tenure) on satisfaction and quits suggests that at least some

economic institutions and variables have very distint effects on the subjective

way in which individuals view their job satisfaction.
                                                                             9



conclusi-p-i

        This paper has attempted to show that   subjective   variables like job satisfaction,
which economists traditionally view with suspicion, contain useful information for

predicting and understanding behavior, but that     they   also lead to complexities due
to their dependency on psyhological states. The enpirical analysis has found job
satisfaction to be a major determinant of labor market mobility and has turned up
puzzling   relations between certain economic
                                                variables, notably unionism,and satisfaction
that
       appear attributable to the 8Ubjective nature of the variable.
                                                                                      10




  Table 1:           a0n8 about   Job Satisfaction and Responses to Questions from Major




Survey and Year                             Question    and Response
National Longitudinal             "Row do you feel about the job you have now?"
Survey (NLS)                  dislike ft      dislike it        like it     like it
                              very much       somewhat         fairly well very much

 Older Men,1966                    22                              37         56
                  1971             2            6                  45         48

 Ydung Men, 1966                   3            8                  42         47
                  1971             2            9                  50         38




Michigan Work Quality(]-968—9)
and Quality of Employment      "All in all how satisfied would you say you are with your job?"
(1972—3)
                              not at all      not too           somewhat     very
                                             satisfied          satisfied   satisfied
           1968—69                3            11                 39          46
           1972—73                2             8                 38          52




Michigan Panel Survey of                   "In general would you say your job is:
Income Dynamics (PSID)
                             not enjoyable      not very        somewhat   mostly          very
                               at all           enjoyable       enjoyable enjoyable        enjoyable
           1972                   2                 2              21        42               28




 Source: Calculated from distribution of answers for the population given by each

 of the surveys.
                                                                                          11



           Table 2: Maximum   Likelihood   Estimates of the Coefficients and Standard Errors of

     Job Satisfaction and Other Variables on the Probability of Quits, Using, Using the Logistic For:


Sample, Period, and      Mean Logistic Coefficients and Standard Errors   Other    Minus ln
&umbers of Observations Quits                                           Variablesa Likelihood
                                 Satisfaction in Wage Age       Tenure

 1. NLS Older Men             .145      —.31          —.37      .021      —.05     2—7, 10          2438
    1966—71 (3284)                         (.06)       (.14)   (.013)     (.006)


 2. Michigan PSID             .093      —.14          —.89     —.027      —.06     1—9,11       2585
    1972—73 (3730)                      (.06)         (.12)    (.006)     (.01)


 3. NLS Younger Men           .12i      —.37          —.62     —.605      —.25     2—11                 596
    1969—71 (1742)                      (.09)         (.24)    (.033)     (.06)




'Other variables defined as 1—sex; 2race; 3—years of schooling; 4=occupation (7 dummy variables)

 in NLS   samples;   9 in PSID); 5—industry (9 duaies in NLS   samples,   5 in PSID); 6—number of

 dependents; lgeographic locale (3 region dummies); 8"years of work experience; 9—local market

 conditions (unemployment in area in NLS young men sample; 3 variables reflecting unemployment,

 shortage of workers, and area wage in sin) 1OSMSA dummy; 11=union.
'Quits calculated by a complicated algorithm based on changes from intervening jobs, and is subject

to considerable potential error.                                                                    -




Source:    Calculated from surveys with questions on satisfaction as described in table 1
                                                                                 12




                  Table 3 Estimates of the Differential Effect of Unionism and

                             Job Tenure on Satisfaction and Quits



                 Michigan P510          NLS Older Male

            Satisfaction P(Quit)     Satisfaction    P(Quit)
                 1972     1972—73    1969    1971    1969—71


Union            —.15       —.35      .04    —.13     —1.93
                 (.04)      (.16)    (.05)   (.05)       (.42)


Tenure          —.001       —.06     +.000 —.002        —.16
                 (.002)     (.01)    (.002) (.002)      (.03)


R2/(ln likelihood) .067     (2385)    .073    .075      (231)




Note: All equations include controls used in table 2.      P(Quit) estimated on logistic

function using maximum likelihood. Sample sizes, as in table 2 except for older male

ilLS, which has 1735 observations.
                                                                        13



                                    References



Borjas, George, "Job Satisfaction and Unionism: A Reappraisal of the Union Wage

      Effect" (processed, 1977).

Flanagan, Robert, Straus, George and Ulnan, Lloyd "Worker Discontent and Work Place

      Behavior," Industrial Relations, May 1974.

Freeman, Richard, "Individual Mobility and Union Voice in the Labor Market," American

      Economic Review, May 1976.

Hamermesh, Daniel, "Economics for Job Satisfaction and Worker Alienation," in 0.

      Ashenfelter and W. Oates, Essays in Labor Market and Population Analysis, 1977.

Hughes, James, "Satisfaction and Union Voice," Har-vard.undergraduate honors thesis,

      1977.

Locke, Edwin A., "The Nature and Causes of Job Satisfaction," in Marvin Dunnette,

      Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology (Rand McNally, 1976),

      pp. 1297—1350.

Vroom, Victor, Work and MOtivation, New York, 1974
