NBER Working Paper Series

ESTIMATING TEE FAMiLY LABOR SUPPLY FUNCTIONS

DERIVED FROM THE STONE—GEARY UTILITY FUNCTION

Michael U. Hurd

Working Paper No. 228

CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305

January 1978

Preliminary; not for quotation.

NEER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for conunents only.
They should not be quoted without

written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBERpublications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for appreval by the Board of Directors.
This research was supported in part by NBER, and in part by a
grant from the U.S. Department of Labor (Labor Grant J—9—M—60156). The author wishes to thank John Pencavel for many useful
discussions on this work and Jeffrey Parker for excellent computational assistance.

NBER Working Paper 228
January 1978

ESTIMATING THE FAMILY LABOR SUPPLY FUNCTIONS

DERIVED FROM THE STONE-GEARY UTILITY FUNCTION

Abstract

The Stone—Geary utility function defined over an index of goods,
the leisure of the husband, and the leisure of the wife is used to

derive the earnings functions of the husband and the wife. The parameters
of the utility function are estimated from the parameters of the earnings
functions in a way that accounts for a number of theoretical and

statistical problems. The effect of family composition on utility is
estimated by specifying and estimating adult equivalents in consumption

and leisure of various categories of children. On the statistical
side the following difficulties are all considered: nonlinear constraints
across equations, endogenous marginal income tax rates, variations in
tastes in the population, heteroscedasticity, and truncation of the

left—hand variable. The data come from the 1967 Survey of Economic
Opportunity. The results are generally good and support the view that
the effects of family composition on utility can be estimated from

behavioral relationships. Alternative results that ignore the complicated statistical problems are presented; they imply that the statistical problems are empirically important and should not be ignored.

Michael B. Hurd
NBER-West
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard

Stanford, CA 94305

1.

Introduction
This paper gives the statistical theory and results of estimating the

parameters of the family labor supply functions derived from the Stone—

Geary utility function. The economic theory behind the labor supply
functions is quite standard; but, the statistical problems associated with
them are not, at least I know of no other work that treats all of them

together. The statistical problems are: in one of two equations which
have correlated error terms the right—hand variable is truncated; both
equations have heteroscedastic errors; both equations have endogenous
variables on the right—hand side; there are nonlinear cross—equation

restrictions. A several—step procedure is developed that accounts for
these problems to produce consistent estimates of the utility function
parameters, and the procedure is applied to data.
In connection with some other work, a colleague and I want to estimate the parameters of the Stone—Geary utility function in a way that takes
account of family composition so that the welfare effect of various income
maintenance schemes can be studied. 1

We

study only husband—wife families

and we define utility over goods, the leisure of the husband and the

leisure of the wife. The parameters of the utility function can, therefore, be estimated from the labor supply functions of the husband and the

wife, or from the earnings functions of them. In fact, the earnings
functions are slightly easier to work with; but, everything that is said
in this paper can be applied directly to the estimation of labor supply

Ny partner in the project is John Pencavel. He specified the form of
the Stone—Geary utility function that is estimated here, and has
provided valuable advice at several steps of this work. However, any
errors in this work are mine.

2

functions. When the earnings functions of the husband and wife are
written, one discovers that the error term in each function is hetero—
scedastic under the assumption that the error term arises partly because of

variations in tastes for leisure and for goods.2 Furthermore, earnings
are zero for some family members when tastes for leisure are above a cer-

tain level or when tastes for goods are below a certain level! That is,
some families are at corner solutions, and if, say, the offered wage rate
were increased, the family member(s) would still desire not to work.
Formally, this amounts to specifying that desired hours of work are
functions of tastes and of the exogenous variables, and that for certain
combinations of tastes and the variables, desired hours are negative.3
In the data, however, we observe hours and earnings to be zero rather than

negative! This is the truncation problem. Finally, the first—order conditions for utility maximization relate the net wage rate to desired hours

of work. In that there is considerable variation in marginal income tax
rates, we want to account for the income tax in the estimation. Marginal
tax rates should be considered to be endogenous because they partly reflect

tastes for workJ
One way to estimate regression functions with a limited dependent
variable is the tobit estimator; however, tobit is not consistent when

there is heteroscedasticity.5 In our problem part of the heteroscedasticity
arises from the specification of the utility function, and the theory

indicates how it may be accounted for. The rest of the heteroscedasticity
2 See Pollack and Wales.
See Ileckman. He states the equivalent condition that the reservation
wage is greater than the offered wage.
See my "Estimation of Nonlinear Labor Supply Functions."
See my "Estimation in Truncated Samples."

3

in our model is due to the endogeneity of some of the right—hand variables
A considerable part of the work is concerned with accounting for this
heteroscedasticity.
In this paper the discussion is limited almost completely to the

estimation problems, the solutions, and the results. In other work we
shall be concerned with the theory behind our formulation of how family
composition affects utility, and with application of the results of the
estimation.

2.

Labor Supply and the Stone—Geary Utility Function
The form of the Stone—Geary utility function chosen to account for

family composition is

U =

U(li,

12, x) = (l—B1—B2) ln(t — a) + B11n(b1— y—) +

Bzln(bz—

where

—)
12

11 = husband's leisure, 12 =

wife's

h1 = 1—li = husband's work, h2 = 1—12 =

leisure, x = an index of goods,

wife's

work. I, 12 and I may be

thought of as indexes that give the number of adult equivalents in the
family; B1 and B2 are parameters to be estimated; and a, b1 and b2 are
random variables that represent a distribution of tastes in the popula-

tion.6 In static utility maximization subject to the budget constraint

6

shall not attempt to justify here either the use of this utility
function to derive labor supply functions or this way to account for
family composition. We shall do that in other work as the emphasis
here is on the estimation problem.

4

px

w1h1+ w2h2 + py — T (w1h1+w2h2+y),

the earnings functions of the wife and of the husband are given by

(l—t)e1 = (1—B1) b111(l—t)w1 — B2b212(l—t)w2—31(y+(e1+e2)t—T)

+ Blaixis
(l—t)e2 = —B2b111(1--t)wj + (1—B2)b212(1—t)w2 — B2(y+(e1+e2)t—T)

+ BzaIp

where T( ) is the income tax function, t=T'=marginal tax rate, e1and e2
are the husband's and wife's earnings respectively, ynonlabor income,

and p=price index of goods
It is apparent that I make several assumptions that have been relaxed

in the work of others. In particular, the wage rate is given to the
7

individual,
Let

and there are no fixed costs associated with working.

, and

ç

be the expected values of b1, b2 and a respectively.

The husband's earnings function, for example, may be written as

(1—t)e1 = (l—B1)1I1(l—t)w1--B1ç2I2(l—t)w2—B1G

+

BialxP

+ (lB1)t1(1_t)wizi.-B1Iz(1_t)wzza4-BlIxpza
'

Rosen within a restricted framework allows the wage rate to depend on
hours of work. Banoch and others have Introduced fixed costs of work
into the labor supply decision.

5

where z1 =

b1-1,

z2

b2—2, Za

=

a—ca, and C =

y + (e1+e2)t—T. The last

three terms in each earnings function constitute the error term, the

result of the distribution of tastes. The error terms are seen to be
heteroscedastic, and to be correlated with each other. As things stand,
the way to estimate the system is not apparent: 1—t and the z's are
correlated; therefore, the expectation of the error term is not zero.

(of course, the expectation of the error term given the right—hand variables is not zero due to the endogeneity of l—t; however, that problem
may

be

attacked in the usual way.) I proceed by assuming that a is a

parameter rather than a random variable. This is a compromise that
imposes some restriction on the data; but in view of the other serious
estimation problems it seemed sensible to impose the restriction rather
B

•

than compromise on the solutions to the other problems.

If a is a con-

stant the earnings functions become

=

(l_ni)gaIiwa_Bi2I2wz_Bic/(l_t)+Bi€aIxp/(l—t)

=

—B21I1w1+(l—B7)'c2I2w2—B2d(l—t) + BzaIxJ(l_t) +

+ ul

where u and u are the composite errors.
8 It is perhaps surprising that assuming a to be a parameter is, in fact,
a restriction. It is clear that if the variance of Za is identified it
is a restriction. One could imagine estimating the variances and the
covariances of the z's from the regression of the square of the residual
from the earnings functions on the squares and products of the variables
that appear in the error terms after appropriately accounting for the
endogeneity of l—t. Even though it is a restriction, it is probably a
weak restriction in these data because there is not much variation in p.
In the actual estimation an additional error is allowed to account for
mistakes in maximization and observation. The variance of this error
term appears as the coefficient on the constant term which is not too
different from p.

6

In the data a1, the husband's earnings, is greater than zero in
almost all households we study; however, e2 is greater than zero only in

about a third of the cases. There are a number of empirically equivalent

ways to explain how this happens. First, the earnings functions may be
interpreted as desired earnings functions, and one may recognize that if
the tastes for leisure of the husband and the wife and the tastes for goods
are of certain magnitudes desired hours of work of the wife will be nega-

tive. In the data this variable is truncated at zero. Second, one could
consider inverting the earnings function of the wife to give the reserva-

tion wage as a function of earnings. Truncation occurs when the reserva—

tion

9

wage at earnings of zero is greater than the offered or market wage.

Third, one might assume that u ha that distribution required to generate
the observed values of earnings; that is, u takes the value of minus the
right—hand side for all those observations where earnings are zero.'°

S

The likelihood function is the same in all three ways of looking at the

problem so, from a statistical point of view, the way is immaterial. I
prefer the first so that will be the terminology used here.

The I's are index functions to be estimated as will be discussed
below; there are many nonlinear restrictions across equations; and several

of the right—hand variables are endogenous. Because u1 and u2 are correlated
the expected values of both the u's given that a2 is greater than zero are

LU

This is the way Beckman considers the problem.
Let y = x3+u. Specify the distribution of u as follows: given x
p(u = —xS) = F(xS) and p(utlt >—x$) =
where F(x) is the
dt = 1 — Ii(x$).
probability y = 0 given x and
d
The likelihood of the sample is I[(F(x))''1i (f(y—x-S)) i where
di = 1 if yj > 0 and d = 0 otherwise. This likelihood function is
the sanE as the function obtained by considering y to be truncated.

f(t)

f(t)

S

7

functions of the right—hand variables. This means that both the husband's
and wife's earnings functions should be estimated by nonlinear methods.
All of these problems mean that a first—round simultaneous estimation of

both equations would be very complicated and expensive. Therefore, I
adopted a several—stage method: first, the wife's earnings function is
estimated consistently; second, the husband's earnings function is estimated
consistently using some of the parameters from the first round to account
for the truncation in the wife's earnings; third, both equations are
simultaneously estimated using some of the previous estimates to account
for the truncation but imposing the cross—equation restrictions on the

coefficients of the right—hand variables. Nonlinear estimation is required
at each step; however, a large very complicated nonlinear estimation
problem is broken up into smaller less complicated nonlinear problems.

8

3.

Estimation of the Wife's Earnings Function

A. Statistical specification
The index functions, 11, I and

are assumed to depend linearly

on family characteristics:

I2Pz

11pjz
where

z

[1 I'll P12 P131 ,

z'

=

[1 K1 K2 A] and similarly for

and Ql2 z is a vector that describes some of the characteristics of

the family: K1 = number of children 0—5; K2 = number of children 6—15;
A = number of adults aged 16—64 exclusive of the husband and wife. The

p's and U are vectors of parameters to be estimated. Define WhW1Z and
= W2Z; these are 4—vectors of exogenous variables which give the inter-

action between the wage rates and family composition. Let i = —B21p1,
= (1—E2)zp2, S1 = B2a0 and S2
Define 5' =

[Sj 21 y

'

= [pz' /(l—t)

—B2; all but the last are 4—vectors.

G/(l—tJ, a 5—vector. Then the wife's

earnings function can be written as
e2 = wc41 + w2 + Y' 5 + u

where

u2=wlIzl+wirz2+v2

It is assumed that z1 and 22 are normal random variables with mean zero,

variance a2, 022 and covarance 0. v is normal with mean zero, variance
and it is independent of z1 and 22. The specification allows the
12 See, for example, Brown and Deaton, and Muellbauer for discussions of
incorporating family composition in the utility function.

.

9

random tastes for the leisure of the husband and the leisure of the wife
to be correlated, but requires that maximization and observations errors

be uncorrelated with the other random components. u is heteroscedastic,
the variance depending on the first 8 right—hand variables.
e2 is only observed when the right—hand side is positive; however,

the conditional expectation of e, given that the right—hand side is posi-

tive, cannot be written immediately because of the endogeneity of Y. In
particular, the expectation of u, given that the right—hand side is positive, is not given by the usual formula for the expectation of a truncated
normal random variable; the same statement applies for the conditional
density.

The endogenous part of y is due to l/(l—t) and 0(y +

(e1+e2)t—T)/(l—t).

Because the marginal tax rate and actual taxes depend on labor supply and
the wage rate, I assume that these two endogenous variables have reduced
forms that depend on polynomials in all the exogenous variables in the

problem. Suppose then that Y = irx +

v.

In that v incorporates u2 it

should be assumed that v is heteroscedastic. Therefore, when the reduced
forms are used in the earnings functions another source of heteroscedas—
ticity is introduced.

=

Y = irx

wa1

and v =

+ wcs2 + Y 5 + u

Y—Y

.

+

S where

I assume that v is normal with mean zero and it has

variance—covariance terms that arise from allowing a correlation between

l/(l—t) and G. The likelihood of e2 can now be written as

10

p(e2se2>0) = p(RHS

=

i

=

=

÷ waz +

— wWcc2 —

x'1c'),,//(wui

(s_wLai

where

sRHS>0)

var(u2

+ v'S).

xtrThls)

-r2 varies from observation to observation

because both v(u2) and v(v) vary.

ii

is

not known, but it can be estimated

consistently. The likelihood of the observations with earnings of zero
could also be written down; however, I only use the observations with

positive earnings in estimating the earnings functions. The other observations are not used because the wage rate is generally not observed when

earnings are zero. There are ways to use these observations by estimating
a wage function. Considerable difficulties are introduced when this is

done and the gain may be rather small: usually the R2 in the wage
equations are not large so that the amount of additional information

obtained from using all the observations may not be large. Of course, as
far as consistency of the estimators is concerned, either the conditional
likelihood function or the unconditional likelihood function may be used.
if one assumes that if

is

known the only barrier to estimating the

earnings function by maximum likelihood is that the variance of v is not

known: the parameters that enter the variance of u are the a's multiplied
by w1 and w2, and the functional forms are known from the theory. Unfortunately, the estimation of V(v) is not simple.

Some of the x's that appear on the right—hand side of the reduced
forms for Y are functions of the wage rate and the square of the wage rate,

but the wage is not always observed. One cannot estimate the reduced form
over the observations with wage rates because the conditional likelihood is not

11

known:

the

conditioning event is that earnings of the wife are positive,

not that the right—hand side of the reduced form is positive. It is not at
all obvious how that conditioning event relates to the error term in the
reduced forni because the tax schedules are nonlinear. My strategy is first
to estimate a wage function;t3 second to estimate the reduced form for Y
using all the observations and the fitted wage rate where necessary; and
third to use all the observations to estimate the variance functions of v.
Suppose that

=

s'5

+ c1

w2 =

''2 +

£2

where s is a vector of exogenous

variables, and that c, 52 v(cj), v(62) and cov(c1,c2) have been estimated

consistently. If ; and ;2 are used where the observations are missing on
w and w2, x may

be

formed and 'it estimated over all the observations. This

estimate of it is consistent. Finally, it is assumed the variance of each
element of the random vector v depends linearly on the X; however, the
straightforward regression of the square of the residuals on the X is not

desired for two reasons. First, when the fitted values of w and w2 are
used as regressors, the variance of the v is changed according to a function

of the variances of s and 62. Second, a functional form for the variance
of v is desired that will reflect the fact that variances are positive. It
is assumed that the functional relationship is loglinear; however, that
specification requires nonlinear estimation because some of the estimates of
the variance (the squared residuals less a correction for the use of the
fitted wage) are negative making impossible the usual log transformation to
linearity.

In theory one ought to estimate the wage function conditional on labor
force participation. See Gronau. In practice this has made little
difference. Here I ignore any trucation in the wage functions.

12

All of this may be illustrated by considering the first equation, the
=

equation for

1/(1—t).

Yi =

+ v1wheré x, a vector of length 55,

includes w, w2 and interactions between w and other exogenous variables.
If the fitted values of w and w2 are used for certain observations

y1 = xir1 + v1 + (x-x)u1

Despite the heteroscedasticity, consistent estiamtes of

may be obtained

by ordinary least squares because there is no truncation: all of the
observations are used. The residuals for the

=

y

—

satisfies

v(vj.) + ,r1tv(x, —

v(x

—

xj)=O

observation,

asymptotically

+

residual where iiin E(residual)=O.11

S

for the observations with a known wage, and for the other

observations many elements of v(x—;) are 0 because most of the x vector is

exogenous and known. Of course, v(x—;) can be estimated for the observations

with a fitted wage from the wage and wage squared regressions. Finally r
has been estimated and asymptotically can be considered known, at least
for the purposes of consistent estimation.

14 This form requires that the covariance between v1 and the error terms
in the wage functions are uncorrelated. This follows from the exogen—
city of the wage rates.

S

13

I specify that v(v1) =

e1.

The variance function to be estimated

2

becomes t1 — d = e xy1 + residual where d is 0 when the wage is observed

and d = n11v(x—x)-rr1 when it is not observed. Asymptotically and for
purposes of estimation v(x—x) is composed of either zeros or elements of
Although the expectation of the left—hand side is positive, there is
nothing to prevent it from being negative in the data; even asymptotically
the v1from some of the observations with a fitted wage will be close to

zero. My solution is to estimate y by nonlinear methods which do not
require that the log of the left—hand side be taken. That is, I find the

y such that the sum of squares of v — d —

e'1

is minimized.

Y has five elements; however, only two underlying random variables,
l/l—t and C, are combined with the exogenous variables on P and family

composition to form the elements of Y. Therefore, only the determinants
of l/l—t and C need be estimated: the rest of Y and v(v) can be constructed from them. I specify that the variance function of C has the
same form as that of l/l—t, so it too must be estimated by nonlinear

methods. Finally, I assume that the correlation coefficient between the
residuals of l/l—t and C is a constant. It may be estimated from the
variance functions.

Once r and the variance functions have been estimated, the estimation

of the earnings function of the wife can proceed. The estimated likelihood
of an observation is

;(e2 = se2>O) =
12

14

where T22 may be written as v(u) + 2cov(u2, v'$) + S'v(v); ;(v) is a
5x5 matrix constructed from the variance function of l/l—t and G; it is
fixed in this part of the estimation.

v(u2) =

Wh

)2a12 + (w; 2)2a22 +

1 2

a12 + c

2'

I have assumed that the correlation between u and v'3 is a constant,

p2: this is not entirely satisfactory, but the alternative, allowing
separate correlations between each of the components of u and each of
the v's, requires the introduction of six more variance parameters and is
not practical.

The parameters of the earnings function are estimated by maximizing

the estimated likelihood function. Asymptotically this is equivalent to
maximizing the likelihood function because the estimate likelihood function
converges in probability to the actual function.

The nonlinear problem

is, therefore

max —

E

log T2f

> (5i_Th'ctrC2_)c;8)2_ (Wwct1+wwci2+X1t'8)
where P = { cia,

2'

a12, a22, a12, a2, P2 }

This statement requires that the variance functions of l/l—t and G be
exact. This was implicitly assumed in the estimation of these functions.
There are no statistical measures, such as a R2, to verify this.

.

15

3.B. Data and Results

The data are from the 1961 Survey of Economic Opportunity. These
data have been used extensively by many researchers and do not need to be

described here.11 The variables are defined in the Appendix and the criteria for inclusion in the sample are discussed. Briefly, I use observations on husband—wife families for which the husband is not self—employed,
has an observed wage, has earnings, is white, and is between the ages of

16 and 64. In the estimation of the functions determining l/l—t and G
(the tax and nonlabor income functions), the observations on all the wives
are used; in the estimation of the earnings function only the wives with
positive earnings are used.

The results from the estimation of the tax and transfer equations and

the wage equation are not of particular interest here: the first two
equations do not have a behavioral interpretation as they combine parameters
of the labor supply function with the parameters of the functions that

determine tax rates given income. The wage function is quite standard in
the literature and the results are similar to what others have found. More
details are given in the Appendix. Of more interest are the variance
functions because they are not often estimated and used as they are here.
The main issue is whether there is sufficient heteroscedasticity to
warrant the calculations involved in the estimation of the variance

functions. Table 1 gives the estimated distributions of the variances of
the tax and nonlabor inconE equations.

See Hall for example.

.

16

Table 1

Variance Distributions
Rate
Interval

0—

* l0

Nonlabor Income (thousands)
Frequency %

Interval

Frequency %

0— .67

11.8
13.0

37.9

2.01 —

1.34
2.01
2.68

2.96 — 3.70

24.2

2.68 — 3.35

26.7

3.70 - 4.44

10.6

3.35 -

13.6

4.44 — 5.18

5.1

5.18 — 5.92
5.92 — 6.66

2.4

4.02
4.02 — 4.69
4.69 — 5.36
5.36.— 6.03

.74

.5

.74 — 1.48

1.5

.67 —

1.48 — 2.22

15.0

1.34 —

2.22 — 2.96

6.66+

It may be

1.0
1.6

12.5
8.0

5.3
3.1

1.8
4.2

6.03+

seen that the tax function seems to have less heterosce—

dasticity than the nonlabor income function. This is varified in a scale
independent measure of heteroscedasticity Ai(J)/E(a),

where

v(a) is the

estimate of the variance of the standard error and E(c) is an estimate of

its mean. The value of this summary measure is .18 for the rate function
and .37 for the nonlabor income function. It is not easy to judge what a
large value of this measure is. However, in some other work on the effects
of heteroscedasticity on the kind of estimator employed here (but ignoring
the heteroscedasticity) I found that in a simple problem with only one
right—hand variable, values of this measure of heteroscedasticity were

associated with fairly large misestimates of the slope parameter. The
comparison is only suggestive, of course; however, it does suggest that
the amount of heteroscedasticity found here is not an inconsequential amount.

.

17

.

The correlation coefficient between the error term in the tax
function and the error term in the nonlabor income function was estimated

to be .315. The results for the wife's earnings equation are given in

Table 2. In that they are only intermediate, the discussion of them will
be brief.

As a description of the earnings function, the results are about what
one has come to expect from the many studies of the labor supply of wives:
an increase in the husband's wage causes a decrease in hours, although if
there are several children this is no longer the case; an increase in
the own wage increases hours; an increase in the number of children de-

creases hours. One would, however, expect the coefficient on

to be

negative as that is the response to nonlabor income. More will be said
about this later. As implicit estimates of the parameters of the utility
function the results are not so good. For example, the consistent esti-

mates of e1 and e2 are both negative. They are supposed to be the adult
equivalents in consumption of children aged zero to five and of children

aged six to fifteen. One explanation of this is that most of the utility
function parameters have large asymptotic standard errors. The asymptotic
variances are given by

v[f(z)]

= af'

at

--— v(z)—

where z is the vector of estimated earnings function coefficients and f

is the function that gives the utility function estimates. For example

=

= 1.11

with estimated standard error of 2.42.

18

Table

2

Wife' s Earnig Eqjt

Estimated
Variable

Coefficient

ion
Estimated
Standard Error

—.133

.025

WhiCi

.089

.048

WhK2

.050

.022

WhA

.063

.023

1.497

.172

WKi

.002

.345

WK
WA

.213

.148

—.139

.091

.452

.309

Y1K1

—.503

.787

YJ.C2

—.827

.341

Y1A

—.066

.131

.083

.018

1.635

.174

.263

.025

—.595

.056

1.076

.118

Wh

Y2

c52

V2

= p/(1—t)
=

(nonlabor income + tax

grant)/(l—t)

.

19

Of more interest are the variance estimates because they are not
2

2

often made in this way. 0 and °2 are the estimated variances in the
maximum hours of the husband and the wife respectively. According to
these results there is much greater variation in tastes for work among

husbands than among wives. It should be emphasized that this is not the
result of only using the part of the sample with working wives because the
conditional likelihood function accounted for the sample selection given

that the distributions are normal. The covariance between the tastes for
work of the husband and the wife is negative and large: it implies a
correlation boefficient of —.91. This is strong evidence in support of
the kind of marriage sorting suggested by Becker: he gives the condition
92v
for negative sorting that

be negative, where v is the indirect

utility function and bi and b2 are characteristics of the husband and wife.
This is the case in the indirect utility function based on the Stone—Geary
utility function.

.

20

4..

Estimation of the Earnings Function of the Husband
By using some of the estimates of the coefficients in the wife's

earnings function the earnings function of the husband can be estimated

by fairly simple nonlinear methods. This is possible because estimates
of the probability that the wife works will be available, so that the

effects of sample truncation can be considered to be known. As will be
seen, the nonlinearity of the problem arises because it is necessary to
make nonlinear constraints on the coefficients in the equation.
The husband's earnings function may be written as

=

ThnJ
+ u1 + (y-y)
6

whai + wwa2 + y $

a =(cq a2) and $ are functions of the parameters of the utility

where

function, and u1 =

trt

In1

z1+ ww

1%

E(eje2>O)

where Ti =

=

w' + (7rx) + pr1m (wJt +2&rx)B)

v(u1 + v") and p is the correlation coefficient between the

residual in the husband's earnings equation and the residual in the wife's

earnings function. That is,

=

ti21

where t12

cov(u1 + v'$, u7 + v'$).

.

21

The last part of the expectation accounts for the truncation. This form
shows that in the estimation of labor supply functions based on family
utility maximization, the truncation of the wife's earnings function (or
labor supply function) should be taken into account when estimating the

supply function of the husband. Only if p is zero can consistent estimates of the supply function be obtained when the truncation is ignored.

In this system p is generally not zero. Except for the special case in which
there is no variation in tastes for leisure, p Is zero only if the utility
of leisure of the husband and wife are both zero.

From the estimation of the wife's earnings function many of the
parameters that enter T1 and p. and the entire argument of m may be

considered to be known. As shown in the Appendix, the estimation reduces
to a nonlinear problem in three parameters which takes the following form:

mm

SSR(B1, B2, 02

V1

B1, B2, 2

where B1 and B2 are parameters of the utility function and 02 =
SSR = E(e—e)2 and e is found from the regression of e —

v(v1);

f1(B1, B2) on

and f2(B1, B1, o2); f1 and f2 are known functions of B1, B2 and
The iterations consist, therefore, of a search over B1, B2 and
and at each step in the search least—squares residuals are found
V1

conditional on the values of B1, B2 and c. In this step the heterosce—
dasticity of El

u1 + v' — E(uj + v' e2>O) is ignored. The estimators

are still consistent.

The only parameters estimated in this step that will be used in later

calculations are B1 and 02. B1 was estimated to be —.140, which implies

22

that an increase in nonlabor income will lead to an increase in the hus—

band's hours. As was the case with B2 in the wife's equation, a possible
cause of this anomalous result will be discussed later. a2 ,

the varia—

vi

tion attributed to maximization errors and errors of observation in the
husband's earnings equation, was estimated to be 1.107, again a substantial value.

.

.

23

5.

Simultaneous Estimation of the Wife's and Husband's Earnings Functions
From the separate estimates of the earnings functions of the husband

and of the wife consistent estimates of all the parameters have been

obtained. No cross—equation constraints were imposed, however, so that
there are multiple estimates of many of the parameters of the utility

function. In this step the cross—equation constraints are imposed to
estimate the parameters that influence the means of the earnings function
in the complete sample while using the previous estimates of those parameters and the variance parameters to account for the truncation and heter—

oscedasticity. Being able to take those effects to be known is an important empirical simplification. Of course, the estimators will not be as
efficient as the full—scale maximum likelihood estimators because the
estimation does not take account that the parameter estimates that correct
for truncation and heteroscedasticity should be the same as the estimates

produced by this step. The full—scale maximum likelihood problem is not
at all easy to solve numerically: the solution of the likelihood function
describing the wife's earnings function required substantial programmer
and computation time, and it is much simpler than the complete maximum
likelihood problem.

The wife's and husband's earnings functions are:

e1 =

e2

w'2 + y'B +

+

24

where P1 = 112 m("

and p2 =

12(sia
v

[ci j

2

+Yt15

.

Therefore E(Ei!e2>O) = 0 and E(c2e2>0) = 0.

[T12(p21 + l—p2) TiT2Ptj =

e2>0]

tm(t)

—

TI2 j

[E1T2PT

j

EL2

where t = [1 —

)1 12

m(t)2]

and t =

+ Y

W

Q will, of course,

2

vary from observation to observation. The generalized least squares
estimators are

e1 — 21

e1 —
,min
i

subject to the

1.

e2— e2

e2— e2

.
nonlinear

constraints g(a, a, 5, 5 ) =

and similarly for e2 .

, Pi

0.

y%

TflJ

e1 = w a + y + P1

and Pz have been consistently estimated

and are considered to be known. Taken together a, , 5 and

have a

total of 26 components; but, there are only 14 underlying parameters
from the utility functions so that 12 restrictions are imposed.

The results of the joint estimation are given in Table 3. What I
have called the standard errors in that table are at best only suggestive

because they do not take into account two facts: part of the systematic
part of the earnings functions, p1 and p2, are not known but are estimated;

the parameters that appear in the systematic part, the a, a2, 5 and ,

also

appear in the variances. One can develop the formulas for calculating the
true asymptotic standard errors; but, the calculations are very complicated,

25

and I have not done it. See Aznemiya for a discussion of maximum likeli—
hood when part of the likelihood function has been estimated.

.

26

Table 3
Joint Estimation of the Husband's and
Wife's Earnings Equations

Parameter

Estimate 'standard Error"

Interpretation

Mean of husband's max. hrs.

1.233

.031

Mean of wife's max. hrs.

1.687

.025

—7.817

.841

.612

.124

.150

.057

.759

.107

Husband's Hours Index: K1

—.122

.019

l2

K2

.036

.012

P13

A

—.179

.011

—.145

.012

—.142

.008

—.012

.012

Minimum goods
Si

Goods Index: K1

A

2i

Wife's Hours Index: K1

P22
P23

A

B1

Husband's Marginal Propensity
to Consume Leisure

—.135

.008

B2

Wife's Marginal Propensity to
Consume Leisure

.003

.003

Note: K1 indicates number of children 0—5 years old.
K2 indicates number of children 6—15 years old.
A indicates number of other adult family members.

.

27

Most of the parameter estimates seem reasonable and have a natural
interpretation.

and 2 are the means of the distributions of maximum

hours of work. Perhaps it is surprising that the husband's mean is less
than the wife's mean; however, these parameters are supposed to represent
tastes for work and, from that point pf view, there is no reason to suppose
that

should be greater than .

One purpose of the estimation is to

discover whether observed differences are due to systematic differences

in the exogenous variables or not. Apparently, in these data differences
in hours are due to differences in the exogenous variables and in the other

parameters. In addition, the variance of the husband's maximum hours is
much greater than the variance of the wife's maximum hours (1.635 and .263)

so that some husbands have very large maximum hours. For example, about
2.5% of the husbands would have maximum hours greater than 3800, whereas
about 2.5% of the wives would have maximum hours greater than 2700.
The B have a natural interpretation of adult equivalents in goods

consumption. Because of the normalization of the B vector, the unit of
measure, the adult equivalent, is a "husband—wife." Notice that without
considering data on single—headed households, one cannot estimate per

capita equivalents. According to these estimates, the first child between
the ages of zero and five has a weight in consumption of .612 of a husband—

wife. This seems too large: if one assumed that there were no returns—to—
scale in husband—wife households without children, the per capita consumption of each adult would be .5, yet the consumption weight of the

first child is :61. This may be partly caused by the strong returns—to—
scale imposed by the functional form of the goods index. For example, a
second child aged 0-5 has a weight of .23 In consumption, and a third

28

.
child

a weight of .12. Similarly, the consumption weight of the first

additional adult is surely too large. All of the composition variables
interact in the sense that the additions of children to a family which
already has a complicated structure will reduce the effective consumption

less than the addition in a family with a simple structure. Not too much
weight should be placed on the returns—to—scale as an empirical finding,
however, because the functional form imposes this as long as the U are
positive.

The interpretation of the p's as adult equivalents in hours of work

poses conceptual difficulties. As far as their place in the utility
function is concerned, they act to change the utility associated with
hours of work because they enter the utility function through the variable
—

4 where

h is hours of work and I is the index. Negative values of p

mean that increasing the number of children increases the disutility associated with a given number of hours of work, and, if leisure is a normal

good, this will cause a decrease in hours of work. Of course, because no
distinction is made between time spent in home production and time spent
at leisure, this change could be caused by an increase in efficiency of

time spent in home production. It may be noted that the results on the U
and the p do not explain why people have children: if all the U were positive and the i'

were negative, having more children would always decrease

family utility. This is almost the case with these estimates. Unlike the
case with the U, however, it is not at all clear what reasonable magnitudes of the p

are.

For example, adding a young child increases the

weight given to an hour of the husband's work by about 12%, and to an hour

of the wife's work by about 15%. Thile these values seem plausible, I

S

29

have no prior notions about what they might be, nor do there seem to be
other estimates in the literature with which to compare them.

The estimate of B1 is not reasonable. Its being negative implies
that the marginal utility of leisure of the husband is negative, and that

increases in nonlabor income will cause the husband to work more. I find
this completely implausible. In the estimating equation, the identification of B1 comes from nonlabor income which is probably badly measured

both in these data and in other data sets. Other investigators have estimated the marginal utility of leisure of the husband to be negative, so

that these results are not completely anomalous in the literature.16 One
can think of at least one reason why the estimate of B1 is negative: because
most of nonlabor income flows from accumulated assets, families with high

incomes in past years would tend to have large nonlabor income. The heads
of those families would have worked more than average both in past years
and in the present year because tastes for work probably change rather

slowly. This argument that nonlabor income is endogenous at the individual
level would lead to a positive relationship between measured nonlabor
income and hours worked if the taste component of work is large compared

with the other components. In this model the taste component is quite
large; as previously mentioned the variance in maximum hours of husbands

is estimated to be about 1600 hours per year. Due to these considerations,
I decided to re—estimate the parameters under the assumption that nonlabor

income is endogenous. The variable in which nonlabor income appears is

16See, for example, 3. DaVanzo, D. DeTray and D. Greenburg; H. Rosen and
R. Quandt; J. Hams and my "The Estimation of Nonlinear Labor Supply
Functions."

30

=

(y+g)/(l—t)

where y is nonlabor income, g is the tax grant necessary

to linearize the curving budget constraint, and t is the marginal income

tax rate. The variable 2 was originally taken to be endogenous due to
the endogeneity of g and t; but, y was taken to be exogenous by allowing
it to appear on the right—hand side of the reduced form for Y2.

I

made

y endogenous by re—estimating the reduced form for Y2; y was excluded, and
a set of explanatory variables for y such as age and

geographic

infornia—

tion was included. To my surprise, the estimate of B1 was even more negative, and, therefore, I conclude that the endogeneity of nonlabor income
is not the cause of the negative estimates.

.

.

31

6.

Conclusion
A number of statistical problems in the estimation of labor supply

functions were taken into account and they complicated considerably the

estimation. The final results seem generally good; but, one naturally
wonders whether the difficult procedures made a difference in the results.

Here, therefore, I shall concentrate on the methodological issues. In
particular, I shall try to indicate the importance of accounting for the
truncation and the heteroscedasticity.

As indicated near the beginning of Section 5, the conditional earnings functions are e1 =

w'2 + y + P + c1 and e2 = w'a + y' + P2 + £2,

and when written in this way the conditional earnings functions are true

regression functions in that the expected values of the error tens are
zero given the right—hand variables including P1 and P2• If P1 and P2
are small, ignoring the p's will cause little error in the estimation of

the earnings functions. In these data, P1 has a mean of —.06 with a
standard deviation of .33. These statistics compare with a mean and
standard deviation of husband's earnings of 6.9] and 3.04. In that there
is no constant term in the earnings function, the mean of the p's will

have considerable influence on the estimation of the slope parameters of

the earnings functions. The mean of p is small; but the standard deviation is not small compared to the standard deviation of the husband's
earnings.

Pa has mean and standard deviation of .20 and .30, which are substantial fractions of the wives' earnings mean and standard deviation of 3.20

and 1.97. Another way to make the comparison is the ratio of P2 to earnings; this variable has mean and standard deviation of .27 and 1.39.

32

Apparently the observations with low actual eatnings were given high P2•
This is, of course, what the statistical theory of truncated random
variables would suggest.

The estimated heteroscedasticity is substantial: in the husband's
equation the standard error of the conditional error term has a mean of

2.07 with standard deviation of 1.77, a ratio of .86. This is, for example,
much more heteroscedasticity than what was found in the tax and transfer

functions in Section 3. In the wife's equation the conditional standard
error has mean of 1.48 with standard deviation of .751. Again, this is
considerable heteroscedasticity.

The heteroscedasticity and P2 are substantial enough that one would
think accounting for them would change the estimates of the parameters.

To provide a comparison I estimated the earnings functions only imposing

the cross—equation constraint. That is, both the heteroscedasticity and

the p's were ignored. The results are given in Table 4. They are quite
different from the results of Table 3: for example, the signs on five of
the coefficients changed. I would judge that the estimates produced by
accounting for truncation and heteroscedasticity are superior: two of
the B, which are supposed to represent adult equivalents in consumption,

are negative in Table 4. This makes their interpretation difficult. The
marginal utility of the wife's leisure became negative. The means of the
maximum hours of work were reduced considerably from what I consider to be
small values of Table 3.

I conclude that accounting for truncation and heteroscedasticity makes
a difference in the estimates, and that the estimates produced by the
theoretically appropriate estimation method are superior to the simpler

33

estimates. Whether this will hold in other bodies of data remains to be
seen; however, there is nothing about this problem or these data to suggest
that this conclusion will not hold.

34

S

Table 4
Joint Estimation of the Husband's and Wife's Earnings
Equations; Truncation and Heteroscedasticity Ignored

Parameter

Estimate
-

702

.714

a

—22.845

01

.090
—.094
—

.084

—.108
P12

.254

l3

.172

21

—.326

—.141
P23

.013
—.130

B2

5

—.060

.

35

7.

Appendix

A.l Data and Sample Selective
The data are from the 1967 Survey of Economic Opportunity.
See I-Tall for a description of the data. The variables were generated in
the following way:

Annual earnings in 1966: reported directly. Por husbands or wives
who were unemployed in 1966 earnings were adjusted to account for

the unemployment. The theoretical left—hand variable is desired
earnings, and the reported weeks unemployed were interpreted as
weeks during which desired earnings were the same as actual earn-

ings during the weeks employed. Desired annual earnings are actual
earnings plus desired earnings while unemployed.

Wage rate: gross labor earnings in the Survey week of March 1967
divided by hours worked in that week.

Marginal tax rate: calculated from the tax tables assuming standard
deductions.

Nonlabor income: actual reported income from assets plus inputed
returns to assets and liabilities. See Hall.

Price: assigned one of 20 values according to geographical information in the SEO. The geographical information includes which of
the 12 largest SNSA's, which of four CPS areas, and information
on whether the residence was in an urban or rural area.

The sample was selected to include husband—wife families headed by a

white. Neither husband nor wife was self—employed and neither had health

S

difficulties

that influenced the amount or kind of work done. The husband

36

was between the ages of 16 and 64, and there were no other family members

over age 64. Families that received welfare income were excluded.
Families in which the husband did not have an observed wage rate or in

which the husband had no earnings were excluded. One additional observation was excluded; the wife was recorded to have had a wage rate of $120.

A.2 Wage and Wage Squared Functions
Each of these functions had 37 categorical right—hand variables.
There were variables indicating age, variables indicating education,
variables indicating geographical location, variables indicating union
status, and variables indicating whether the observation was from the

self—weighting part of the SEO or not. The error terms were estimated to
have standard errors of 1.16 and 20. 87 and covariance of 20.17. The only
use to which the wage functions were put is in the estimation of the tax
functions and the variance functions for the tax functions; they did not
enter directly the estimation of the earnings functions because the earnings functions were only estimated over the part of the sample with
observed wage rates.

A.3 Husband's Earnings Function
The husbandTs earnings function can be written as

= w1 in..
a1 + w2a2 + Y113 + u1 + v
In)

In..

w1a1
where

u1 =

12

z1 +

w2a2
+ vj,

and z and z are bivariate normal with zero mean and variance—covariance

37

a12

matrix

is normal (0, c ) independent of the z's.

a?

k2

1

The wife's earnings function is

e2 = w1 a1 + w2 a + Y 5 + u2 + v 5
I

w1 a1

where u2 =

—j--— z1

2
+

I

E(e1e2>0) = w111 +

+ V2 .

w22 +

Then

y' +

where 112 = cov(u1 + v', u2 + v'iB).

a, 5,

m(Wa +Nx)'B)/

ir,

and T2

have

been estimated;

however, 112 is not a parameter but a function of other parameters and of
the data for each observation.

= cov(u1, u2) + cov(uj, v'S) + cov(v', u2) +

cov(''v,

v'13).

From the assumption on (zj, z2),cov (u1, u2) can be calculated as

+ k2x2

where k1 = (B1 — 1)/B2, k2 = Bi/(B2 — 1)

and x1 and x2 are known functions of the data and previously estimated

parameters. As in the wife's equation u1 and v'S are assumed to have a
constant correlation coefficient, p1; v(u1) can be written as

+ k1k2x4 + k22x5 +

a

where x3, x4 and x5 depend on pre—

38

viously estimated parameters and the data; a2 is an unknown parameter
to be estimated; v(v'8) has been consistently estimated from the wife's
earnings function. Therefore, cov(u1, v'.B) can be written as

+ a2) x6)12

P1 ((k,2x3 + k1k2x4 +

v(v'iS).

where x5 =

cov(v',

=

Because

u2)

k where k =

k cov(v'Si,u2) and cov(''v, v's)

k v(v').

cov(v'iS, u2) and v(v'S) have been consistently estimated from

the wife!s earnings function. All of these facts may be used to write T12 as

1/2

2

kjx1 + k2x2 + p1((k12x3 + k1k2x11. + k2 x5 + a2) x5) + kx7

where

cov(v',

=

In t12

there

u2) + v(v'S).

are three unknown parameters, B1, p1 and a

however, in the
V1

estimation

i did not impose the value of B2 obtained from the wife's

earnings equation because the estimated variance of i/B2 is very large.
Because m(

)/

r

in the husband a earnings equation can

be calculated, one can write

=

w' +

Yjj + c1(B1, B2) + p1c2(Bj, B2, a2) + E1 where

39

=

U2

+

v'f — E(u1 + v"Ie2>O); Y1j8 a vector of the first

four entries of the five—vector '1, and j
parameter vector

c(B, B2)

is

the corresponding part of the

(k1x1 + k2x2 + kx7)m/T2 — B1Y2 and Y2

in the la:t entry in 1; c2(B1, B2, 02) = ((k12x3 + k1k2x4 +
cy1)x6)

+

rn/i2.

E isheteroscedastic,

but that is ignored in this step. The pararn—

eters are estimated by least squares. Given estimates of B], B2 and

a, ,

R, and p1 which comprise 13 parameters can be estimated from the

linear regression of e2 — c1 on w, Y', and c2. That is, the problem of

minimizing the sum of squared residuals over all the parameters can be
decomposed into two parts:

mm

B1, B2,

2

[,..,min

Z(e1

—

c1(b1,

In.,
B2) — w a —

Y1i

2
)) ].

— p1c2(B1,B2,a

The part of the problem inside the braces has a closed—form solution so
that the iterative search need only be made over three parameters.

40

Aniemiya, T., "The Specification and Estimation of a Multivariate Logit
Model," Technical Report No. 211, IMSSS, Stanford University.

Becker, C., "A Theory of Marriage, Fart I," Journal of Political Economy,
July/August, 1973.

Brown, A. and A. Deaton, "Models of Consumer Behavior: A Survey,"
Economic Journal, December 1972.
DaVanzo, 3., D.N. DeTray andD.H. Creenburg, "The Sensitivity of Male
Labor Supply Estimates to Choice of Assumptions," Review of Economics
and Statistics, 58(1976), pp. 313—25.
Gronau, R., "Wage Comparisons——A Selectivity Bias," Journal of Political
Economy, November/December 1974.
Hall, R.E., "Wages, Income, and Hours of Work in the U.S. Labor Force,"
in Income Maintenance and Labor Suppjy, C. Cain and H. Watts, eds.,
Chicago: Rand McNally, 1973.

Ham, J.C., "Rationing and the Supply of Labor: An Econometric Approach,"
Princeton Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 103, revised
November 1977.
1-lanoch, C., "Hours and Weeks in the Theory of Labor Supply," RAND Publication R—1787, August 1976.

Heckman, J., "Shadow Prices, Market Wages, and Labor Supply," Econo—
metrica, July 1974.
Hurd,

N., "The Estimation of Nonlinear Labor Supply Functions with Taxes
from a

Truncated Sample," Technical Report No. 217, IMSSS, Stanford
University.
Hurd, N., "Estimation in Truncated Samples when there is Heteroscedasticity,"
Working Paper 85, IMSSS, Stanford University.
Muellbauer, 3., "Testing the Barten Model of Household Composition Effects
and the Cost of Children," Economic Journal, September 1977.
Poilak, R.A. and T.J. Wales, "Maximum Likelihood Estimates of the
Linear Expenditure System," Econometrica, October 1969.
Rosen, H., "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage—Hour Determination," Econometrica, May 1976.
Rosen, H. and R.E. Quandt, "Estimation of a Disequilibrium Aggregate Labor
Market," Princeton Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 96,
June 1977.

.

