                                       NBER -               WEST LIBRARY

                                          NATIONAL   OEJ OF ECU0M RESEARC}
                                                     204 JUWIFERO SERRA BEVO.
                                                                                 .
                                                     STANFORO, CALIFORNIA S43U
         NBER Working Paper Series




    WHO PUTS THE INFLATION PREMIUM INTO
          NOMINAL INTEREST RATES?


           Benjamin H. Friedman
       Harvard University and NBER

       Working Paper No. 231




NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
          1737 Cambridge Street
     Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138


               January 1978




This paper has not undergone the review
accorded official NBER publications; in
particular, it has not been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.
        WHO PUTS THE INFLATION PREMIUM INTO NOMINAL INTEREST RATES?



                            Benjamin M. Friedman

                             Harvard University



                                  Abstract




       For expectations of price inflation to affect interest rates, they
must affect the behavior of borrowers and lenders or both. This paper
analyzes the emergence of the inflation premium in long—term interest rates
as the explicit result of borrowers' and lenders' behavior in the bond
market in response to price expectations. The object of this analysis is
not only to estimate the magnitude of the inflation premium due to this
portfolio behavior but also to evaluate the respective contributions to
it of borrowers' and lenders' responses.

       The empirical results presented in this paper indicate that both
borrowers' and lenders' portfolio behavior play an important role in the
relationship between interest rates and inflation expectations. Estimation
results for U.S. data provide evidence that, all other things equal,
nonfinancial business corporations increase their supply (net issuance)
of bonds in response to an increase in expected inflation; these results
mirror the bond investors' responses found by the author in a previous
paper. Partial equilibrium experiments based on the combined model of
bond supply and bond demand indicate that, all other things equal, the port-
folio responses to expected price inflation by borrowers and lenders together
increase the bond yield by 2/3%, and modestly decrease the net quantity of
bonds issued and purchased, in response to a 1% increase in expected inflation.
This result follows as the consequence of a slightly greater response by lenders
than by borrowers.
                                                                    Revised
                                                                    January, 1978


          WHO PUTS THE INFLATION PREMIUM INTO NOMINAL INTEREST RATES?

                              Benjamin M. Friedman*
                               Harvard University

     It is a truism that, for expectations of price inflation to affect interest

rates, they must affect the behavior of borrowers or lenders or both. Conversely,

whatever Fisherian "inflation premium" the market associates with the yields on

fixed—interest debt contracts must reflect the behavior of the borrowers and/or

lenders who are the sellers and buyers of such contracts.

     While many researchers have investigated the response of nominal interest rates

to expectations of price inflation --   for   example, estimating the equilibrium

magnitude of the inflation premium or its dynamic adjustment under the assumption of

adaptively formed expectations, or jointly testing alternative hypotheses about the

inflation premium and the expectations formation process —-     they   have typically done

so in the context of reduced—form models which necessarily abstract from the

specific underlying channels of economic behavior leading to the inflation premium.

Such reduced-form models also abstract from any specific differential contributions

to the premium due to the behavior of different groups of market participants and

therefore stand in contrast, in some respects, to Irving Fisher's own views which

did allow for the possibility of asymmetrical behavior between borrowers and lenders.1

     This paper analyzes the emergence of the inflation premium in long—term interest

rates as the explicit result of borrowers' and lenders' behavior in the bond

market in response to expectations of price inflation. By exploiting a structural

modelling approach, this analysis seeks not only to estimate the magnitude of the

inflation premium due to this portfolio behavior but also to identify the (in general

differential) contributions to it of borrowers' and lenders' behavior. To anticipate,

the empirical results suggest that the equilibrium portfolio responses to a marginal
                                          —2—


1% of expected price inflation change the nominal long-term interest rate by

about 2/3%, and that this premium reflects approximately equal responses by

borrowers and lenders.

     Section I briefly reviews the simple analytics of the inflation premium in

nominal interest rates. Section II presents empirical estimates for a model of

bond supply behavior by nonfinancial business corporations, the group which accounts

for the great majority of borrowing in the U.S. corporate bond market; these

estimates support the hypothesis that borrowers respond to expected price inflation

in the direction consistent with producing an inflation premium in nominal long-term

interest rates. Section III uses this model of borrowers' bond supply behavior,

together with an analogous model of lenders' bond demand behavior developed in

Friedman [10], to estimate the magnitude of the inflation premium due to portfolio

behavior and to decompose it into elements associated with the respective portfolio

responses of borrowers and lenders. Section IV summarizes the paper's principal

conclusions.



I. The Simple Analytics of the Inflation Premium

     Nominal interest rates are relative prices set on loan agreements struck

between borrowers and lenders. Since these nominal yields (or, conversely, prices

of bonds) are proximately determined in a market in which loans are extended and

received, it is a truism that any factor hypothesized to influence such yields

(or prices) must do so by influencing some borrower's supply of bonds, or some

lender's demand for bonds, or both.2 For expectations of future price inflation

to increase nominal interest rates, therefore, the underlying behavioral process

must involve creating a net excess supply of bonds by increasing borrowers' willing-

ness to borrow or reducing lenders' willingness to lend at a given nominal yield.

     Two   broad   groups of hypotheses, both based on the appealing assumption that
                                             —3—


 it is expected real wealth which ultimately matters for economic behavior, are

able to provide an explanation of this effect consistent with expected utility

maximizing behavior. First, saving and investment behavior may plausibly be

responsive to anticipated real yields, along the familiar lines of the standard

neoclassical analysis. Secondly, portfolio behavior may also be plausibly related

to anticipated real yields ——     i.e.,   price expectations may affect choices with

respect to the composition of assets held and liabilities outstanding, wholly

apart from the respective totals.3 In a world of risk neutrality and zero trans-

actions costs, for example, a straightforward extension of the expectations

hypothesis of the term-structi.ire is that lenders and borrowers (investors and shorts)

would fully arbitrage any difference in expected real holding-period yields among

all nominal-interest debts and all storable commodities. Furthermore, although

in practice the opportunities for such portfolio substitutions are usually extremely

limited -—   i.e.,   it is difficult to invest in the consumer price index basket of

goods --   restricted   substitution possibilities need not preclude portfolio behavior

from having a key influence especially on the dynamics which connect expected

price inflation and nominal interest rates. As long as there remains at least the

choice between money (or, equivalently, short—term interest bearing assets) and

bonds (of long duration), borrowers' and lenders' portfolio behavior can still be

the immediate vehicle by which expected price inflation affects nominal yields.

     Represented formally, the portfolio behavior underlying the effect of

expected price inflation on the nominal bond yield is

           S = S(...,   r, e               S2
                                                > 0 >
                                                        S1                             (1)

           D = D(...,   r, e                    > 0 >
                                           D1           D2                             (2)

           S=D                                                                         (3)

where S and D are, respectively, the supply of and demand for fixed—interest bonds;

r is the (nominal) interest rate on bonds; e is the expected rate of price inflation;
                                        —4—


and the notation Si or D. represents a partial derivative with respect to the

i-th argument shown.    In addition to the interest rate and expected price inflation,

the bond supply and demand in (1) and (2) in general depend on a number of variables

not explicitly shown, including yields on other assets and liabilities, levels

of wealth and economic activity, negative and positive cash flows, any exogenously

determined balance sheet stocks, etc.

     Equating the supply of and the demand for bonds as in (3) determines the bond

yield as the combined implicit function of all of the arguments of (1) and (2), and

substituting the market-clearing bond yield into either (1) or (2) determines the

market-clearing quantity of bonds outstanding. In particular, unless S2 = D2 = 0,

the two-equation reduced form of (1)-(3) expresses both the interest rate and the

quantity of bonds Q as functions of (among all the other arguments) expected

price inflation:

          r=f(...,pe,               f1>0                                                   (4)

          Q =   g(..., e            g1 >   0.                                              (5)


     Figure 1 illustrates the familiar workings of the simple system (l)—(3) in

(r, Q) space. Curves 5(e) and D(Pe), which intersect at point a =              (r,   Q),

represent the supply of and demand for bonds, both conditional on some fixed expec-

tation of price inflation e Curve S(Pe +        6),   which represents the supply of bonds

conditional on the inflation expectation        +   6,    6 >   0, is shifted to the right from
5(e), indicating borrowers' increased willingness to sell bonds at any given nominal

interest rate. Alternatively, although Q is the true dependent variable in a

competitive market setting, it is conceptually possible to focus instead on the

vertical distance between 5(e + 6) and S(pC), for any given Q, via the "thought

experiment" of asking what increase in r (i.e., what "upward shift") would be required

to make borrowers content to supply exactly Q bonds after an increase of 6 in their

expectation of price inflation. Curve D(pC +        6),   which represents the demand for
    r                                              D(e

                                                          D(e)
                              b

r



    —
r


                                                               S(+8)
                                                        S(e)
                                  I

                               Q1                              -Q

                          FIGURE      1



        THE SIMPLE ANALYTICS OF THE INFLATION PREMIUM
                                            —5—


bonds   conditional   on the inflation expectation e + S, is analogously shifted to

the left (or, alternatively, "upward") from D(Pe).

     Following (4) and (5), the supply and demand curves conditional on the greater

expectation of price inflation intersect at point b =       (r',   Q'). Here r' >   r
unambiguously, reflecting the additional premium in the interest rate, but the

magnitude of the premium (r' -     r)   in relation to depends on the specifics of

borrowers' and lenders' behavior. While the neoclassical neutrality proposition

associated with Fisher presumes r' —      r=   5, Mundell [18] and Tobin [26] have argued

on the basis of portfolio effects that the premium is smaller than S, while Darby

[4] and Feldstein [6] have argued on the basis of tax considerations that the

premium   exceeds   5. In contrast to the effect on the interest rate, which is unambig—

uously positive, even the sign of the effect on the equilibrium quantity of bonds

depends on the respective shapes and shifts of the supply and demand curves. In

Figure 1 as drawn, Q' < Q, but the opposite case is equally plausible on a priori

grounds, and strict neoclassical neutrality would imply Q' = Q.



II. A Model of the Supply of Bonds under Inflation Expectations

     Because corporate bonds in the United States are noncallable for either five

or ten years from the date of issue, and because market imperfections usually render

bond repurchases fairly expensive, a corporation's decision on whether to finance

its external deficit at long or short term contains a major element of nonreversi-

bility. Using a decision—tree framework to represent this asymmetry,

Friedman [8] formulated and estimated a model relating a corporation's desired bond

supply, for a given cumulated external deficit to be financed, not only to currently

prevailing yields but also to expectations of future yields on the long- and short-

term liabilities of the corporation, with both future yield expectations represented

by autoregressive distributed lags.4 Although that model included no explicit role
                                                        —6—


for expectations of future price inflation, such expectations will indeed be

relevant to the desired bond supply if inflation expectations influence expecta-

tions of future yields, as in Modigliani and Shiller [17], and/or if inflation

expectations affect the expected relative yields on issuing debt versus equity.

     The familiar linear homogeneous model of desired portfolio allocation,

applied to the corporation's selection of liabilities to finance externally a

given cumulated deficit requirement, is

             L N                      M
                   = krk + 1ihCht + if i,                                 i =   1,... ,N               (6)



where
         1
               i =     1,... ,N,   is the corporation's desired amount of the i-th liability
                   N
outstanding (E Lt =                 Et is the corporation's total cumulated external deficit;
                             Et);
rk k = l,...,N,            is the expected "borrowing period" yield on the k-th liability;

x., h =      l,...M,     is the value of any additional variable (e.g., second central

moments or other risk-related variables) which influence the portfolio allocation;

and the ik' ih and ir. are fixed coefficients which staisfy                                = 0 for all k,

        = 0 for all h, and                = 1.        On the assumption of universal substitutability,

the jk also satisfy ik < 0, k =                  i,    and      0, k     i. After explicitly including

the influence of expectations of price inflation, the desired bond supply equation

corresponding to (6) is

              B*                                                    M
                   =           +           + B3'st + B4t +
             Et
                       8BlrB                                            'Bh'ht +


where B is the desired amount of bonds outstanding; rB is the currently prevailing

(nominal) yield on new issues of the corporation's bonds;                           is the corporation's

expectation of the average future value of rB;                         is the corporation's expectation

of the average current and future value of ri the yield on its short—term liabilities;

and p is the corporation's expectation of future price inflation. The basic choice

of whether to issue (noncallable) bonds at time period t or to issue short-term
                                         —7—


liabilities then and pursue an optimal financing strategy from time period t+l

onward implies B2' B3 > 0   >
                                Bl'   and the implication of inflation expectations,

under either of the rationales noted above, is accordingly B4 >

     The general portfolio allocation model (6), as well as the specific model

(7) of desired bond supply, describes the determination of variables which are

unobservable in the presence of transactions costs. To translate the implications

of these expressions into an operational model of behavior, therefore, it is also

necessary to apply some model of portfolio adjustment. The "optimal marginal

adjustment" model developed in Friedman [9] relates net short—run portfolio adjust-

ments not only to the discrepancies between the desired liability levels         from

model (6) and the corresponding previous-period outstanding stocks L.t1 as in

the standard stock-adjustment model, but also to current values of financial flow

variables. The primary rationale for emphasizing these flow variables is that

current financial flows are more easily (i.e., costlessly) allocated than are the

currently outstanding financial stocks. This allocation-cost distinction between

stocks and flows is especially relevant for borrowers whose outstanding long-term

liabilities are typically noncallable, and, since transactions costs constitute the

fundamental underlying motivation for using a model which admits discrepancies

between actual and desired portfolio composition, it is worth while to model the

implications of transactions costs with some care. The optimal marginal adjustment

model incorporates in a tractable form the differential transactions costs between

outstanding liability stocks and the new deficit flow by positing the allocation

of current financial flows according to whatever proportions portfolio allocation

model (6) indicates are the desired equilibrium proportions for the total portfolio.

     Applied to the case of a corporation financing a given external deficit, the

optimal marginal adjustment model is

                   OikktEt_l -    L)        +
                                                XtEt          i =   li...   ,N     (8)
                                                   —8—


where the desired equilibrium proportions
                   L'
                              i =   1,... ,N                             (E Ai = 1)                      (9)
             it    E
                       t                                                  1

follow   from (6), and the              are fixed coefficients satisfying E                =   B   for all k,

with e arbitrary. The first term on the right-hand side of (8) represents the re-

allocation, according to a standard multivariate stock-adjustment model, of the

corporation's previously outstanding stocks of liabilities L. _'                          -=
(which sum to the previous period's total cumulated external deficit Eti). The
second term represents the allocation of the current period's new flow deficit

according to the desired equilibrium proportions X,1, i =                     1,... ,N.   The key advantage

of the optimal marginal adjustment model in the particular context of this bond

supply model is that it captures the increased expected yield (and inflation)

sensitivity of the allocation of the flow AE in comparison with the re-allocation of

the stock Eti

     Expanding portfolio adjustment model (8) with the desired bond supply expression

(7) used as the specific form of the portfolio allocation model (6) yields

            Bt =       BEt +
                  +                     +
                       BBlBtEt                  k1OBkH
                   +
                       B2     Bt.AEt +         k20Bk1      .




                   +
                       8B3StEt          +
                                            8k38Bk
                                                           .
                                                               r.E1
                   +
                       B4t .Et +           [(k4.eBk)]
                                                           .
                                                          .Eti p

                   +
                           {YBh.Xt      Et +     kh.OBk)]htEt_i
                   —   U    .B      —   Z   (0 .L     ).                                                 (10)
                           BB t-l            Bk k,t—l

Here it is useful to distinguish the particular right-hand—side terms which do and

do not have coefficients of known sign a priori. Each of the four variables rB

            and p, as well as x., h =             1,... ,M,        enters (10) twice, in nonlinear form
                                                       —9—


both times. In each case the product of the variable and the deficit flow AEt

bears a coefficient which consists of a single parameter of known sign from (7).

Similarly, the lagged stock of bonds Bi enters (10) with coefficient 0BB < 0

from the stock-adjustment component of (8). All other right-hand-side terms in (10)

--   including   the linear terms              E1 and Lktll k                B, as well as all nonlinear

terms consisting of products with Eti -- bear coefficients which are of unknown
                 .6
sign a priori.

      Nonfinancial business corporations represent the dominant source of private

long-term borrowing in most developed economies. In the United States, domestic

nonfinancial corporations —-          including        companies in manufacturing, extraction,

utility, transportation, communications, and commercial businesses ——                       constitute
the bulk of the economy's productive capacity, typically producing over half of the

nation's gross national product. As of the end of 1975, $254 billion of the $317

billion of corporate bonds outstanding were their direct liabilities. Furthermore,

long—term bonds are a key source of funds to these corporations, constituting more

than 40% of their year-end 1975 credit market debt liabilities outstanding.

       The result of estimating (10) for the net supply of bonds by U.S. nonfinancial

corporate businesses, using quarterly data for 1960: I — 1973: IV and an instrumental-

variables procedure to derive consistent.estimators given the simultaneous determina-

tion of          and rB is
            tB = 2.311          E —   6.448       (rBt.tEt)* + 0.04631 (rB .E
                                                                                        t
                       (3.8)          (—5.8)                         (1.6)

                      + 5.223 (re .AE )* — 0.03025 (re .E i)* + 0.5203 re .LE
                                Bt   t              Bt t—               St   t
                        (5.1)                     (—1.1)                        (3.1)

                      + 0.3984 p.E - 0.01429 Pe.E              1
                                                                   + 10.53 x1t.tE
                                                                                     t
                        (2.7)                 (-3.2)                 (47)

                      — 9.430 x .tE + 0.6445 x .1E — 0.1047                                          (11)
                               2t  t         3t  t          Bt —1
                                                                    (—3.4)

          = 0.95                       SE = 329                       DW =    2.71
                                                —10—


where x1 is a measure of the stock of fixed investment assets oed by the non-

financial corporate business sector; x2 is a measure of the nonfinancial corporate

business sector's cumulated retained earnings; x3 is a measure f current equity

retirements;        is the adjusted coefficient of determination; SE is the standard

error of estimate, in millions of dollars; DW is the Durbin—Watson statistic; the

numbers in parentheses are ratios of coefficient estimates to standard errors; and an

asterisk superscript indicates fitted terms from the first stage of the instrumental—

variables procedure.7 The respective autoregressive representations of the three

unobservable expectations, generated within the estimation of (11), are8

                =
                    rB +E     CT&B,t_T
                                                         T=0
                                                               CT = 1)                            (12)


               = 0.1632 (12.5)         C3 = 0.1424 (32.3)                     = 0.0796   (10.0)

          C1 = 0.1537 (13.4)              = 0.1260 (27.7)                     = 0.0527   (6.5)
                                                                         C7
          C2 = 0.1522 (22.3)           C5 = 0.1045 (16.4)                     = 0.0257   (4.4)
                                                                         C8

                    16
                =                                                 = 1)                            (13)
                    T=0
                          +TrS_T                         T=0

          +0 = 0.0266 (1.0)            +6
                                            = 0.1030 (8.4)                    = 0.0512 (8.3)
                                                                     +12
             = 0.0088 (0.3)                 = 0.1024 (8.3)                    = 0.0374 (5.2)
                                       +7
          +2 =      0.0435   (2.8)          = 0.0975 (8.7)                    = 0.0245 (3.2)
                                       +8                                14
          +3 = 0.0694 (9.4)                 = 0.0890 (9.6)                    = 0.0134 (1.9)
                                       +9                            +15
          +4 = 0.0874 (11.5)          +10
                                            =0.0778 (10.8)
                                                                     +16
                                                                              = 0.0049 (1.0)

          +5 = 0.0983        (9. 3)
                                       11
                                            = 0.0649 (10.9)


                    8                                     8
               =                                                  = 1)                            (14)
                    T0 T t-T                             T0
               = 0.1539 (2.3)               = 0.1557 (3.8)               '6 = 0.0756 (1.8)
               = 0.1486 (2.3)          \L14 =   0.1363   (4.4)              = 0.0436 (0.9)
               = 0.1614 (3.6)               = 0.1081 (3.9)                    = 0.0168 (0.4)

where the numbers in parentheses are again ratios of estimates to standard errors.

To identify coefficients Bk' k =         2,... ,4,     in the underlying bond supply model, the
                                          —11—


estimation procedure used here arbitrarily imposed a unit sum constraint on each

of the three sets of distributed lag weights.9 The estimation procedure also

constrained each set of lag weights beginning with T = 1 to follow a third-degree

polynomial pattern with the implied right—hand tail passing through zero, and left

the lead (t = 0) weight free of the polynomial constraint while including it

within the unit sum constraint. In addition, in the case of          and p , each of

which appears in two separate multiplicative terms in (11), a nonlinear procedure

was necessary to render identical the two appearances of what must logically be

the same distributed lag)°

     The estimation results in (11) are consistent with the implications of the

model of bond supply deveLoped in Friedman [8] and elaborated above to include the

effect of expectations of price inflation. In particular, the estimated values of

8Bk' k =   1,. ..,4,   imply that, all other things equal, nonfinancial corporations

issue less bonds as the currently prevailing bond yield is higher, more bonds as

the expected future bond yield is higher, more bonds as the expected average of

current and future short—term yields is higher, and more bonds as the expected rate

of price inflation is higher. In addition, the estimated values of 1Bh' h =      1,... ,3,
imply that, all other things equal, nonfinancial corporations issue more bonds as

their fixed investment assets are greater, less bonds as their retained earnings are

greater, and more bonds as they retire equity.



III. The Inflation Premium in Nominal Interest Rates

     The model of nonfinancial business corporations' bond supply developed in

Section II, together with the disaggregated model of bond demand developed in

Friedman [l0],].l provides a quantitative framework directly analogous to the simple

model reviewed in Section I. The estimated own—yield coefficients indicate the

slopes of the curves shown in Figure 1, while the estimated inflation coefficients
                                         —12—


indicate the shifts of these curves corresponding to greater or lesser expectations

of price inflation.

     Figure 2 and Table 1 summarize the results of six partial—equilibrium experi-

ments, based on this combined supply—demand model, which associate quantitative

magnitudes with the elements of the inflation premium discussed in Section I. Each

of these experiments takes the form of an equilibrium solution of the model, deter-

mining the net quantity of bonds purchased and the (constant) bond yield indicated

by the model under specific variations in the underlying exogenous conditioning

variables -—   including   the exogenous expectation of price inflation. A "control"

solution of the supply—demand model, conditional on the sample-period means of all

of the model's exogenous variables, (including observed sample—period means in

place of the unobservable expectations of price inflation and the short-term yield),

gives the values 6.09% for the bond yield and $2,343 million for the net bond

quantity. Point "a" in Figure 2 corresponds to these values.12

     What equilibrium adjustment in the nominal interest rate will the combination

of borrowers' and lenders' portfolio behavior induce in response to expectations

of greater price inflation? Point "b" in Figure 2 plots the values given by an

alternative solution of the model which differs from the control solution only in

that the underlying exogenous inflation expectation is greater by 1%. As Table 1

shows, the equilibrium value of the bond yield in this experiment is 6.73% -- 0.64%

more than the control solution value —— and the net quantity of bonds issued and

purchased is slightly less than in the control solution.

     Two further experiments decompose this impact of additional expected price

inflation into elements due to the respective portfolio behavior of lenders and

borrowers by solving the model holding first borrowers' and then lenders' behavior

constant (i.e., by making first the bond supply curve and then the aggregated bond

demand curve vertical). As the values plotted by point "c" indicate, the "upward
                                          TABLE 1



              EQUILIBRIUM SOLUTION VALUES FOR SUPPLY-DEMJND MODEL



Solution               Solution Values              Differences from Control



                      (%)   ($   million)               (%)   ($    million)

a (control)          6.09         2,343

b                    6.73         2,267                0.64            —76

c                    6.79         2,343                0.70              0
d                    6.72         2,343                0.63              0

e                   6.31          1,268                0.22         —2,075
f                   6.51          3,343                0.42          1,000
     r
7.00%                                     D( +1°!)

6.80%


                                                       D    )
6.60%


6.40%                                                  S(e+l%)


6.20%


6.00%I—
                                                 S()
              I             I     II         I
                                                       LQ
          "$1,000        $2,000           $3,000

                         FIGURE 2

  EQUILIBRIUM SOLUTION RESULTS FOR THE SUPPLY-DEMAND MODEL
                                      —13—


shift" of the demand curve is 0.70%) By contrast, the "upward shift" of the

supply curve, indicated by point "d," is only 0.63%. Hence the new supply-demand

equilibrium, after the 1% increase in expectations of price inflation, increases

the nominal interest rate by more than 0.63% but less than 0.70% and slightly

decreases the net bond quantity.

      Finally, points "e" and "f" plot the values corresponding to experiments in

which first only lenders and then only borrowers are assumed to change their

inflation expectations (i.e., in which the supply and demand curves are conditional

on different expectations). As the logic of the underlying supply-demand model

suggests, these solutions show that such an asymmetrical shift in expectations

produces a smaller shift in the nominal bond yield but a much larger shift in the

net quantity of bonds issued and purchased, in comparison with the effect of a

symmetrical change in expectations by both borrowers and lenders.



IV.   Concluding   Remarks

      The effect of expected price inflation on nominal interest rates is an

important element in the set of complex interrelations which connect the financial

and nonfinancial markets. Moreover, the role of portfolio behavior is expecially

interesting in this context since, of the different kinds of economic behavior

which may underlie this effect, it is the most plausibly flexible in the short run.

The empirical results presented in this paper indicate that both borrowers' and

lenders' portfolio behavior play an important role in the relationship between

interest rates and inflation expectations.

      First, at the single—equation level, estimation results for U.S. data provide

evidence that, all other things equal, nonfinancial business corporations increase

their supply of bonds in response to an increase in expected inflation. These results

mirror the bond investors' responses found in Friedman [10].
                                      —14—


     Secondly, partial equilibrium experiments based on this model of bond supply

and the model of bond demand developed in Friedman [10] indicate that, all other

things equal, the portfolio responses to expected price inflation by borrowers

and lenders increase the equilibrium bond yield by 0.64%, and modestly decrease

the net quantity of bonds issued and purchased, in response to a 1% increase in

expected inflation. This result follows as the consequence of a slightly greater

response by lenders than by borrowers.

     It is important to emphasize that, for several reasons, the indicated adjust-

ment of 0.64% for 1% of expected price inflation is far from the last word on the

effect of inflation expectations on interest rates. At the single—equation level,

for example, the underlying bond supply and bond demand equations impose arbitrary

constraints in order to identify empirically several key coefficients in the absence

of direct observations of expectations, and they do not allow for any changing tax

effects over time. Similarly, the multi-equation experiments are clearly of only a

partial-equilibrium nature not just in that they incorporate only portfolio behavior,

holding constant saving and investment behavior,14 but also in that they focus only

on the market for bonds. Nevertheless, these results are instructive in providing

at least limited evidence suggesting approximately symmetrical but less than one—for-

one inflation adjustments in portfolio behavior on both sides of the market.
                                   Footnotes


*   The author is grateful to David Jones for research assistance and many helpful
    discussions; to John Linther, William Poole and Vance Roley for useful comments
    on a previous draft of this paper; and to the National Science Foundation for
    research support under grant APR77—14160.

1. See Fisher [7, pp. 75-77] and the illuminating discussion in Rutledge [20].

2. The concept of the nominal yield's being "proximately determined" in the loan
    market is not inconsistent with the principle of general equilibrium in the
    asset markets or for the economy as a whole. In well developed financial
    markets, of course, the relevant group of "lenders" includes not only those
    who make primary loans directly to borrowers but also those who acquire debt
    securities in a secondary market.

3. In simple consumption-loan models there is typically no well defined distinction
    between saving behavior and portfolio behavior in the conventional sense as
    meant here; see, for example, Sainuelson [21]. In addition, even in models in
    which these two kinds of behavior are distinct, they are not in general
    independent; see, for example, Fania [5), Merton [16], and Samuelson [22].

4. See Friedman [8] for further details on the derivation of the desired bond
    supply model. For a development of the implications of the nonreversibility
    element associated with the call deferment, using a dynamic programming approach,
    see Bodie and Friedman [1).

5. Coefficients B measure first—moment effects only; in the completely specified
    model coefficie?its 1Bh measure any effects associated with variances, covariances,
    etc.

6. Since (6) and (8) deal with the corporation's supplies of all liabilities,
    (10) is implicitly an element of a set of equations satisfying the "adding up"
    constraints specified above. By contrast, the more limited focus of this paper
    is on the supply of bonds - and, more specifically, on its implications for
    the inflation premium. As Ladenson [12] and Smith [25] have shown, it is not
    necessary to use constrained estimation techniques to guarantee that the parameter
    estimates of the full set of supply equations satisfy the t'adding up" constraints,
    so that there is no inconsistency involved in estimating only one supply
    equation rather than the entire set. Nevertheless, a complete model including
    all liabilities (and assets too) would permit the researcher to adopt the
    philosophy as well as the mechanics of Brainard and Tobin [2] in examining the
    implications for other equations of the presence of a given variable in any one
    equation. The construction of such a complete model, however, lies well beyond
    the scope of this paper.

7. See Friedman [8] for details of the estimation procedures, data and definitions
    of variables, as well as a discussion of the rationale underlying the effects
    of x1, x2 and x on corporationst desired bond supply. The specific instrumental—
    variables procedure used here is the augmented principal components method due
    to Brundy and Jorgenson [31, and the set of relevant instruments includes not
    only the exogenous variables in the bond supply equation but also those in the
    six bond demand equations developed in Friedman [10].
 8. Friedman [10] tested autoregressive versus "rational" (in Muth's [19] sense)
     representations of interest rate and price inflation expectations, in analogous
     equations describing the behavior of bond investors, and found that the auto-
     regressive representations were markedly superior. As Modigliani and Shiller
     [17] usefully illustrated, also in the context of interest rate and price
     inflation expectations, general autoregressive expectations of this form are
     consistent with a combination of extrapolative and regressive components.
     Some writers, e.g., Sargent [24] and McCallum [15], have referred to such
     expectations as "partly rational."

 9. The unit sum constraint implies that expectations are formed according to the
     belief that the stochastic processes generating the respective series are
     borderline stationary/nonstationary —— i.e., any interest rate or inflation rate
     which has persisted for a long time will continue to persist. For the process
     to be stationary, the lag weights would have to sum to less than unity, and
     the expectation would also have to include a constant term. Several other
     writers have also emphasized this point; see, for example, Lucas [14] and
     Sargent [23].

10. See Friedman and Roley [11].

11. The bond demand model separately represents the demand for bonds by life
     insurance companies, other insurance companies, private pension funds, state
     and local government retirement funds, mutual savings banks, and households.
     (An appendix showing these equations, not reproduced here because of space
     limitations, is available from the author.) As of yearend 1975, these six
     groups of investors together held $300 billion of the $317 billion of corporate
     bonds outstanding in the United States.

12. The "quantity" axis in Figure 2 corresponds to a within-period net flow of new
     bonds issued and purchased, in contrast to the discussion of Figure 1 in terms of
     the end-of-period stock of bonds outstanding. Since the end-of-period stock
     outstanding equals the (predetermined) beginning-of-period stock plus the within-
     period net flow, the two concepts are equivalent, but the flow representation
     seems more natural in the context of the short-run adjustment aspects of the
     underlying estimated models of bond supply and demand.

13. The "upward shift" in the demand curve reported in Friedman [10], calculated by
     averaging the period—by—period differences between two dynamic simulations of
     the six bond demand equations, was 0.65%. The difference reflects the model's
     nonlinearity.

14. In other words, these experiments hold constant corporations' external deficit
     (E in Section II) and lenders' investable cash flows. See Lintner [13], for
     example, for an argument that the external deficit moves asymmetrically with
     lenders' cash flows as a result of price inflation.
                                   References


 1. Bodie, Zvi, and Friedman, Benjamin M. "Interest Rate Uncertainty and the
     Value of Bond Call Protection." Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

 2. Brainard, William C., and Tobin, James. "Pitfalls in Financial Model—Building."
     American Economic Review, LVII (May, 1968), 99—122.

 3. Brundy, James M., and Jorgenson, Dale W. "Efficient Estimation of Simultaneous
     Equations by Instrumental Variables." Review of Economics and Statistics,
     LIII (August, 1971), 207—224.

 4. Darby, Michael R. "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary Policy on
     Interest Rates." Economic Inquiry, XIII (June, 1975), 266—276.

 5. Fama, Eugene F. "Multiperiod Consumption-Investment Decisions." American
     Economic Review, LX (March, 1970), 163—174.

 6. Feldstein, Martin. "Inflation, Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest: A
     Theoretical Analysis." American Economic Review, LXVI (December, 1976), 809—820.

 7. Fisher, Irving. Appreciation and Interest. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1896.

 8. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Substitution and Expectation Effects on Long-Term
     Borrowing Behavior and Long-Term Interest Rates." Mimeo, Harvard University, 1976.

 9. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Financial Flow Variables and the Short-Run Determination
     of Long-Term Interest Rates." Journal of Political Economy, LXXXV (August, 1977),
     661—689.


10. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Price Inflation, Portfolio Choice, and Nominal Interest
     Rates." Mimeo, Harvard University, 1977.

11. Friedman, Benjamin M., and Roley, V. Vance. "Identifying Identical Distributed
     Lag Structures by the Use of Prior Sum Constraints." Annals of Economic and
     Social Measurement, VI (Autumn, 1977), 429—444.

12. Ladenson, Mark L. "Pitfalls in Financial Model Building: Some Extensions."
     American Economic Review, LXI (March, 1971), 179—186.

13. Lintner, John. "Inflation and Securities Returns." Journal of Finance, XXX
     (May, 1975), 259—280.

14. Lucas, Robert E. "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis."
     Eckstein (ed.), The Econometrics of Price Determination. Washington: Board of
     Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1972.

15. McCallurn, B.T. "Rational Expectations and the Natural Rate Hypothesis: Some
     Consistent Estimates." Econometrica, XLIV (January, 1976), 43-52.

16. Merton, Robert C. "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Continu-
     ous—time Case." Review of Economics and Statistics, LI (August, 1969) 247—257.
17. Modigliani, Franco, and Shiller, Robert J. "Inflation, Rational Expectations,
     and the Term Structare of Interest Rates." Economica, XL (February, 1973)
     12—4 3.

18. Mundell, Robert. "Inflation and Real Interest." Journal of Political Economy,
     LXXI (June, 1963), 280—283.

19. Muth, John F. "Rational Expectations and     the   Theory of Price Movements."
     Econometrica, XXIX (July, 1961), 315—335.

20. Rutledge, John. "Irving Fisher and Autoregressive Expectations." American
     Economic Review, LXVII (February, 1977), 200—205.

21. Samuelson, Paul A. "An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or
     without the Social Contrivance of Money." Journal of Political Economy, LXVI
     (December, 1958), 467—482.

22. Samuelson, Paul A. "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic
     Programming." Review of Economics and Statistics, LI (August, 1969), 239—246.

23. Sargent, Thomas J. "A Note on the 'Accelerationist' Controversy." Journal of
     Money, Credit and Banking, III (August, 1971), 721—725.

24. Sargent, Thomas J. "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the
     National Rate of Unemployment." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
     (No. 2, 1973), 429—472.

25. Smith, Gary. "Pitfalls in Financial Model Building: A Clarification."
     American Economic Review, LXV (June, 1975), 510—516.

26. Tobin, James. "Money and Economic Growth." Econometrica, XXXIII
     October, 1965), 671—684.
