NBER NAflO:AL

WEST L1BRAR

!?E[) Cf ECCNC1C

RSEACH, INC.
2C4 JUi!PE:O SEI'RA 8LVtJ.

SfAi1k

Price Inflation, Portfolio Choice
and Nominal Interest Rates
Benjamin M. Friedman
Harvard University and NBER
Working Paper No.

235

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH, INC.
1737 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

January 1978
Revised

This paper has not undergone the review
accorded official NBER publications; in
particular, it has not been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.

CflFCR; 943f5

PRICE INFLATION, PORTFOLIO CHOICE, AND NOMINAL INTEREST RATES

Benjamin M. Friedman
Harvard University

Abstract

Among

the

different kinds of economic behavior which may

account

for

the familiar Fisherian relationship between nominal interest rates and ex—

pected price inflation, portfolio behavior is the most plausibly flexible

in the short run. Since substitution into real assets is not a practical
portfolio alternative for many investors, however, it is not obvious a priori

how important lenders' portfolio behavior can be in bringing about the adjustment of interest rates which Fisher's theory associates with expected infla-

tion. Given the importance of this adjustment for questions of both monetary

and monetary policy, the underlying economic behavior merits explicit

theory

investigation.
The empirical results presented in this paper provide evidence that
lenders' portfolio behavior does play an important role in the expected-priceinflation/nomjnal-jnterest..rate relationship. First, results indicate that
five of the six major categories of investors in the U.S. long—term bond

market reduce their demands for bonds in response to an increase in expected

inflation. Secondly, the results of multi—equation partial—equilibri experiments indicate that ,with all other things unchanged, this response by

investors will raise the equilibrium nominal bond yield by about 2/3% in
response to a 1% increase in expected inflation.

Revised
January, 1978
PRICE INFLATION, PORTFOLIO CHOICE, AND NOMINAL INTEREST RATES

Benjamin

M. Friedznan*

Harvard University

belief that expectations of future price inflation tend to result

The

in higher nominal

interest rates ——

the proposition which Irving Fisher, in a

perhaps more optimistic era, labeled "preciation and

interest"1

——

is

now

conunonpi.ace among both economists and financial

of nominal interest

just when

rates in the

the U.S. economy was

market participants. The rise
United States to record high levels in 1974,

undergoing its first experience of peacetime

double-digit inflation, dramatically

demonstrated this relationship at even

the most unsophisticated

eyeball level. Many economists have also undertaken
statistical investigations of this

relationship, using a variety of devices to

obviate the analytical difficulties due to the unobservability of
the relevant

expectations.2 With its inunediate implications for real
yields, the Fisher
relationship is central to the classic
questions confronting monetary theory
and policy.

aspects of the
rate relationship remain undetermined, however. In the
comparative statics
context of a long-run steady-state
equi1jbrj, do nominal yields adjust
Many important

on a

one-for-one basis with fully anticipated inflation, thereby
leaving real
yields unaffected? In the dynamic context of a transition from one such
librjum to another, are
the lags associated with

equi-

expectation formation (which

Fisher
their

emphasized) the only reason why nominal yields may adjust
slowly toward
new steady—state values? Alternatively, to what extent are other

involved,

lags
arising either from limited speeds of portfolio adjustment out
of

—2—

equilibrium

or from gradual changes in saving and investment behavior? At the

most fundamental level, what is the exact nature of the process by which
economic behavior causes nominal interest rates to respond to price expecta-

tions in the specified way? Fisher himself was curiously sketchy in his
"interpretation" of the relationship,3 and most subsequent writers on the subject have followed his lead in seeking more to document and quantify the
relationship than to investigate in any precise way the underlying economic
behavior which causes it.

The object of this paper is to explore in some detail one of the possible
sources of the Fisher relationship —-

in

particular, the portfolio behavior of

lenders. The starting point for this analysis is the simple truism that, for
expectations of price inflation to affect interest rates, they must affect the
behavior

the

of lenders or borrowers (or both). Responses to such expectations on

part of lenders and borrowers could logically involve not only their port-

folio behavior (the composition of their assets held and liabilities issued)
but also their saving and investment behavior (the amounts of their assets

held and liabilities issued). This paper's specific focus is on the role of
lenders' portfolio behavior in the relationship between price expectations and
nominal interest rates, and the paper investigates this role using behavioral
equations directly explaining lenders' willingness to enter into long-term
fixed—income loan contracts.4 To anticipate, the conclusion of the paper's
partial—equilibrium analysis is that lenders' portfolio behavior is an important

component of the economic process generating the Fisher relationship. Results
based on U.S. data indicate that, with all other aspects of economic behavior
held unchanged, lenders' portfolio behavior would cause the equilibrium level
of nominal bond yields to rise by 0.65% for each 1% of expected price inflation.

—3—

Section I discusses several different hypotheses about economic behavior
which would logically support Fisher's relationship between price expectations

interest rates, and

and nominal
of

those

explains the particularly interesting features

which turn on portfolio behavior. Section II develops the key

behavioral equations describing lenders' demand for long-term fixed-interest
loans,

and

Section III presents estimation results for these equations based

on U.S. data for six major

categories

of lenders. Section IV presents partial-

equilibrium simulation results showing the implications of lenders' portfolio

behavior, as represented by these estimated equations, for the relationship

between

expected price inflation and

marizes

the paper's conclusions.

nominal

yields. Section V briefly sum-

—4—

I. Portfolio Behavior and the Fisher Relationship
Since there is widespread agreement not only on the importance of expected
real yields in influencing economic activity but also on the ability of monetary
policy to cause price inflation, the equilibrium extent and the dynamic speed of
the adjustment of nominal interest rates to expected inflation are crucial

of the ability of monetary policy to

determinants
in the long
have

is

and short

influence economic activity

runs, respectively. The great concern which economists

shown with the expected—price-inflation/nominal-interest-rate relationship

therefore hardly surprising.
Fisher assumed that, in long-run steady-state equilibrium, nominal yields

adjust on a one—for—one basis with expected price inflation, thereby leaving
real yields (and hence real economic activity) invariant to fully anticipated

inflation. By contrast, Mundell (50] and Tobin [69] have argued -and dynamic models, respectively —-

that,

in

static

given the fixed nominal yield

(conventionally zero) on money balances, the inevitable reduction in the real
yield on money which is consequent upon price inflation will cause a correspond-

ing reduction in real yields on other assets. According to the Mundell-Tobin
view, therefore, nominal yields will adjust less than one—for—one with expected
inflation, and real economic activity will itself depend on the rate of
inflation. ?.bre recently, Darby [9] and Feldstein [13] have conversely argued
that the distortion introduced by price inflation under non-indexed taxation

will cause the adjustment of nominal yields to be greater than one-for-one. The
precise equilibrium nature of the Fisher relationship -- and with it the equilibrium effectiveness of monetary policy ——
Even

if nominal

is

therefore an open question.

yields do adjust fully for expected inflation in long-run

steady—state equilibrium, there remains the question of the short-run effective-

ness of monetary policy if the adjusthent is not instantaneous. Fisher relied

—5-.

largely

on lags in (autoregressive) expectation formation to explain the

observed lag of nominal interest rate movements behind actual price movements,
but --

in

sharp contrast to the typical modern

rendering

of his views -- he did

not assume either that real yields are constant (or constant to a white noise),

or that they remain invariant to price inflation in the short run.5 In addition,
at least in his early work Fisher argued that, in the short run, asymmetrical
behavior between lenders and borrowers further rendered real yields systematically

dependent on the rate of price inflation.6 The well documented lags associated
with a number of relevant aspects of economic behavior, including construction
and delivery times for physical investment and the transactions costs of portfolio adjustment, provide yet additional potential sources of a lagged relationship and further suggest that even fully anticipated price inflation may influence
real yields —- and, consequently, that monetary policy may influence real
economic activity ——

in

the short run.

Many economists have investigated these important questions by working
directly with the relationship between nominal interest rates and price expec-

tations.7 It is clear, however, that this relationship is at best (if price
expectations are meaningfully exogenous) a reduced-form relationship which
presumably follows from --

but

does not explicitly reveal -- some underlying

behavioral structure.8 In the more general case without the exogeneity
assumption

between two

In

for price expectations, the Fisher relationship is a connection
variables within a structural model.

endogenous

attempting

to

shed

light on the

questions

posed above about the

equilibrium extent and dynamic speed of Fisher's adjustment of nominal interest

rates to expected price inflation, therefore, it is useful first to identify
the specific kinds of individual optimizing behavior which may plausibly

—6—

produce the observed adjustment. Nominal interest rates are relative prices
set on loan agreements struck between lenders and borrowers. Since these
nominal yields (or, conversely, prices of loan agreements) are proximately
determined in a market in which loans are extended and received, it is a
truism that any factor hypothesized to influence such yields (prices) must do
so by influencing some lender's demand for loans, or some borrower's supply
of loans, or both.

9
For expectations of future price inflation to increase

nominal interest rates, therefore, the behavioral process by which they do so
must involve creating a net excess supply of loans by reducing lenders'
willingness to lend and/or increasing borrowers' willingness to borrow at a
given nominal yield.

In what way may price expectations have this effect? Two broad groups of
hypotheses, both based on the appealing assumption that it is the expected
utility of real wealth which matters for economic behavior, are able to provide
some explanation.

First, saving and investment behavior may plausibly be responsive to

anticipated real yields. From the standpoint of lenders, the simplest example
is a household which decides to consume more and save less, at a given nominal
interest rate, when expectations •of price inflation shift the perceived inter-

temporal consumption possibility frontier infavor of current consumption.
Hence the demand for total portfolio wealth in general, and for loans in partic-

ular, is smaller. From the standpoint of borrowers, the analogous example is a
firm which decides to do more loan—financed investment, at a given nominal
interest rate, when expectations of price inflation increase the expected

revenue stream from sales of future output. Hence the supply of loans is
greater. In either case the resulting net excess supply of loans means that
the nominal interest rate must rise to clear the loan market.

—7—

Secondly,

portfolio behavior may also be plausibly related to anticipated

real yields, so that price expectations may affect choices with respect to
the composition of assets held and liabilities outstanding, wholly apart from

the respective totals)0 In a world of risk neutrality and zero transactions
costs, for example, a straightforward extension of the principle of Hicks (36]
and Lutz [44] is that lenders (investors) would presumably fully arbitrage
any difference in expected real holding-period yields among all nominal-interest

loans and all storable commodities. In practice, however, the available
opportunities for such portfolio substitutions involving consumption commodities

are usually extremely limited. Furthermore, while many investors can substitute
equities for fixed—return assets (money or loans) in their portfolios, recent
empirical and theoretical work has shown that equities are hardly an effective
"inflation hedge" in any short or intermediate run and
the

has

even cast doubt on

long-run relationship between equity returns and price inflation.11 Hence

simple propositions, framed as if

investors could actively arbitrage between

nominal interest bearing assets and the consumer—price-index basket of goods,
are inadequate for understanding the workings of the Fisher relation.
Nevertheless, even absolute barriers to portfolio substitution between
commodities and nominally denominated assets need not preclude investors'
portfolio behavior from having a key influence on the dynamics which connect

expected price inflation and nominal interest rates. As long as investors have
at least the choice between money (or, equivalently, short—term interest bearing
assets) and loans (of long duration), and as long as price inflation will
eventually affect some real variable, then investors' portfolio behavior can
still be the immediate vehicle by which expected price inflation affects

nominal yields. For example, investors expecting higher goods prices in the

—8—

future will probably expect that the associated greater nominal volume of
transactions will increase the demand for money and therefore drive up nominal

interest rates (drive down loan prices) in the future. To avoid the resulting
capital losses on holding loans, such investors will act currently to substitute
money for loans in their portfolios, thereby causing a rise in nominal yields
(a fall in loan prices) to occur even while the anticipated higher goods prices

remain only an expectation rather than a reality.12 Similarly, investors
expecting price inflation may anticipate higher nominal interest rates to
follow, either because of the monetary authority's policy response to the
inflation or because of eventual induced changes in saving and investment

behavior. Once again, portfolio substitutions of money for loans, intended to
avoid capital losses, will cause an immediate rise in nominal yields)3
Hence el/en under the assumption of severely limited substitution possibili-

ties, which preclude investors' portfolio behavior from being the ultimate source
of the adjustment of nominal interest rates to price expectations, this behavior
may still substantially influence the dynamics of the adjustment process.
Especially since the changes in saving and investment behavior which may
ultimately

underlie the Fisher relationship presumably involve substantial

time lags, the role of portfolio behavior is a crucial determinant of whether
expected

real yields reach their equilibrium (perhaps unaltered) levels

quickly or with a (perhaps exploitable) lag.
The specific object of attention in this paper is the role of lenders'
portfolio behavior in producing the adjustment of nominal interest rates to

expected price inflation. Sections II and III below develop and estimate
equations representing, with special attention to the influence of price
expectations, the maximizing behavior of lenders in the market which many

—9—

previous researchers have also chosen to reflect most
tionship —-

in

clearly

the Fisher rela-

particular, the market for long—term fixed-interest loans

(bonds). Section IV then uses a partial-equilibrium methodology to examine
the implications of lenders' portfolio behavior, as represented by these
equations, for the relationship between nominal interest rates and
price inflation.

expected

—10—

II. A Model of Lenders' Demand for Loans
It is well known that, for risk averse investors maximizing the expected
utility of either terminal wealth or portfolio rate of return, the optimal portfolio allocation depends not only on the means but also on the higher moments of
the distributions describing the expected holding-period rates of return on

each individual asset available for portfolio investment. Under the simplifying
assumption of joint normally (or lognormally) distributed rates of return,
therefore, optimal portfolio allocation depends on the means, variances and co-

variances of the individual expected asset yields)4 In the familiar linear homogeneous form, the resulting model of desired portfolio allocation is the expression15

=

krk +

1ik'kt + E

i=l,... ,N

ikjCkjt +

(1)

where

= the investor's desired holding of the i-th

i=l,... ,N

asset at time period t (ZA =
=

the
at

W)

investor's total portfolio size (wealth)

time period t

e
rkl
k=l,... ,N

=

the

Vkt? k=l,... ,N

=

the variance associated with

=

the covariance associated with re and
kt

c
kjt

,

k,j=l,.

.

. ,N

expected value of the holding-period
yield on the k—th asset at time period t

and the 8ik' ik' 6ikj and it. are fixed coefficients which satisfy k =

'k = 0
1

for all k,

ikj =

0 for all k and

j, and Z it.

1

tion of universal substitutability, the

=

1.

On the assump-

1

and

also

satisfy 8•k > 0 >

—11—
i =

k,

and 8ik < 0 <

ik'

i

k. The expression for the investor's desired

holding of loans (La), for example is (without the covariances)

=

8LLrL +

kLkt

+

YvL + kLkt +

(2)

where the coefficients of the holding-period yield expectations and variances

satisfy8>O>yand8<O<y kL.
What is the role of expected price inflation within a portfolio choice

framework like (1) and (2)? If real assets constitute a plausible asset for
portfolio investment, then the effect of price expectations here is striaght-

forward. The increase in goods prices is then simply the holding-period
return on investment in such real assets, and the associated expectation re is

an argument of (2). The associated coefficient

is negative so that, for

all other things equal, greater expectations of price inflation reduce lenders'

demand for loans. Following the discussion of Section I, however, purchasing
the consumer—price—index basket of goods is not in fact a practical portfolio
alternative.

For expected price inflation to influence lenders' portfolio behavior under
limited portfolio Substitution possibilities, therefore, inflation expectations
must differentially affect the expected holding—period returns (or variances or
covariances) on those assets which do constitute

plausible portfolio choices.

For example, expected inflation may increase the expected return to equities
relative to expected returns on money and loans (of all maturities) which have

fixed nominal yields. Alternatively, again in the term—structure context,

the future price inflation to bring higher future nominal
interest rates, thereby increasing the expected long—holding_period return or
a series of short-term loans relative to that on a long-term loan —- or,
investors may expect

—12—

equivalently, to bring lower future loan prices, thereby reducing the expected
short—holding--period return on a long-term loan relative to that on a single

short—term loan)6 Even for an investor who cannot practically invest in real
assets, therefore, the demand—for—loans expression (2) may depend on expectations

of price inflation via their influence on the expected asset returns r. Moreover,
if the investor associates uncertainty of asset returns with uncertainty of
price inflation, then the variance (and relevant covariances) of price expectations will also be a determinant of the demand for loans.
The general portfolio allocation model (1), as well as the specific loan
demand expression (2), describes the determination of variables which are

unobservable in the presence of transactions costs. Consequently, it is
necessary to apply some model of portfolio adjustment to translate the implications

of

such expression into an operational model of behavior. The "optimal marginal

adjustment"

that

model developed in Friedman (23]

is useful for this purpose, in

it generalizes the familiar stock adjustment model so as to relate the

investor's short—run portfolio adjustments not only to the discrepancies
(Are -

At...i),

i=l,...,N, between the desired asset holdings from selection

(1) and the corresponding previous-period holdings but also to the current

model

investable cash flow. The primary rationale for distinguishing the cash flow in

this

context is that current cash flows are typically more easily (costlessly)

allocated than are existing asset holdings. Since transactions costs constitute,
in the first instance, the underlying motivation for using a model which admits
discrepancies between actual and desired portfolio holdings,17 it is worth while

to model the implications of transactions costs with some care. The optimal
marginal adjustment model incorporates in a tractable form the differential
transactions costs between the investor's allocation of a new cash flow and

—13—

re-allocation of existing asset holdings by positing the allocation of the
current cash flow according to whatever proportions portfolio selection model
(1) indicates are desired for the total

an

Given
flow,

portfolio.

investor' s beginning-of—period wealth and

current—period cash

the optimal marginal adjustment model is
=

Mit

OiktWt_l

-

Ak,t_l)

i1,...,N

+

(3)

where the desired equilibrium proportions

it Wt
F

i=l,... ,N

,

(Z ct1 =

1)

(4)

1.

follow from (1), and the 0ik are fixed coefficients of adjustment satisfying
0J.k = 8

for all k, with 0 arbitrary. Heuristically, the first term on the

right—hand side of (3) represents the re-allocation, according to a standard
multivariate stock—adjustment model, of the investor's existing asset holdings

l,...,N

i =

W_1), while

term represents the allocation of the investor' s current—period cash

the second

flow

(which sum to the beginning-of—period wealth

according to the desired equilibrium proportions

a1, i l,...N. The

key advantage of the optimal marginal adjustment model in the context of this paper

is that it captures the greater sensitivity to expected holding—period yields
(and inflation) of the allocation of the flow AWt in comparison with the reallocation of the stock W1.
Expanding

portfolio adjustment model (3), using the desired loan demand

expression (2) as a specific component of portfolio
yields

selection model (1),

an operational equation for investors' short-run demand for loans:
ALt

=

LAWt

+

+ 8r.Aw

+

(8kLO)J.r.W

—14—

+

kL

Lk kt

+

+ YJJVLtWt +
+
[Z(YjkOLj)]•vktWtl}
—

O.Lti

-

kL,t1

(5)

Here it is useful to distinguish the particular right-hand-side terms which do

and do not have coefficients of known sign a priori. Each expected holding-

period yield r and variance vkl k =
own-variance

1,... ,N

(including the own-yield r and

vL) enters (5) twice, in nonlinear form both times. In each case

the product of r or vk and the flow

bears a coefficient which consists of

a single parameter of known sign from (1). Similarly, the lagged own-stock

L1 enters (5) with coefficient 0LI. < 0 from the stock—adjustment component
of (3). All other right—hand-side terms in (5) ——

W1 and
of r or vk with

including

the linear terms

as well as all nonlinear terms consisting of products
—-

bear coefficients which are of unknown

sign a

priori)8

Since the models of desired equilibrium portfolio behavior (1) and short—run

portfolio adjustment (3) underlying loan demand equation (5) deal with the
investor's demands for all assets (and supplies of all liabilities),
(5) is implicitly an element of a set of demand equations which satisfy the

various "adding-up" constraints specified above. By contrast, the more limited
focus of this paper is on the nature of investors' demands for loans -— more
specifically, long-term loans -- and on the partial-equilibrium implications

of these demands for the relationship between expected price inflation and

nominal

interest rates. As Ladenson [37] and Smith (66] have shown, it is not

—15-.

necessary

to use constrained estimation techniques to guarantee that the

parameter estimates of the full set of demand equations satisfy the "adding-up"

constraints,

so that

there is no inconsistency involved in estimating only one

demand equation rather than the entire set. In principle, however, even for
the limited objective at hand, a complete model including all assets (and

liabilities too) would be preferable. In particular, a complete model would
not only facilitate a general—equilibrium analysis but also permit the researcher
to adopt the philosophy as well as the mechanics of Brainard arid Tobin (6] by

examining the implications for other asset demand equations of the presence of

a given variable in any one asset demand equation. The construction of such a
complete model, however, lies well beyond the scope of this paper.
Section III presents the results of estimating loan demand equation (5)
applied to the demand for long-term fixed-interest loans by six separate
categories of U.S. lenders.

-16—

III. Estimation Results
Preliminary Issues. it is useful at the outset to comment briefly on
several aspects of the specification and estimation of the loan demand equations presented below.

Disaggregation: The equations presented below represent the demand for
long-term loans to private borrowers (that is, long-term corporate bonds) by
six categories of U.S. lenders which together held approximately 93% of all

such loans outstanding in the United States as of yearend 1976: life insurance
companies (34.4%), other insurance companies (4.0%), private pension funds (11.0%),
state and local government retirement funds (19.3%), mutual savings banks (5.7%),

and households'9 (18.4%). This disaggregation is useful because such diverse
lenders —-which face different legislative and regulatory constraints, and play
different roles in the markets' highly complex intermediation structure ——

are

unlikely to exhibit identical portfolio responses to expected price inflation.
For example, although life insurance companies must earn real dividends, since
their liabilities are almost exclusively in nominal form it is not obvious that
their asset demands are highly sensitive to expected real yields in the short run.
In addition, life insurance companies in most states can invest only a small

fraction of their portfolios in equities. By contrast, many pension funds face
liabilities which are either explicitly or implicitly indexed to consumer goods

prices, and private pension funds in particular have substantially more latitude
in allocating their portfolios.

Data: The primary data source for the stock and flow quantities used to
estimate these equations is the Federal Reserve System's flow—of—funds accounts

[1, and subsequent issues].2° These data are seasonally adjusted and are
denominated in millions of dollars. The sample period consists of 56 quarterly
observations beginning in 1960:1 and ending in l973:IV.

—17—

The particular nominal interest rate rL used in these equations is the
observed new-issue yield on long-term bonds issued by utility companies rated

Aa by Moody's Investors Ser,ice, Inc. Aa-rated utility bonds provide the
greatest continuity, in terms of the frequency of new issues; they are also

most representative of new-issue activity in the U.S. market. Previous studies
of

long—term nominal interest rate
approach have

term—structure
or

seasoned issues,

issues or

quoted

relied on indices of yields either on new issues

but the new—issue yield is likely to be superior for

reasons. First, trading in

several

new

determination using the reduced—form

the corporate bond market involves either

recent issues to a far greater extent than

seasoned issues, and

price movements among seasoned issues are often just a reflection of

what is happening in the new-issue market. Secondly, because of thin trading
markets, problems of measurement are considerably smaller for new issues than

for

seasoned issues. Thirdly, differences in coupon rates between current new

issues and the issues used in constructing seasoned yield indices introduce a
form of bias into the seasoned yield index itself.
Instrumental

variables estimation: Since the own—yield on

long-term loans

is jointly determined by lenders' demands for loans and borrowers' supplies of
loans, it is necessary to allow for this simultaneity in deriving consistent

estimates of the loan demand equations. The relevant set of instruments used
here for deriving consistent estimators includes not only the exogenous variables in the six respective disaggregated demand equations but also the
exogenous variables in the two disaggregated loan supply equations developed in
Friedman

(22]. As is

typically the case in multi-equation models, it is impos-

sible to apply the two-stage least-squares method directly because there are
too

many exogenous

variables to permit

ordinary

least—squares estimation of

the system's reduced form as this method requires.

The procedure used here

—18—

follows Brundy and Jorgenson [5] in using as instrumental variables not only
the leading principal components of the full—system set of exogenous variables
but also, on an equation—by—equation basis, the single-equation sets of
exogenous variables themselves.

Intercepts: Equation (5) has no intercept term, but it is probably accurate
to consider the portfolio behavior model developed in Section II as a linear
approximation to a more complex behavioral pattern, and an intercept may follow

from linearization. The procedure used here includes or excludes an intercept
in each loan demand equation according to the t-statistic.

Expectations proxies: Since lenders' expectations are unobservable, both
for price inflation and for nominal holding-period returns on assets subject to
capital gains or losses, it is necessary to use some indirect representation in

their place. Nevertheless, no sharp consensus exists on the best form of
expectations proxy to use for such purposes. The approach adopted here, therefore, is to estimate each of the six loan demand equations twice —- once using
an autoregressive and once using a rational representation of lenders'
expectations.

Results Based on Autoregressive Expectations. A familiar representation
of expectations, used by many of the researchers who have explored the relationship between expected price inflation and nominal interest rates, is that
market participants form their expectations of relevant variables on the basis

of previously observed values of these variables. Following Nerlove [53], a
general autoregressive expectation mechanism of the form
=

.E

(6)

i=O

where E(.) is the expectation held at time t, the w. are lag weights and the

—19—

tilde indicates that variable x1 is unknown as of time t, is consistent
with the optimal linear prediction of a time series from its own past history.
Several familiar simple expectations mechanisms, such as the "naive" model that

next period will be like last period, or Cagan's (6] adaptive expectation, are

special cases of autoregressive expectations. More generally, Modigliani and
Shiller (48] have usefully illustrated, also in the context of interest rate and
price expectations, that autoregressive expectations are consistent with a

combination of extrapolative and regressive components. To emphasize the
contrast to the more restrictive adaptive schemes, some writers have referred
to such general autoregressive expectations mechanisms as "partly rational" or
"weak—form rational."21

Table 1 shows the results of estimating loan demand equation (5), for
each of the six categories of lenders indicated above, using autoregressive
representations

of the relevant expectations. The variable symbols are con-

sistent for all six equations, with letter superscripts indicating distinctions
among corresponding variables for the respective categories of lenders.
Asterisk superscripts indicate terms for which an equation is estimated using
fitted values of the variable from the first stage of the instrumental variables

procedure.22 The numbers in parentheses are ratios of estimated

coefficients to the corresponding standard errors.23
Following the autoregressive model, these equations use distributed lags
on past percentage changes of the consumer price index, past percentage changes

in the one-period loan yield, and past percentage changes in equity prices to
represent the influence of these past observations on lenders' expected
holding-period
variances

yields. Similarly, these equations use computed

moving-average

to represent the second moments of the distributions describing

Table 1
LOAN DEMAND EQUATIONS BASED ON AUTOREGRESSIVE EXPECTATIONS

Life Insurance Companies

LL = 0.1716

L* —
0.2193 (rL.W)
0.03203

+

(59)

(2.9)
—

E

i S,t—i

(—3.5) 1

0.1215 r
(-1.3)

It

-

tW

.wL
t

0. 00216 r .W1 — 0.3225
Ct

Z

(-2.8) i

+ 0.00457 Z

(2.9) i
+ 1.398 v
Et
(1.7)

P

—

i t—i.wL
t—1

2.241
(—1.7

— 0.3551 LL

t

(1.4)

— 0.1405 I

(—5.6)

2O89

VLt t + 0.02475 VLtWt1
(—2.6)

SE=154

DW=1.35

Other Insurance Companies

0*

= 524.1 + 0.2570 W1 + 0.0501 (r
Lt
(2.1)
(2.8)

-

0.00121

E cJ

(—1.4) 1

(6.2)

r

i S,t-i

t

0

(—2.4)

=

VEWt1

(—4.7)

— 0.2534 L

—

M° —

0.3005

p

.

(—7.0) i

+ 0.000109 VE•W — 0.00000846
(1.3)

i t—i t—1

— 0.02000 E

(—2.9)

0.2572

E1 —

(—2.8)

0.96

0.3985 U0
(—3.9)

SE = 42

DW =

1.99

Private Pension Funds
= 0.2892 W1 + 0.09953 (rLt.W)* —
(2.1)

•

— 0.09811 E

(—1.8) i

P •Wt —
it—i

0.000428

(—3.2)

0.2925
(—2.0)

E

(—2.1) i

+ 1.323 VE,tSW — 0.02630 v
E
(3.0)
—

tr

0.00445 E •
i s,t_i.wt
(—2.1) 1

(3.1)

1.

— 0.4633
(—2.5)

E + 0.3714 U1
(3.7)

SE=198

DW2.48

Table 1 (Continued)
State-Local Retirement Funds

LS =

1834 + 0.2729

W1 +

(3.4)

(—2.6)

(—2.8) 1

—

0.1229

E

(—2.4) 1

(2.0)

•W5 —
trS,t—i
t

0.01273 E $
i

—

0.07650 (rLt.W)*

P

it-i

t+

0.04255
(—1.4)

rT.W

8.571 VBtWt

0.2682 v

—

(3.

(—3.8)

B

+ 2.100 VEIt•W — 0.04604 VE,tSWl — 1.376 v
Pt
(3.9)

(—3.2)

— 0.2674 LS

0.1943 Us

—

(—2.8)

(—3.0)

—

0.2511

(35)

(—3.0)

2O94

E1

SE=95

DW=1.74

Mutual Savings Banks

LM = 4906 + 0.3767 (r •wM) — 0.02573E
Lt
t

(6.9)

(6.0)

— 0.4265

(—4.4)

(—4.1) i

rMW

0.3672

E
P
(—1.5) 1 it-i

—

0.01412 VE,tWl — 0.2722 LM
(—3.7)

(2.3)
—

r

i S,t—i t

0.07869

—

+ 0.4147 VEtW

•

U

M

(—6.1)

2O94

(—7.0)

+ 0.5683

RM — 0.3317

(6.9)

(—7.0)

cM

SE=97

DW=2.52

Households

LH

= 9995 + 0.06960 (rL.W)* — 0.00531
E +.tr
(4.2)

(5.1)
—

'S

(—2.2) i

0.09108 rEw + 0.00142 r
Et t-1
(—4.0)
(4.4)

— 0.03282

E .P
it-i•W + 0. 00495

(—2.3) 1

t—1

E

Table 1 (Continued 2)

— 0.00337 v .wH — 0.2843 LH
Pt
t
(—2.2)

= 0.86

Summary

—

(—4.0)

0.1533 uH 1

—

0.00482 EH

(—4.2)

(—4.2)

DW =

SE = 382

2.94

of Variable Symbols

C = holdings of commercial mortgages
E
I

=
=

holdings
holdings
holdings
holdings
holdings
holdings

L
M
R
U
W

=
=
=
=
= total

r

= yield

rE

rL
rM
r8

rT

of corporate equities
of intermediate-term U.S. government securities
of long-term corporate bonds
of municipal bonds
of residential mortgages
of all U.S. government securities
holdings of all financial assets

on
yield on
= yield on
= yield on
= yield on
= yield on
= yield on

new commercial mortgages (ALIA series)

(S&P dividend/price ratio)
intermediate-term U.S. government securities
equities

(3—5 years)

corporate bonds (new Aa utility issues)
municipal bonds (new Aaa issues)
commercial paper (prime 4—6 months)
Treasury bills (3 months)

=
=
=
=

P

variance of yield on long—term U.S. government securities
variance of yield on equities (dividend/price yield only)
variance of yield on equities (total return)
variance of yield on corporate bonds
= variance of rate of price inflation (CPI)
= annualized percentage change of consumer price index

Q

=

VB
VE
VE,

VL

V

annualized

percentage change of equity prices (S&P)

Notes: Numbers in parentheses are ratios of estimated values to standard errors.
SE in millions of dollars.

—20—

lenders'
loan

expectations. The distributed lags on consumer prices and one—period

yields

are estimated, within the estimation of the loan demand equations,

with lag weights constrained to follow a third-degree polynomial pattern, the
right-hand tail of the lag constrained to

pass through zero, and the lead lag

weight free of the polynomial constraint.24 The coefficients shown in Table 1
for the several distributed lag variables are in each case the sums of the

estimated lag weights. The equity price distributed lags and the moving-average
variances, by contrast, rely on uniform fixed weights.
The results shown in Table 1 are broadly consistent with the model of

portfolio behavior developed in Section II. The estimated equations explain
a large percentage of the variation of the changes of holdings (net purchases)
of long—term loans by all lender categories other than private pension funds.
The demand for loans in each case responds

positively to the currently prevail-

ing nominal yield on long-term fixed-interest loans; negatively to currently
prevailing nominal yields on competing assets; negatively to the expected yield

on a series of one—period loans, as represented by the distributed lag on past
one-period loan yields; and negatively to expected price inflation, as represented by the distributed lag on past price movements.

Some lenders' loan

demands also respond negatively to the expected capital gain on equities, as
represented by the distributed lag on past equity price movements. The different moving—average variances appear in these equations in an irregular way;

but

the own—variance (calculated from realized net returns to holding corporate

bonds) and the price variance enter negatively in each case, while the variances
of competing asset yields enter positively in each case.25
Table 2 summarizes, for all six categories of lenders, three key coeffi-

cients of the loan demand equation which

are particularly relevant for assessing

Table 2
SELECTED PARAMETER ESTIMATES FOR LOAM DEMAND
EQUATIONS BASED ON AUTOREGRESSIVE EXPECTATIONS

Lender Category

Life Insurance Companies

Other Insurance Companies

LL

LP

0LL

RNSE

.219

—.322

.355

125

(2.9)

(—2.8)

(5.6)

.050

—

(6.2)

Private Pension Funds

State-Local Retirement Funds

—.098

.463

(3.1)

(—1.8)

(2.5)

.077

—.123

.267

.377
(6.0)

Households

.070
(5.1)

33

(2.4)

.100

(2.0)

Mutual Savings Banks

.253

(—2.4)

—.079
(—1.5)

—.033
(—2.3)

164

77

(2.8)

.272

84

(7.0)

.284

323

(4.0)

Notes: Nunibers in parentheses are ratios of estimated values to standard errors.
RMSE in millions of dollars.

—21—

the

role of lenders' portfolio behavior in the relationship between expected

price inflation and nominal interest rates.
First, the estimated own—yield coefficients
equation (2) of the desired portfolio selection
responsiveness of the desired fraction of loans

xxdel (1), indicate the

in the portfolio. With the

exception of mutual savinqs banks (for which
estimates are all of credible magnitude in

B, from the specific loan

is implausibly large), these

addition to being significantly

greater than zero at high confidence levels. In each case the value of
indicates the fractional increase in the share of the portfolio which the
lender will want to allocate to long-term fixed-interest

loans if, with all

other things equal, the nominal own—yield on loans rises by one percentage
point (that is, by 100 basis points).
Secondly, the estimated price expectations coefficients 8,, again from
(2), indicate the responsiveness to expected inflation of the desired fraction

of loans in the portfolio. These estimates are significantly

different

from

zero, with the expected negative sign, for five of the six categories of

lenders.26 Hence the greater the expected inflation as inferred from recent
observed inflation -rate, equal ——

the

all

other things, including the nominal loan interest

smaller are these lenders' demands for fixed—interest loans.

Following the discussion in Section II, this

response may represent an

explicit utility maximization of real rather than nominal wealth (or rate of
return), or it

may indicate

that investors draw inferences about future interest

rate

movements (about future capital gains) from observations of price inflation. The magnitudes of the
estimates provide support for the hypothesis

that lenders seek to maximize the utility of some real quantity
four of the six lender groups, it is impossible to
reject at the

since, for
10%

confidence

—22—

=

level the hypothesis

Nevertheless, since the estimated lag weight

sums reported here are not identifiable as

estimates without an arbitrary

(though plausible) assumption that the true lag weights in the autoregressive
expectation sum to unity,27 it is not in general appropriate to assign these
estimates a specific economic interpretation strictly comparable to the

corresponding .

These estimates reflect the effect of observed price infla-

tion on the demand for loans, including not only the effect of expected inflation
on portfolio behavior but also the effect of observed inflation on expected
.

•

inflation.

28

Thirdly, the 0LL estimates reflect the stock-adjustment component of the

optimal marginal adjustment model (3). These estimates are significantly
different from zero, with the expected positive sign, for all six categories

of lenders. Their magnitudes roughly correspond to intuitive judgments of
various lenders' respective likely speeds of portfolio adjustment based on
institutional considerations; private pension funds, for example, which are
typically managed very actively, undertake the most rapid re-allocation of

their existing assets.29 Although these estimated adjustment speeds are fairly
rapid in comparison to those typically found by previous researchers, they
still indicate the existence of lags in portfolio behavior which will, in the
short run, prevent nominal yields from immediately achieving their full
adjustment to any stimulus affecting lenders' behavior --

including

expected

price inflation.

In addition, for purposes of comparison with the alternative set of loan
demand

equations estimated using the rational representation of the relevant

unobservable expectations,

Table 2 shows the root—mean—square forecast error

for each of the six equations.

30

—23—

Results Based on Rational Expectations. Recent researchers have broadly
applied Muth's [52] concept of rational expectations, especially in the context of models dealing with the effectiveness of monetary policy.31 Expectations are rational, according to Muth's definition, if
=

E(;i)

+

(7)

where Et(.) is again the expectation conditional on all information available
as of time t, and u is a zero—mean finite—variance random disturbance which is
serially uncorrelated as well as uncorrelated with Et(.). In other words,
expectations are rational in Muth's sense if the lender's expectation equals

mathematical expectation of the corresponding variable, conditional on all
information available as of time t.32 As Frenkel [21] and Mussa [51] among
the

others

have shown in the specific context of price inflation, if the nature

of the process generating realizations of the x series is such that all
relevant information is contained in past values of x itself, then the autoregressive expectation is also the rational expectation.

Nevertheless, even

in simple models the necessary conditions for rational and autoregressive
expectations to be identical are typically severe, so that it is useful to
treat these two representations of expectations as distinct alternatives for
estimation purposes.
As McCallum [46] and others have emphasized, in the absence of perfect
foresight Muth's definition of rationality renders the realization

x+1 in

(7) distributed around, rather than equal to, the
expectation Et (x+1),

thereby

leading to a classical errors—in—variables problem for estimation if

actual values are simply used in place of the relevant expectations. The
procedure used here to estimate loan demand equation (5) under rational

expectations therefore replaces the

actual

values corresponding to the three

—24—
relevant expectations -—

of

price inflation, capital gains on bonds, and

capital gains on equities —-

with

their respective Brundy-Jorgenson instrumented

values. While any valid instrument will give a consistent estimate of the
coefficient of such an expectation, this instrument will give a more efficient
estimate than the commonly suggested simpler one based only on past realizations
of the series themselves if lenders, in forming their expectations, take account
of the additional information on which the instrument is based.33 In the
absence of any clear interpretation of the rationality definition •for higher
moments of distributions, the variance representations included in these equations
are the same moving—average variances used in the equations presented above
based on autoregressive expectations.
Table 3 shows the estimates and standard error ratios for two coefficients
of the loan demand equations based on rational expectations. The estimated
coefficients

again indicate the responsiveness, to the (rational) expecta-

tion of price inflation, of the desired fraction of loans in the portfolio.
The estimated coefficients 8LC analogously indicate the responsiveness of
desired portfolio allocation to the (rational) expectation of capital gains

on bonds. In sharp contrast to the corresponding estimates shown in Tables 1
and 2 for the loan demand equations based on

autoregressive expectations,

these coefficient estimates are significantly different from zero, with the

expected signs (negative for 8, positive for 8) for only two and zero
categories of lenders, respectively.
Table 3 also shows the root-mean—square forecast errors for each of
the six loan demand equations estimated using the rational expectations pro-

cedure. In each of the six cases, this error is greater than the error shown
in Table 2 for the corresponding loan demand equation based on autoregressive

expectations. These root-mean-square errors are essential to a valid comparison

Table 3
SELECTED PARAMETER ESTIMATES FOR LOAN DEMAND
EQUATIONS BASED ON RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS

Category

Lender

Life Insurance Companies
Other

8LP

—.0471
(—1.1)
.0517

Insurance Companies

Private

Pension Funds

State—Local Retirement Funds

.0000375

(1.2)

(0.0)

— .0369

—.0292
(—4.3)

Notes:

—.00278

.0215
.00740

RMSE

221

(0.3)
(—1.2)'

(—3.6)

Households

.000437

(1.0)

(0.4)

Mutual Savings Banks

8LC

—.00247

129

190

98

(—2.0)

— .00339

100

(—3.3)

—.0000555

437

(—0.1)

Numbers in parentheses are ratios of estimated values to standard errors.
RMSE in millions of dollars.

—25—

of the two sets of results, since high multicollinearity between the price
inflation and capital gain series (as would be expected under perfect arbitrage)
could in principle explain the weakness of the

and 8LC estimates. By

contrast, the respective root—mean—square errors are not sensitive to multi—
collinearity, and their comparison --

which uniformly favors the equations

based on the autoregressive expectations proxies —-

is

analogous to an F-test

rather than the t-tests reported for the individual parameter estimates.
Section Iv presents a partial-equilibrium analysis of the role of lenders'
portfolio behavior in the relationship between expected price inflation and
nominal interest rates, based on the autoregressive expectations version of
the loan demand equations shown in full in Table 1.

—26--

Expected Price Inflation and Nominal Interest Rates

IV.

The equations developed and

estimated

in Section III represent lenders'

demand for loans. These six equations, together with some representation of
borrowers' supply of loans, therefore constitute a complete model of the loan

market. Adding the market-clearing equilibrium condition

6.

ZL=Lt,

(8)

:1=1

where L is the supply of loans, thereb4y enables the model to determine the
nominal loan yield which is an argument of each of the six estimated loan
demand equations.34
include

loan

Furthermore, since five of these six equations explicitly

expected price inflation as another independent variable, the nominal

yield determined in

this model is

an implicit

function of

expected

inflation.

Figure 1 illustrates in (rL L)
based

space how a partial-equilibrium analysis

on the six estimated loan demand equations and equilibrium condition (8),

with loan supply taken as given, isolates the contribution of lenders' portfolio
behavior

to the

relationship.

The object of this analysis is to show how the nominal loan yield would respond
to expected inflation if all aspects of economic behavior other than lenders'

portfolio behavior remained unchanged. In particular, the assumption of given
investable
holds

cash flows (which are important arguments of the loan

unchanged

demand equations)

all decisions about how much to save, and the assumption of a

given loan supply analogously holds unchanged not only all decisions about how

much to invest but also borrowers' decisions with respect to the composition of
their liabilities.

In Figure 1 the upward sloping curve L(Pe), which
represents the aggregated

J .L
I-

I

-• -----.---

I

i-—-

-i ••-

,I_

-.

-

--'-i-:-

-

--—

— IJT
I

- -- I

I

ii-- -!---—

-

-H .—-

I•

--

H

-z
— -—----+
-- —-I

--

--.-—

-

-

---I---

-

II .::J-I

4---—-—- —

-

'1
-

--

-

-

•

-

I-

:'\-\

-----

-

--

--I

-z

-

-

-

IH.
-i---

0

.•

.

-

-.-

I

U-I
-

1i1

I-

H-

—

-

-

-

i

-

7

I
--

-I

— ——

---•

--——

.-

- --.--

-

-

.—— —...

.

-

-

.

—I

___. _L.__.

dIR -- 3. 1 NOId4cI—iJ I-L.

—27—

demand for loans conditional on some fixed expectation of price inflation
intersects the fixed loan supply L at interest rate rL. Curve L(Pe + 1%),
which represents the demand for loans conditional on an inflation expectation

1% greater, is shifted to the left from L(e), indicating lenders' reduced
willingness to hold bonds at any

therefore
that

given

nominal interest rate. Curve L(Pe + 1%)

intersects L at interest rate rL >

and the difference (r rL) --

is, the "upward shift" measured by the vertical distance between L(Pe + 1%)

and L(Pe) for a given L —-

indicates

the increase in rL which makes lenders

content to hold exactly L loans after an increase of 1% in their expectation
of price inflation.

2 and Table 4 summarize the results of a dynamic version of such
a partial-equilibrium analysis based on the six estimated loan demand functions
from Section III, the market equilibrium condition (8), and given loan supply.
Figure

The heavy solid line in Figure 2 plots the observed historical values of the
nominal loan yield which, as Table 4 shows, averaged 6.07% over the 1960-73

sample period. The light solid line in the figure plots the simulated values
of the nominal loan yield from the nxdel of lenders' portfolio behavior. This
"control" simulation, based on historical values of all exogenous variables
(including distributed lags on observed price inflation in place of the unobservable
inflation expectation), is fully dynamic in that, after the first quarter of
the

simulation, the solution uses internally generated values for the lagged
own-stock variables
in each of the six loan demand equations.
This control simulation indicates that the partial—equilibrium loan market
model reproduces the relevant historical experience with reasonable accuracy.

There is no significant bias for any
variables,

and, as Table 4

of

shows, the

the model's seven jointly determined

mean

simulated value of the nominal loan

• --LJ'-

____

T

II
-F.
- t. . t -

Thii
1±H-H—
-—t--*
'—

.•

L., '.

-J H-H431+ 1 --

— --

H- d—- r H[': LL.j

-t-k4't

L.1 - J-..

-L

I-

'l_

J-L;- L

JHT'T.4:1'.

''rr

t_t_i1144 '.4.11 .j.

--$---'• —--H•H ---

+H H4±

41 +} rft
y

1

fJ.

-.-H 1'" 1

44
,

:- ':.l-

T

-

*
t
J_. ..

T

'
-

LL

-,

i

.1

-i---1- -i-- ..L.

-

--r-t-.

—

—4-

.+

'r

I

I

T-

L.
—,-' --r--' ---4
.J

T

"

I—

1-1 -—

.

-

.,,T1..

____

H iL
T

.L

"-a- ._l

-Li -, '-

:Li.:

4—.---.

L..
.t— ...4.. .—

:.Tt'.

'"

-.

.

L.
---1H —-,. .4"
-

.I

.-a-—

.1

-, :---, 'H
T-

T

—

'-T

._

—1

-

1

"'

4-f .J ,
4-4 t,
LI

t±i -'-'-• 'I-

j,

—1

H)NI oi VflOS O - NO.L3S ScOd
019 'ON ..iNal NOlVH3 ]H.L..

Table 4

NOMINAL LOAN YIELD DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS

1960—73
Average Yield

Difference
from Historical

Historical

6.07 %

Control Simulation

6.07

0.00 %

1 % Greater Inflation Experiment

6.72

0.65

—28—

yield is precisely 6.07%. For the six loan demand variables, the root—meansquare dynamic simulation errors are about in line with those shown in Table 2,
indicating that the errors made by individual equations have no observable

tendency to compound one another.35 For the nominal loan yield, the root-meansquare dynamic simulation error is 0.21% (that is, 21 basis points) --

about

comparable to the "fit" achieved by previous researchers who have directly
estimated reduced-form equations for long-term nominal interest rates.36
This within—sample performance seems quite creditable, especially since the
methodology of the structural model does not estimate an equation directly for
this yield but, instead, implies an equation for the yield which is restricted
by the underlying structural hypotheses about lenders' portfolio behavior.37
What equilibrium adjustment in the nominal interest rate, equivalent to

the difference between r and rL In Figure 1, will lenders' portfolio behavior
induce in response to greater expectations of price inflation? The broken line
in Figure 2 plots the simulated values of the nominal loan yield from an
alternative simulation which differs from the control only in that the expected

rate of price inflation is 1% greater throughout the simulation period. Specifically, this simulation experiment is based on values of the rate of change of
consumer prices which, from as long before 1960 as is consistent with the
distributed-lag price expectations terms in the estimated loan demand equations,

are 1% greater than the corresponding historical values. In all other respects
this simulation is identical to the control.
Since the demand for loans by five categories of lenders responds negatively
to the greater expectations of price inflation,38 the nominal loan yield must
rise as in Figure 1 if total loan demand is still to equal total loan supply.
As the broken line in Figure 2 shows, the market—clearing level of the nominal

—29—

yield in this experiment is strictly greater than

the

control simulation

level throughout the simulation period. The mean simulated value of the

nominal yield in this experiment (r) as Table 4 shows, is 6.72% —- an
increase of 0.65% above the control simulation mean (rL).
Finally, what is the dynamic

speed

by which lenders' portfolio behavior will

about this 0.65% equilibrium adjustment? The dotted line in Figure 2 plots
the simulated values of the nominal loan yield from a further experiment in
bring

which

the 1% increase in the assumed rate of price inflation, .in comparison

with the control, is effective only in l966:Iv and thereafter. Hence this
experimnt's results for 1960—66 are identical to those of the control simulation. As of 1967:1, however, the simulated nominal loan yield begins to rise

the

above

control path. By 1971:1 —-

adjustment

to the new equilibrium

that

path,

is, after four years --

the

which is identical to that of the

first simulation experiment, is essentially complete.

These simple partial-equilibrium experiments cannot, of course, represent
the complete nature of the

relationship. In the first instance, the intent motivating their construction
is not to model all of the underlying economic behavior but rather to isolate

the role of lenders' portfolio behavior. Borrowers' portfolio behavior, for
example, presumably corresponds to a downward sloping loan supply curve instead

of the vertical L
rate

will,

in Figure 1, and the

equilibrium adjustment of the interest

be greater (less) than 0.65% if the "upward shift" of the supply

curve is greater (less) than

the

0.65% found here for the aggregated demand

curve.40 This analysis also abstracts from the influences of saving and

investment

behavior as discussed in Section I. In addition, as the discussion

of Section II notes, even the lenders' portfolio behavior modeled here applies

—30—

only to one market —— that for long—term fixed-interest loans -- rather than

to the complete set of all asset and liability markets. Nevertheless, these
partial—equilibrium

experiments are instructive in showing that lenders'

portfolio behavior is an important part of the Fisher relationship, that this
behavior alone is likely to yield a large (but less than

one-for—one)

equilibrium

adjustment of nominal interest rates to expected price inflation, and that the
dynamic path toward the equilibrium adjustment involves a substantial time lag.

—31—

V. Suimnary of Conclusions

Both the equilibrium extent and the dynamic path of the adjustment of

nominal interest rates to expected price inflation are important questions

for monetary theory and policy. The role of portfolio behavior is especially
interesting in this context because, of the different kinds of economic
behavior which may underlie the Fisher relationship, it is the most plausibly

flexible in the short run. Even so, since substitution into real assets is
not a practical portfolio alternative for many investors, it is not obvious
a priori how important lenders' portfolio behavior is in this relationship.
The empirical results presented in this paper indicate that lenders'
portfolio behavior does play an important role in the expected-price-inflation/
nominal—interest—rate relationship.

First, at the single—equation level, the results provide evidence that,

with all other things equal, five of the six major categories of lenders in
the U.S. long—term fixed—interest loan market reduce their demands for loans

in response to an increase in expected inflation. Even life insurance companies, whose liabilities are almost entirely in nominal form, respond to

price expectations in this way.
Secondly, at the multi—equation partial—equilibrium level, the results

indicate that, with all other things equal, this response by lenders will
raise the equilibrium nominal loan yield by 0.65% in response to a 1% increase

in expected inflation. The results also indicate that this 0.65% adjustment
requires approximately four years for completion.

Footnotes
*

The author is grateful to David Jones and Vance Roley for
research assistance,
and to James Duesenberry, Stanley Fischer, David Jones, Robert King, John
Linther, Thomas Mayer, Allan Me].tzer, Franco Modigliani, Vance Roley, John
Rutledge, Jerome Stein and James Tobjn for helpful discussions and conunents
on a previous draft of this paper. The author also gratefully acknowledges
the research support of the National Science Foundation, under grant
APR77-14160, and the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1. See especially Fisher [17], [18, ch. 5] and [19, h. 19]; emphasis added.
2. Prominent examples include Cargill [8], Fama [12], Feldstein and Chamberlain
[14], Feldstejn and Eckstejn [15], Gibson [31, 32], Lahiri [38], Modigliani
and Shiller [48], Pesando [54], Pyle [55], Sargent [60,62], and Yohe and
Karnosky [72].

3. See Fisher [19, pp. 438-442]. Somewhat astonishingly to the modern reader,
Fisher's suggested "interpretation" followed Wicksefl [71] in noting that
higher prices usually meant a greater nominal volume of trade, which in
turn increased the demand for money, and hence increased nominal interest
rates for given bank reserves. What is surprising about this
"interpretation"
that, as rendered by Fisher, it has nothing whatever to do with expectations. In addition, the association of higher prices with a greater nominal
transactions volume is necessarily valid only if the source of the inflation is a demand shock to the economy; under a supply shock prices rise
but real transactions volume falls, so that the change in nominal transactions volume remains ambiguous in general.

is

4. See Friedman (26] for an analogous treatment of the role of borrowers'
portfolio behavior.
5. On invariance of the real rate with respect to inflation [19, p. 493]:
"...in actual practice.. .the appreciation or depreciation of the monetary
standard does produce a real effect on the rate of interest... This effect,
in times of great changes in the purchasing

power of money, is by far the

greatest of all effects on the rate of interest." On constancy of the real
rate for given inflation [19, p. 411]: "...there are...so many other
causes affecting the rate of interest besides changes in the price level."
interpretations as the "Fisherian"

These views clearly contradict such
proposition tested in Faina [12].

6.

See Fisher (17, pp. 75-78] and the useful discussion in Rutledge (56].

7. See again the references cited in footnote 2. Froyen and Davidson (30]
argued (along the lines taken below) in favor of a structural modelling
approach, but their empirical work also relied on a reduced-form model.

statement of this point.
9. The concept of the nominal yield's being "proximately determined" in the
loan market is not inconsistent with the principle of general equilibrium
8. See Sargent [63] for a forceful

in the asset markets (see, for example, Tobin [70])or for the economy as
a whole (see, for example, Grossman [34]). In well developed financial

markets, of course, the relevant group of "lenders" include not only those
who make primary loans directly to borrowers but also those who may under
certain circumstances be willing to acquire debt securities in a secondary
market.

10. In simple consumption—loan models there is typically no meaningful distinction between saving behavior and portfolio behavior in the conventional
sense as meant here; see, for example, Samuelson (58]. It is also worth
noting that, even in models in which the two kinds of behavior have distinct
meanings, they are not in general independent; see, for example, Fama (11],
Merton [47], and Samuelson (59]. Hence the portfolio behavior analyzed
in Section II below implicitly relies on a single-period horizon.

11. See, for example, Bodie (2], Cagan [7], and Lintner [40].
12. This argument is parallel to that of Fisher and Wicksell, but it differs
in that it involves expectations in a fundamental way; see again footnote 3.

13. While capital loss avoiding behavior as in these two examples clearly
indicates a connection between expected price inflation and long-term
interest rates, this argument does not carry over to short—term interest
rates. Hence it may be more accurate to refer to such effects as "termstructure effects" rather than "Fisher effects," but it is difficult to
support any such sharp distinction on the basis of Fisher's own work; see
again footnote 12.

41], for example, for the precise derivation of asset
from maximization of a negative exponential (or logarithmic)
utility function under the normality (or lognormality) assumption. Alterna-

14. See Lintner (39,
demand functions

tively, as

Tobin (68] and Markowitz (45] have shown, the first and second
moments of the yield distributions are sufficient to determine asset demands,
regardless of the distribution assumed, if utility is quadratic.

15. See Friedman [25] for a review of the alternative sets of assumptions which
permit the derivation of asset demand functions that satisfy the homogeneity
property and that are linear in expected asset yields; de Leeuw [10] and
M. Friedman (29] also provided discussions of the rationale behind the
homogeneity constraint. Asset demand functions of this form are familiar
in both empirical (e.g.,de Leeuw) and abstract (e.g., Brainard and Tobin [41)
work on portfolio behavior in monetary economics. A particular advantage
of the homogenous form, in the context of this paper's concern with price
inflation, is that rising dollar magnitudes per se do not affect the
portfolio allocation.

16.

See Stiglitz (67] for a demonstration that these two propositions are
equivalent. Modigliani and Shiller (48] provided a useful discussion of the
role of price expectations in differentially influencing the expected
holding yields on short- versus long-term bonds.

17. See Foley [20] for a useful analysis of this issue.

18. See Friedman [23]. It is worth noting explicitly that the nonlinear way
in which the flow
matters for short-run portfolio behavior in the optimal
marginal adjustment model is in sharp contrast to the work of Bosworth and
Duesenberry [3] and Henderghott and Lemon [35] who, without explicitly
developing an underlying model of portfolio adjustment, emphasized linear
dependence on the cash flow.
19. The household sector as defined here primarily consists of individuals but
also includes non-profit organizations and bank—managed personal trusts.
20. See Friedman [23] for further details on precise definitions of variables,
in particular the cash flows of life insurance companies and households
and dummy variables in the two insurance company equations.

21. See, for example, Sargent [64], Rutledge [56] and McCallum[46].
22. Because of the nonlinear way in which both expected yields and variances
enter the model, as indicated in (5), all such terms are products. The
correct instrument to use in each such case, for purposes of deriving
consistent estimators, is the first—stage fitted value of the entire
product; this procedure is used here.

23. Because

of the instrumental variables estimation procedure, the standard

error ratios

shown are asymptotically distributed as t-statistics but are
not necessarily distributed as t—statistics in small samples.
24.

The estimation of

these distributed lags presents an interesting identification problem due to the potential appearance of each distributed lag in
two separate nonlinear terms on the right-hand side of each single loan
demand equation. See Friedman and Roley [27] for the derivation of the

method used to solve the resulting estimation problem.

25. See Friedman [23] and Friedman and Roley [28] for further details of the
exact procedures used in deriving the equations' final specifications.

is interesting that the standard error ratios of the variance terms
are uniformly smaller (in absolute value) in these equations than in the
It

corresponding ordinary—least—squares estimates.

26. This coefficient was insignificant in the loan demand equation for nonlife insurance companies, and so the CE t.Pt j).w term is omitted from
the final specification. That equation includes the price expectations
distributed lag in the term CE t
but, as the discussion of
.Pt
(5) in Section II indicates, the coefficient of this term is a sum of
products of parameters in the underlying model consisting of (1) and (3).
The

standard

error ratio for the coefficient of the CE C.P .)tW term

it—i

t

in the equation for mutual savings banks is small, but the F-test indicates
that this lag structure is significant at the 5% confidence level.

27. The unit sum constraint implies that lenders believe that the stochastic
process generating the price inflation is borderline stationary/nonsta—
tionary -- that is, any rate of inflation which has persisted for a long
time will continue to persist. U.S. survey evidence suggests that inflation
expectations in the 1970s do differ from those of the 1950s and 1960s in
such a way as to render this borderline stationary/nonstationary specification plausible. Alternatively, for the process to be stationary, the lag
weights in the estimated equations would have to sum to less than unity,
and the expectation would also have to include a constant term. Several
other writers have also emphasized this point; see, for example, Lucas
[42] and Sargent [61].

28. Another reason for caution in interpreting the

estimates is the

potential difficulty of distinguishing first— from second—moment effects.
Gordon and Halpern [33], for example, have argued that the mean of the
inflation rate is a good proxy for the associated uncertainty; such an
effect here would bias upward the absolute values of the
estimates.
In addition, the estimated equations for the two categories of taxable
investors do not allow for specific tax effects, which have shifted during
the sample period; see, for example, Feldstein and Summers [16].

29. This interpretation of the 0.. estimates is merely heuristic, however,
since in a multivariate stock-adjustment model the "speed of adjustment"
depends on the eigenvalues of the entire matrix of 0. . coefficients, not
just the on-diagonal 0.. values.
12.

30. For equations estimated by an instrumental variables procedure, the rootmean-square forecast error (computed from the actual values of all righthand-side variables) is a better measure of statistical performance than
is the estimated standard error (computed from instrumented values of the
right-hand—side variables).
31. See, for example, Lucas [43] and Sargent and Wallace [65].
32. It is worth pointing out that the information available as of time t must
include, to within a set of additive white noise disturbances, knowledge
of the model which will generate the actual outcome x+i; hence this
definition of rationality is stronger than the usual notion of using
efficiently all available information. For further discussion of the
informational implications of assuming rationality in this sense, see
Friedman [24].

33. Fully efficient estimates, of course, would require instruments based
on the model which lenders actually used to form their expectations.
34. Since the six categories of lenders whose portfolio behavior is explicitly
represented in the estimated loan demand equations do not hold all of the
outstanding loans, L is more precisely the supply of loans minus those
loans held by other lenders.

35. The RMSE values for the six lender categories, in their order of
appearance in Table 2, are 120, 36, 176, 87, 114 and 247, respectively.

36. Modigliani and Shiner's [48] preferred equation had SE= 0.13% for the
less volatile Aaa yield over the sample period 1955:1114971:II. Reestimating the Modigliani-shjller equation using the Aa yield and the
1960:I—1973:IV sample period leads to an equatior with SE = 0.22% but
with the coefficients of the distributed lag on the short-term yield
not significantly different from zero. Feldstein and Eckstein's [15]
preferred equation had SE = 0.09% for the Aaa yield over the sample
period 1954:1—1969:11. Re—estimating the Feldstein—Eckstejn equation
using the Aa yield and the l960:I-l973:Iv sample period leads to an equation with SE = 0.29%. Feldstein and Chamberlain's [14] preferred equation
had SE =0.21% for the Aaa yield over the sample period 1954:1-1971:1.
37. This point is especially relevant to the presence of other long—term
yields in the estimated loan demand equations for several categories of
lenders. Including other long-term yields as independent variables in
an unrestricted equation with the bond yield as dependent variable would
presumably increase greatly such an equation's fit. In the context of
the structural model, however, the contribution of other long—term yields
is restricted to their role in influencing the net purchases variables.
See Friedman [23] for a discussion of the structural modeling methodology
as specifically applied to the determination of long—term interest rates.

38. Since the Pt).w1 terms which

appear in the loan demand equations

for three categories of lenders reflect these lenders' behavior in other
markets, the solution used the historical P values for these variables
and introduced the 1% increase only in the (E
terms. See
1
again footnote 24.

39.

An alternative to taking means over simulated values is simply to solve
the model using the sample-period means of the exogenous variables. This
reverse strategy yields an estimate of 0.70% instead of 0.65%. The
difference is due to the model's nonlinearity.

40. The analogous experiments in Friedman (26] indicate that the loan supply
curve actually "shifts upward" by slightly less than 0.65% for an additional
1% of expected price inflation, so that the net upward adjustment of the
interest rate is slightly less than that indicated by the analysis of
lenders' behavior alone, and the resulting quantity L is slightly below -L.

References

1.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Flow of Funds Accounts
1945—72. Washington, 1973.

2.

Bodie, Zvi. "Common Stocks as a Hedge Against Inflation." Journal of
Finance, XXI (May, 1976), 459—470.

3.

4.

5.

Bosworth, Barry, and Duesenberry, James S. "A Flow of Funds Model and
Implications." Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Issues in Federal Debt
Management. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1973.

Its

Brainard, William C., and

Tobin, James. "Pitfalls in Financial ModelBuilding." American Economic Review, LVII (May, 1968), 99—122.
Brundy, James M., and Jorgenson, Dale W. "Efficient Estimation of
Simultaneous Equations by Instrumental Variables." Review of Economics
and Statistics, LIII (August, 1971), 207—224.

6.

Cagan, Phillip. "The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinf].ation." Friedman
(ed.), Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money. chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1956.

7.

Cagan, Phillip. "Common Stock Values and Inflation -- The Historical
Record of Many Countries." New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1974.

8.

Cargill, Thomas. "Anticipated Price changes and Nominal Interest Rates
in the 1950's." Review of Economics and Statistics, LVIII (August, 1976),
364—367.

9.

Darby, Michael R. "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary Policy on
Interest Rates." Economic Inquiry, XIII (June, 1975), 266-276.

10. De Leeuw, Frank.

Model of Financial Behavior." Duesenberry et al.
(eds.), The Brookings Quarterly Econometric Model of the United States.
Chicago: Rand McNally & Company, 1965.

11.

"A

Fama, Eugene F. "Multiperiod Consumption-Investment Decisions."
American Economic Review, LX (March, 1970), 163—174.

12. Fama,

Eugene

F. "Short-term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation."

American Economic Review, LXV (June, 1975), 269—282.

13.

Feldstejn, Martin. "Inflation, Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest: A
Theoretical Analysis." American Economic Review, LXVI (December, 1976),
809—820.

14. Feldstein, Martin, and Chamberlain, Gary. "Multimarket Expectations
the Rate of Interest." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, V
(November, 1973), 373—902.

and

15. Feldstein, Martin, and Eckstein, Otto. "The Fundamental Determinants of
the Interest Rate." Review of Economics and Statistics, LII (November,
1970), 363-375.
16. Feldstein, Martin, and Summers, Lawrence. "Inflation, Tax Rules, and
the Long-Term Interest Rate." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
forthcoming.

17. Fisher, Irving. Appreciation and Interest. New York: The Macmillan
Company, 1896.

18. Fisher, Irving. The Rate of Interest. New York: The Macmillan Company,
1907.

19. Fisher, Irving. The Theory of Interest. New York: The Macmillan
Company, 1930.

20. Foley, Duncan K. "On Two Specifications of Asset Equilibrium in Macroeconomic Models." Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIII (April, 1975),
303—324.

21. Frenkel, Jacob A. "Inflation and the Formation of Expectations." Journal
of Monetary Economics, I (October, 1975), 403—421.
22. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Substitution and Expectation Effects on Long-Term
Borrowing Behavior and Long-Term Interest Rates." Mimeo, Harvard
University, 1976.
23. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Financial Flow Variables and the Short-Run
Determination of Long-Term Interest Rates." Journal of Political Economy,
LXXXV (August, 1977), 661—689.
24. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme Information
Assumptions of 'Rational Expectations' Macromodels." Mixneo, Harvard
University, 1977.
25. Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Effect of Wealth Shifts on the Term Structure
of Interest Rates." Mimeo, Harvard University, 1977.
26. Friedman, Benjamin M. "Who Puts the Inflation Premiwn into Nominal Interest
Rates?" Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
27. Friedman, Benjamin M., and Haley, V. Vance. "Identifying Identical
Distributed Lag Structures by the Use of Prior Sum Constraints."
Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, VI (Fall, 1977), 429—444.
28. Friedman, Benjamin M., and Roley, V. Vance. "Investors' Portfolio
Behavior Under Alternative Models of Long-Term Interest Rate Expectations:
Unitary, Rational or Autoregressive." Mimeo, Harvard University, 1977.

29. Friedman, Milton. "The Quantity Theory of Money: A Restatement."
Friedman (ed.), Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money, Chicago:
University of chicago Press, 1956.

30. Froyen, Richard T.,
and Davidson, Lawrence S. "Estimates of the
'Fisher Effect': A Structural
Model Approach." Mimeo, University of
North Carolina, 1976.

31. Gibson, William. "Price

Expectations and Interest Rates."
Finance, XXV (March, 1970), 19—34.

Journal of

32. Gibson, William. "Interest Rates and
Inflationary Expectations."
American Economic Review, LXII
(December, 1972), 854—865.

33. Gordon, Myron J., and Halpern, Paul J. "Bond Share Yield
Spreads Under
Uncertain Inflation." American
Economic Review, LXVI (September, 1976),
559—565.
34. Grossman, Herschel. "Money, Interest and Prices in
Market Diseguiljbri."
Journal of Political
Econo, LXXIx (September/october 1971), 943—961.

35. Hendershott, Patrjc H., and Lenimon, Richard C. "A
Flow of Funds Model:
First Estimates and Forecasts."
American Statistical Association,
Proceedings (1973 Business and
Economics Section), 112—121.
36. Hicks, John R. Value
and Capital. London: Oxford
University Press, 1939.
37. Ladenson, Mark L. "Pitfalls in Financial Model
Building: Some Extensions."
American Economic Review, LXI
(March, 1971), 179—186.

38. Lahiri, Kajal.
"Inflationary Expectato5 Their Formation and Interest
Rate Effects." American
Economic Review, LXVI (March, 1976), 124—131.

39. Lintner, John. "The

Valuation of Risky Assets and the Selection of Risky
Investments in Stock Portfolios
and Capital Budgets." Review of Economics
and Statistics, XLVII
(February, 1965), 13—37.

40. Lintner, John. "Inflation
XXX (May, 1975), 259—280.

and Securities Returns."

Journal of Finance,

41. Lintner, John. "The
Lognormality of Security Returns, Portfolio Selection
and Market Equiljbrj."
Mimeo, Harvard University, 1975.

42. Lucas, Robert E. "Econometric

Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis."
Eckstejn (ed.), The Econometrics of Price Determination.
Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, 1972.

43. Lucas, Robert E. "An Equiljbri Model of the Business
Cycle." Journal
of Poljticaj. Economy, LxxxIIi
(December, 1975), 1113—1144.

44. Lutz, Friedrich A. "The Structure of Interest Rates."
of Economics, LIV (November, 1940), 36-63.

45. Markowitz, Harry. "Portfolio Selection." Journal
(March, 1952), 77—91.

of

Qarter1y Journal

Finance, VII

46. McCall, B.T. "Rational Expectations and the Natural Rate
Hypothesis:
Some Consistent Estimates."
Econoinetrica, XLIV (January, 1976), 43-52.

47. Merton, Robert C. "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The
Continuous—time Case." Review of Economics and Statistics, LI (August,
1969), 247—257.

48. Modigliani, Franco, and Shiller, Robert J. "Inflation, Rational Expectations, and the Term Structure of Interest Rates." Economica, XL
(February, 1973), 12—43.
49. Modigliani, Franco, and Sutch, Richard. "Innovations in Interest Rate
Policy." American Economic Review, LVI (May, 1966), 178—197.

50. Mundell, Robert. "Inflation and Real Interest." Journal of Political
Economy, LXXI (June, 1963), 280—283.
51. Mussa, Michael. "Adaptive and Regressive Expectations in a Rational
Model of the Inflationary Process." Journal of Monetary Economics, I
(October, 1975), 423—442.
52. Muth, John F. "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements."
Econometrica, XXIX (July, 1961), 315—335.
53. Nerlove, Marc. "Distributed Lags and Unobserved Components in Economic
Time Series." Fellner et al., Ten Economic Studies in the Tradition of
Irving Fisher. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1967.
54. Pesando, James E. "Determinants of Term Premiums in the Market for
United States Treasury Bills." Journal of Finance, XXX (December, 1975),
1317—1327.

55. Pyle, David. "Observed Price Expectations and Interest Rates." Review
of Economics and Statistics, LIV (August, 1972), 275—280.
56. Rutledge, John. A Monetarist Model of Inflationary Expectations.
Lexington: D. C. Heath and Company, 1974.

57. Rutledge, John. "Irving Fisher and Autoregressive Expectations." American
Economic Review, LXVII (February, 1977), 200—205.
58. Samuelson, Paul A. "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest with or
without the Social Contrivance of Money." Journal of Political Economy,
LXVI (December, 1958), 467—482.
59. Samuelson, Paul A. "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic
Programming." Review of Economics and Statistics, LI (August, 1969),
239—246.

60. Sargent, Thomas J. "Commodity Price Expectations and the Interest Rate."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, LXXXIII (February, 1969), 127-140.

61. Sargent, Thomas J. "A Note on the 'Accelerationist' Controversy."
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, III (August, 1971), 721-725.
62. Sargent, Thomas J. "Anticipated Inflation and Nominal Interest."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, LXXXVI (May, 1972), 212—225.

-L

63. Sargent, Thomas J.

A Comment."

"The Fundamental Determinants of the Interest Rate:
Review of Economics and Statistics, LV (August, 1973),

391—393.

64. Sargent, Thomas J. "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest,
and the Natural Rate of Unemployment." Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity (No. 2, 1973), 429—472.

65. Sargent, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil. "Rational' Expectations, the
Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule."
Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIII (April, 1975), 241—254.
66. Smith, Gary. "Pitfalls in Financial Model Building: A Clarification."
american Economic Review, LXV (June, 1975), 510—516.

67. Stiglitz, J.E. "A Consumption-Oriented Theory of the Demand for Financial
Assets and the Term Structure of Interest Rates." The Review of Economic
Studies, XXXVII (July, 1970), 321—351.
68. Tobin, James. "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk." Review
of Economic Studies, XXV (February, 1958), 65—86.
69. Tobin, James. "Money and Economic Growth" Econometrica, XXXIII (October,
1965), 671—684.

70. Tobin,

James. "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory."
Credit and Banking, I (February, 1969), 15-29.

Journal of Money,

71. Wicksell, Knut. "The Influence of the Interest Rate on Prices." Economic
Journal, XVII (June, 1907), 213—220.
72. Yohe, William P., and Karnosky, Denis S. "Interest Rates and Price Level
cthanges." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, LI (December, 1969),
19—36.

