THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP ON
THE TERM STRUCTURE OF INTEREST RATES:
THE CASE OF PENSIONS*
BENJAMIN M. FRIEDMAN
Substantial shifts in wealth ownership from individuals to pension funds are
currently taking place in the United States and also are in prospect for the foreseeable

future. Moreover, pension funds typically exhibit portfolio preferences that are
markedly different from those of individuals. In a world of heterogeneous investors,
redistributions among wealth holders with different portfolio preferences will in general
alter the structure of asset yields. Partial-equilibrium simulation experiments based
on a model of the U. S. long-term bond market indicate that redistributions of saving
flows from individuals to pension funds, in plausible magnitudes, can have major effects

on the term structure of interest rates.

In a world in which wealth holders' risk aversion renders different
assets less than perfect substitutes, the interaction between investors'

portfolio preferences and existing asset supplies determines the
structure of asset yields. Using a model in which the only explicitly
traded assets are money and bonds, for example, Patinkin [19651
showed explicitly how either a shift in the exogenously determined
outside stocks of these two assets (i.e., an open market operation) or
an exogenous shift in wealth holders' liquidity preference changes "the
interest rate." Similarly, using a more general model in which the
relevant assets include money, short-term debt securities, and long-

term capital (equity), Tobin [1969] showed how both short- and
long-term yields depend again on the system's asset demand functions
and on the exogenous outside asset supplies.
Following the appearance of Tobin's [1963] classic "Essay on the
Principles of Debt Management," there was for some time consider-

able public policy interest in exploiting these means of shifting the
prevailing asset yield relationships. The "Operation Twist" experiment during 1961—1964 attempted to reduce long- relative to shortterm yields by a surrogate debt management operation in which the
Federal Reserve System deliberately increased the amounts of longrelative to short-term securities held in the portfolio of the System
*
The author is grateful to Vance Roley for research assistance; to James
Duesenberry, Martin Feldstein, Laura Lee Matthews, Franco Modigliani, Heraklis
Polemarchakis, Irwin Tepper, James Tobin, and especially John Lintner and Vance
Roley, for helpful discussions and comments on previous drafts of this paper; and to

the National Science Foundation (Grants SOC 74-21027 and APR 77-14160), the Alfred

P. Sloan Foundation, and the National Bureau of Economic Research for research

support.
1980 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

The Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1980
Reproduced by Permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

0033-5533/8010094-0567$02.40

568

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Open Market Account. While the average slope of the yield curve did
flatten during this period, most subsequent empirical analyses associated this observed phenomenon with moderating expectations for

short-term yields in the future and hence discounted the role of the
Federal Reserve's policy actions in directly causing it.' Interest in
active debt management policy, among both economists and policy
makers, has waned considerably since that time.
Although asset supplies constitute only one-half of the determination of the structure of asset yields, the prevailing methodology
of economists' empirical analyses has effectively precluded introducing into research on yield relationships any explicit consideration
of the other half—i.e., the role of wealth holders' portfolio preferences
as in Patinkin's theoretical discussion. In order to contribute to a shift

in the structure of asset yields, some aspect of liquidity preference
must itself shift. By working with aggregate asset demand functions
or their derivative reduced forms (thereby assuming that all wealth
holders are homogeneous), and moreover by holding these functions
fixed throughout the analysis (thereby assuming that the homogeneous wealth holders' behavior remains unchanged), researchers have
typically used models that leave shifting asset supplies as the only
possible engine for bringing about shifting yield relationships.2
This paper examines the question of relative asset yield determination from the opposite perspective—explicitly considering the
effect of a shift in the economy's aggregate portfolio preferences, while
holding outside asset supplies fixed. The key to this analysis is to relax

the standard assumption that all wealth holders are homogeneous,
since in fact different groups Qf investors typically display sharply
distinct asset preferences. In order to delineate explicitly the differences in behavior among heterogeneous groups of wealth holders, it
is useful to work directly with the relevant asset demand relationships

rather than with reduced-form systems. The device that then produces a shift in the economy's aggregate portfolio preferences is a shift
in the pattern of wealth ownership among the heterogeneous groups.
Since major shifts of this kind not only are currently taking place in

the United States but will be even more pronounced in the future
because of recent pension legislation, not to mention a variety of
1. See, for example, Modigliani and Sutch [1966, 19671. Moreover, because the
Treasury was emphasizing long-term issues at this time, in fact the average maturity

of the outstanding U. S. government debt rose modestly during these years; see
Friedman [19781.
2. Bosworth and Duesenberry L19731 and Hendershott [1977) were exceptional
in this regard, in that they worked with disaggregated models, but they did not use their
models to analyze the effects of shifting patterns of wealth ownership.

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

569

further pension reform proposals,3 the real-world relevance of such
considerations for the determination of asset yields is at least as great
as that of any possible shifts in outside asset supplies. Appropriately
or not, for practical applications debt management policy seems for
the present to be a dead horse;4 by contrast, shifts in the pattern of
wealth holding—together with associated shifts in aggregate portfolio
preferences—are a very live issue for the present and foreseeable
future.
Section I briefly illustrates the role in the determination of asset
yields of shifting aggregate portfolio preferences due to shifting wealth
ownership, using for this purpose a financial sector model analogous

to Tobin's [1969] but disaggregated to reflect (for simplicity, in this
abstract discussion) two distinct groups of wealth holders. As in Tobin's model, the analysis here and in the remainder of this paper is

partial equilibrium in character, in that it does not incorporate
short-run feedbacks from the nonfinancial to the financial sector.5
Section II focuses on the distinct asset demand preferences exhibited
by individuals' directly held portfolios and pension funds' portfolios
in the United States, drawing in part on empirical evidence on these
investors' demands for long-term bonds provided by the demand
functions estimated in Friedman [1977]. Section III uses partialequilibrium, market-clearing simulation experiments based on these
estimated bond demand functions (and two analogous bond supply
equations) to evaluate the likely term-structure effects of specific
shifts in the form of wealth ownership from individuals' direct holdings to pension funds. According to a priori judgments of these investors' portfolio preferences, supported by the estimated asset demand functions, wealth ownership shifts in this direction reduce aggregate liquidity preference. To anticipate, the experiments' results
indicate that such shifts, in plausible magnitudes, would lead to
substantial reductions in long-term bond yields for given short-term
yields—i.e., they would reduce the average slope of the term-structure

yield curve. Section IV briefly summarizes the paper's principal
conclusions.
3. See, for example, Feldstein 119761 and Munnell and Connolly [1976]. See
Friedman [1976] for a specific discussion of the asset market implications of these
authors' proposals along the lines argued in this paper.
4. Examples of recent interest in debt management policy, however, include
Friedman [1978] and Roley [1979].

5. By arguing that over time investment is a positive function of the ratio of market
price to replacement cost for capital goods, Tobin did sketch the extension of his model
to full general equilibrium; the bulk of his analysis, however, was a partial-equilibrium

treatment of the asset markets.

570

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

I. PORTFOLIO ALLOCATION AND EQUILIBRIUM YIELDS WITH
HETEROGENEOUS INVESTORS

Correctly specified asset demand functions presumably reflect
the expected-utility-maximizing behavior of individual, risk-averse
investors choosing optimal portfolio allocations, in a world of uncertainty, subject to various constraints.6 Because the theory of expected
utility maximization in its full generality does not yield asset demand
functions that are tractable for most analytical or empirical purposes,
however, it is necessary to impose simplifying assumptions. Two
particular assumptions, both of which are commonplace in the vast
literature of expected-utility-maximizing portfolio behavior, provide
a convenient beginning here. First, as is standard in a wide variety of
models, it is useful to abstract from interdependent decisions with
respect to saving and portfolio allocation and to focus instead on the
more limited problem of the allocation of existing portfolio wealth
together with (as in Section II below) a given saving flow.7 Wholly
apart from its analytical convenience, this assumption is especially
appropriate for institutional investors like pension funds that have
both their income arid their outlays fixed by contractual and actuarial
circumstances in at least the short and medium runs. Second, as has
become virtually standard since the work of Markowitz [1952] and
Tobin [1958], it is useful to restrict the class of representations of the
investor's utility or beliefs or both to those that reduce to preference
orderings in terms of the mean and variance of some specific result
of the portfolio allocation (usually end-of-period wealth).8
Utility functions exhibiting constant relative risk aversion, together with joint normal (or lognormal) asset return distributions,
generate optimal single-period portfolio allocations of the convenient
6. For a discussion of the usefulness of the expected-utility framework for analyzing decision making under uncertainty, see, for example, Arrow [19701; Arrow's
discussion also shows why risk aversion must be predominant in the aggregate.
7. For an example of the complications that arise when saving and portfolio allocation decisions are interdependent with some generality, see Merton [19691 and
Samuelson [1969]. A large literature has also investigated the conditions (e.g., constant
relative risk aversion) which, within the more general expected-utility-maximization
framework, render multiperiod behavior in this context "myopic" and hence analytically equivalent to single-period behavior; see, for example, Mossin [1968] and Fama
[1970].
8. Numerous researchers have criticized various aspects of mean-variance analysis;

see, in particular, Hicks [1962], Lintner [1965], Borch [1969], Feldstein [19691, and
Arrow [1970]. As both Markowitz and Tobin originally emphasized, however, the justification for the mean-variance framework is not its precise and universal validity but
rather its appeal as a tractable approximation useful for a variety of practical analytical
purposes. Samuelson [1970) and Tsiang [1972] have subsequently provided theorems
further strengthening the argument for mean-variance analysis when the amount of
risk involved is small relative to initial wealth.

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

571

linear homogeneous form,9
(1)

where, for specific time, t, Wt is total portfolio wealth, A is a vector
of asset holdings (A 1 = 1), r is a vector of the means of the corre-

sponding perceived asset return distributions, and B and lrt are,
respectively, a matrix and vector of coefficients determined by the
utility function's coefficient of relative risk aversion (p) and the
variance-covariance matrix () of the perceived asset return
distributions.'0
If all wealth holders are homogeneous, then the optimal portfolio

allocation (1), together with their aggregate wealth W, uniquely
describes aggregate asset demands. For given exogenous aggregate
supplies of outside assets (and with endogenous inside asset supplies
treated simply as negative demands), general equilibrium in the asset
markets is equivalent to the market-clearing condition,

Wa —

(2)

A = 0,

where A is a vector of outside asset supplies at time t, and 0 is a vector
with all zero elements. If the Jacobian B is nonsingular, substitution
from (1) then yields the determination of expected asset returns (and,
consequently, actual beginning-of-period asset prices) according to
(3)

r=B'(-A'—irt).

The essence of "Operation Twist" and analogous debt management
operations is to exploit this dependence of r on A.
Now suppose that there exist two groups of homogeneous wealth
holders with endowments W, and W2, respectively, and characterized by different utilities such that the two relative risk aversion
9. Brainard and Tobin [19681 and the voluminous work following their lead have
given numerous examples of the use of a linear homogeneous form in both abstract and

empirical research, and M. Friedman [19561 and de Leeuw [19651 provided useful
discussions of the homogeneity property in particular. Wholly apart from the attractiveness of the resulting asset demand functions, Friend and Blume [1975] offered
empirical evidence supporting the assumption of constant relative risk aversion.
10, Specifically, if all assets are risky, B — 1/p [' —
and = (l'[l
[1 1. Here B is singular, so that the asset demand system wil

'1)

(l'O'l)'

1l''

be capable of determining all relative yields and all but one absolute yield. Alternatively,

matrix is singular,
in the presence of a risk-free (i.e., certain return) asset, the full
so that it is necessary to partition the set of demands; the resulting asset demand system, in which at, and fl refer to the risky assets only, is then just at = B r, where
and the optimal portfolio share for the risk-free asset is simply
1/p
(1 — a 1). See Roley [1977] for a thorough treatment of this distinction.

r

572

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

coefficients differ by (with no loss of generality)
(4)

P1 > P2•

Further suppose that the two groups share identical information and
hence identical assessments of asset return outcomes. Then the two

groups' respective optimal portfolio allocations from (1) will differ
so that, for given expected returns that yield interior solutions, group
2 will hold larger fractions of its total group wealth in the riskier assets
than will group 1. If there exist only one risky and one risk-free asset,
for example, each group's desired relative holding of the risky asset
will be
(5)

*
aR
=

E(fRt — rFt)

pV(rR rFt) ,

i = 1,2,

where E(.) denotes an expectation and V(.) a variance, and the subscripts R and F indicate the risky and risk-free assets, respectively.
Given the distinct behavior of the two groups of wealth holders,
it is straightforward to show that shifts in wealth ownership in general
affect relative asset yields. Instead of (2), the general equilibrium
condition for the asset markets is now
(6)

Wia + W2a —

=0

so that substituting from the individual groups' asset demands
analogous to (1) yields

(7) r = (W'1B1 + W2B2)' (A —

— W2tir2t),

where matrices B1 and B2 and vectors lrit and lr2t again depend on

the perceived variance-covariance structure. Hence the marketclearing vector of expected holding-period returns, for given total
wealth W (and given portfolio preferences, outside asset supplies,
and variance assessments), varies according to the division of W
between the two groups of wealth holders as indicated by W1t and
W2. Redistributing wealth ownership toward the less risk-averse
investors (group 2), for example—i.e., increasing W2 and correspondingly reducing Wit—reduces expected yields on the riskier
assets relative to the safer assets.
It is also useful to consider explicitly the analogous implications
of shifting wealth ownership on the market price of risk in the sense
of Sharpe [1964] and Lintner [1965]. For the case of only one risky
asset, for example—or, under an appropriate separation theorem that
is valid given the assumptions underlying (1), a "market portfolio"
of all the risky assets—substituting (5) into (6) yields

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

(8)

E(FRt — rFt)

—

1

+

573

(W2 1 1

rFt) W W P1 W P2
so that the slope of the Lintner-Sharpe capital market line depends
in a straightforward way not only on the composition of the outside
asset supplies (A/W and AIW = 1 — A/W) but also on the two
investor groups' different behavior with respect to risk (Pi and P2)
weighted by their respective shares of wealth ownership ( W1t/Wt and
W2/Wt = 1 — W1/W)." For given W, Pi and P2, therefore, it is
possible to affect the equilibrium market risk-return relationship via
either the composition of outside asset supplies (as in conventional
debt management operations) or the distribution of asset holding.
Redistributing wealth ownership toward the less risk-averse group
2, for example, strictly reduces the market price of risk (i.e., lowers
the capital market line's slope).
V(FRt

—

II. PoRTFoLIo PREFERENCES OF HOUSEHOLDS AND PENSION
FUNDS

As is clear from the discussion in Section I, a change in the
ownership of portfolio wealth in general affects market-clearing asset
returns in a straightforward way. Does the same result follow for a
change not in the ultimate ownership of wealth but rather in the institutional arrangements under which wealth is held? This question
is relevant especially in the context of the substantial ongoing shift
in U. S. private wealth ownership from direct holding by individuals

to indirect holding via pension funds. In large part because of tax
incentives both to workers and to private employers, in recent years
pension funds have represented a rapidly growing share of U. S. private saving; and the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
1974 has accelerated this process.'2 Moreover, a variety of currently

pending proposals would even further reinforce this shift toward
saving via pensions.
Nevertheless, it is not obvious that the analysis of a change in who
owns assets is analogous to a change in how the same people hold their
assets. Pension funds, after all, are no more than intermediaries, and
the ultimate owners of the assets held in pension funds are still the
general public. Hence at one extreme, pension fund managers could
seek to invest the monies entrusted to them in such a way as to re11. In the special case W1 = W2, this result is equivalent to Lintner's [1969]
demonstration that the market price of risk equals the harmonic mean of individual
investors' diverse risk aversions.
12. See, for example, Murray [1968], Soldofsky [19711, and Drucker [1976].

574

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

produce the composition of the general public's directly held aggregate

portfolio. At the other extreme, the general public could rearrange
its directly held portfolio so as to offset any independent movements
in the portfolio held for it in pension funds. If a pension fund accumulated proportionately more long-term bonds than the individuals
who are its ultimate owners would have held, for example, they could
simply sell off enough bonds from their private portfolios to leave their
combined investment positions unaltered.
There are several reasons, however, for believing that a shift from
direct wealth ownership to indirect ownership via pension funds does
in fact imply a shift in portfolio preferences and hence (in general)

a shift in asset yield relationships. In the first instance, individuals
have more freedom to invest their directly held portfolios as they wish,

in comparison with pension funds that are typically subject to a variety of restrictions imposed by federal and state-level legislation and
regulatory rulings. Second, the tax deferral feature of "qualified"
pension funds is likely to shift asset return preferences from fully or
partially tax exempt forms (e.g., interest on municipal bonds or capital
gains, respectively) toward fully taxable forms (e.g., interest on corporate bonds). Third, in practice, zero constraints appear to be an
important part of the story. While in principle individuals can sell
bonds to offset pension funds' purchases of bonds in their behalf, in
fact few individuals hold bonds, and market arrangements make short
sales difficult if not impossible in small amounts. Fourth, the familiar
effects of asset pooling arrangements may be important in the pension
context in several respects. Since very large pension funds account
for the bulk of U. S. pension assets, on the whole pension funds face

far smaller unit costs of acquiring information and engaging in
transactions than do individuals, and have greater practical opportunities for diversification among imperfectly divisible assets.
Moreover, in the case of pension funds the "intermediation effects" of asset pooling go well beyond the usual increase in the stability

and predictability of cash inflows and outflows associated with averaging across a large number of individuals with volatile but imperfectly related income and consumption streams. Virtually all large

qualified pension plans in the United States rely on distribution
systems of a contractual annuity form prohibiting lump-sum withdrawals.'3 In addition to deferring compensation until retirement,
13. It is puzzling that individuals are willing to sacrifice the liquidity of their
pension fund assets, while they purchase so few annuities directly. Although grouppurchase features may play some role, the terms on pension-related annuities are in
fact not very much more favorable than on individually purchased annuities. Perhaps
liquidity seems less important on asset claims that are already deferred until retire-

ment.

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

575

therefore, by participating in a pension plan workers undertake to give
up the liquidity of their claims even after they become eligible to re-

ceive them. Hence in contrast to banks, which are able to "borrow
short and lend long" largely by relying on the averaging of individual
behavior patterns to ensure that all depositors do not simultaneously
withdraw their funds, pension funds typically face long-term liability

streams set by contractual arrangements and subject to short-run
variations due only to varying aggregate retirement decisions and to
random noise around actuarial means.
Yet an additional aspect of the effect of pension funds on aggregate portfolio preferences is that pensions may actually change
the identity of savers in the sense of ultimate asset ownership as in
Section I. In the case of private pension funds, most of the large plans
are of the "defined benefit" form in which the employer assumes a
fixed liability to the employees, and the assets in the pension fund are
the property of the owners of the firm (in the sense that they, not the
plan's contractual beneficiaries, stand to gain or lose according to the
realized return on the fund's assets). To the extent that pension arrangements take the place of workers' direct saving, while the firm's
equity holders accumulate assets to fund their resulting liabilities,
the ownership of marketable assets shifts from the working public to
equity holders (who are, by self-selection, probably less risk-averse).14

Similarly, in the case of state and local government pension funds,
the effect is to shift the ultimate ownership of marketable assets from
government workers to the taxpayers.
Finally, the need to trace private and state-local government
pension fund assets back to equity holders and taxpayers, respectively,

highlights the demands on information availability and investors'
perspicacity that would be required by the argument that individuals
rearrange their directly held portfolios so as to offset the effect of
pension funds' asset selection on aggregate portfolio preferences. Here

what would have to be involved would be "ultrarationality" (in the
sense of David and Scadding [1974J) with respect to not merely the
amount but also the corn position of saving.15 In the case of private
14. Two complications arise here, however. First, whether or not pension arrangements lead the beneficiaries to reduce their private saving is a matter of current
debate; see, for example, Feldstein [1974, 19781 and the references cited therein. Second,

for both private and state-local government pensions, many employers opt for significantly less than full funding; see, for example, Munnell and Connolly [1976), Feldstein
11978), and Oldfield [1977). Both issues lie beyond the scope of this paper.
15. It is interesting to note that David and Scadding clearly rejected the application of "ultrarationality" to intermediation effects on portfolio composition, citing
(p. 247)"... the significant effects of financial intermediaries in facilitating the shifts
in the composition of savings which, over the long run, have probably been essential
in staving off a decline in the real rate of return on 'capital.'"

576

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

pension funds, nowhere in its annual report to shareholders or its 10-K
SEC filing need a corporation indicate either the aggregate value or
the composition of the assets in its pension fund.'6 Only by consulting

that part of the unpublished Form 5500 reports that the Department

of Labor requires (Form 5500 is a joint IRS-Labor filing) can a
shareholder discover the relevant information; and in practice the
research reports produced by the securities industry rarely refer to
even the value, much less the composition, of these assets. The corresponding information for state and local government pension funds
is in principle more readily available, but it strains belief to suppose

that many taxpayers examine the pension fund portfolios, impute
personal returns via their future tax liabilities, and readjust their
directly held portfolios accordingly.
Hence, it is plausible a priori not only that pension funds may
exhibit portfolio preferences which differ from those reflected in individuals' direct asset holdings, but also that individuals may not seek
(or be able) to offset fully the portfolio allocations made by pension
funds. How has the actual experience in recent years, during the pe-

riod of pension funds' most rapid growth to date, jibed with these
considerations? Table I shows the aggregate portfolio composition,
as of yearend 1975, for households' direct holdings, for pension funds
of private businesses, and for pension funds of state and local governments (including both "employees" and "teachers" funds).'7 These
data immediately suggest differences in asset preferences consistent

with the underlying factors noted above, especially the long-term
contractual nature of pension funds' liabilities. The two groups of
pension funds held 93 percent and 98 percent of their respective aggregate portfolios in long-term credit market instruments (mostly
corporate bonds and equities), while households held only 48 percent
of their directly owned financial assets in this form and held an additional 48 percent in deposit form.'8 To the extent that these actual
holdings are indicative of the three groups' desired holdings as in (1),
they provide evidence of sharply differing asset preferences.
16. U. S. corporations' balance sheet statements contain no reference whatsoever
to pension assets or liabilities. A footnote to the balance sheet is required to report the
difference between vested pension liabilities and total pension assets, but need not
even indicate the two respective totals, much less the asset composition. Form 10-K
need not reveal any further pension information, and most corporations do not provide
more than is required.
17. Data are from the Federal Reserve System's flow-of-funds accounts. Data

for the household sector, which consists primarily of individuals but also includes
nonprofit organizations and bank-managed personal trusts, exclude life insurance and
pension reserves. For all three sectors, the portfolio as considered here includes financial
assets only; this restriction is especially important for households, who hold substantial

(though difficult to measure) wealth in the form of private housing and durables.

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

577

In a world of transactions costs, however, it is not in general valid
to assume that an investor's actual holdings at any given time precisely

represent the correspondi desired portfolio allocation. Shifts in
yield relationships or risk assessments, in market structures or
transactions arrangements, or in any of the institutional factors noted
above will cause the desired allocation to change; and in the presence
of transactions costs it will not be optimal to reallocate the portfolio
so as to achieve the new equilibrium of desired holdings immediately.
Table II shows the average annual net financial asset accumulations
(flows) corresponding to the holdings (stocks) shown in Table I, for
the decade through 1975, on a price-adjusted basis.19 Here the divergence between households' and pension funds' portfolio behavior
is even more pronounced. The allocation of pension funds' accumulations during this period largely matched that of their 1975 holdings.
By contrast, although households held 32 percent of their directly
owned financial assets in equities at yearend 1975, they were heavy

net sellers of equities on average for the previous ten years. Furthermore, while households invested only about one-sixth of their
direct net financial asset accumulation in all long-term credit market
instruments, pension funds invested in virtually nothing else.
These starkly different investment patterns suggest that empirically estimating separate asset demand equations of the form (1),
for households and for pension funds, would yield different values for

B and rt for the three sectors in each time period. Following the
analysis in Section I, therefore, it appears as if shifting the pattern
of wealth ownership away from households toward pension funds
would on balance increase the demand for long-term (i.e., more
risky20) assets and thereby reduce the relative yields on these assets.

In the Lintner-Sharpe context this redistribution would reduce the
average market price of risk over time. In the Operation Twist context

it would reduce the average slope of the term-structure yield curve
over time.
18. Because of the volatility of equity prices, these percentages and the others
shown in Table I differ markedly from one yearend to the next. Households' equity
holdings measured at market value totaled as much as $929 billion at yearend 1972
and as little as $477 billion at yearend 1974, for example, and pension funds' holdings
varied analogously. The principaldifference noted in the text, however, remains valid
regardless of the arbitrary reference point chosen.
19. Accumulations of equities shown in Table II are net of market price changes
and therefore reflect only the differences between total purchases and total sales.
20. Although it is customary to consider long-term assets more risky than shortterm assets because of the greater "capital risk" associated with their greater price
volatility, it should be clear from the discussion above that long-term assets may actually be safer for investors (like pension funds) for whom "income risk" is more important. For a useful discussion of this point, see Stiglitz [1970].

3.8
3.7
4.7
2.3

936.5
630.5
65.9
74.2
72.7
93.2
44.5
1963.7

Other

Total

Note: Detail may not add to total because
of rounding.

Corporate bonds
Municipal bonds
Mortgages
U. S. govt. securities

Equities

100.0

32.1
3.4

47.7

0.5

Long-term creditmarket instruments

Other

U. S. govt. securities

2.1
1.5

48.0

40.6
30.2
10.4

$941.8

Households
Amount
Percent
(billions)

Short-termcreditmarket instruments

Deposits and currency

I

148.9

5.5

9.9

2.4

88.6
37.8
0.0

138.7

0.9
0.9
0.0

$3.9

(billions)

Amount

100.0

4.0

25.4
0.0
1.6
6.7

93.2
59.5

0.6
0.6
0.0

2.6

Percent

Private pension funds

Assrs, YEAR END 1975

TABLE
HOLDINGS OF FINANCIAL

•

106.0

0.0

25.8
60.9
2.5
8.2
6.3

103.7

0.5
0.5
0.0

$1.7

100.0

0.0

2.4
7.7
5.9

97.8
24.3
57.4

0.5
0.5
0.0

1.6

government
pension funds
Amount
(billions)
Percent

State and local

0

C)1

0.2
0.2
0.0
7.2
5.2
1.5
0.0

Note Detail may not add to total

beca,iseof rounding.

72.9

Total
100.0

8.0

100.0

3.8

7.1

0.0
0.3

3.4

2.5

Other

0.5
—0.1

7.5

0.0

4.4

0.6

'
—1.3

0.0

18.8

2.2

7.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

—0.1

7.4
5.2

5.4
3.8
3.1
3.0

90.0
65.0

0.0

2.5
2.5

4.3
4.1

16.2
—4.8

11.8
—3.5

1.4

1.6

3.0

100.0

0.0

—1.4

98.6
31.0
62.0
0.0
7.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

1.4
$0.1

3.8

$0.3

government
pension funds
Amount
Percent
(billions)

State and local
Private pension funds
Amount
Percent
(billions)

78.1

Long-term credit market instruments
Equities
Corporate bonds
Municipal bonds
Mortgages
U. S. govt. securities

Other

2.2
1.2
1.0

$56.9

Households
Amount
Percent
(billions)

Short-termcredit marketinstruments
U.S. govt. securities

Deposits and currency

II

AVERAGEANNUALNET FINANCIALASSET ACCUMULATIONS,1965-1975

TABLE

01

580

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Since (1) includes several unobservable variables, however, it is
necessary to impose further assumptions so as to render these asset
demand statements operational. Friedman [1977, 1980] and Friedman
and Roley [1979] applied different sets of assumptions for thispurpose
and presented estimates for the equation in (1) corresponding to each
sector's net demand for long-term corporate bonds—the asset most
closely associated with the literature on the term structure of interest
rates.2'

First, since the expected holding-period yields r in (1) are
unobservable, some proxy is necessary for purposes of estimation. In

Friedman [1977] these unobservable expected yields were simply
replaced by observed actual yields (including yields to maturity for
bonds), and several subsidiary variables were included to proxy expectations effects. In Friedman [1980] and Friedman and Roley
[1979], expected holding-period yields were explicitly modeled as
generalized autoregressive expectations (sometimes called "partly
rational" or "weak-form rational" expectations) based on observed
prior capital gains and losses, etc.22
Second, the Jacobian B and vector lrt in (1) are functions of the
perceived risk structure t, which is also unobservable. In Friedman
[1977] and Friedman and Roley [1979], cit was assumed to be constant
for all t, so that B and lrt become constant parameters B and ir, respectively. In Friedman [1980] ci was explicitly modeled as a moving-average function of the prior variation in observed holding-period

yields, and (1) was linearized with respect to cit, so that separate
(constant) parameters apply to the elements of both r and cii.
Third, in the presence of transactions costs, an investor never
fully implements the desired allocation a' from (1), so that it too is
unobservable. As is commonplace in such situations, Friedman [1977,
1980] and Friedman and Roley [1979] used a model of portfolio adjustment to translate the desired portfolio allocation implications of
(1) into an operational model of the investor's behavior. The "optimal
marginal adjustment" model, on which all three of these sets of esti-

mates relied, is useful for this purpose in that it generalizes the familiar stock adjustment model by explicitly relating the investor's
short-run portfolio adjustments not only to the discrepancies (A; —
21. Until recently the U. S. Treasury was unable to issue bonds bearing coupons
greater than 41/4 percent. For most of the relevant sample period, therefore, no new
issues of long-term Treasury securities existed, and yields on the outstanding issues

incorporated the familiar "coupon bias" (see, for example, Modigliani and Shiller
[1979]).

22. In addition, both papers presented estimates based on rational expectations
proxies, but these estimates were largely unsuccessful.

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

581

A_1) between the desired asset holdings indicated by (1) and the
corresponding previous-period holdings but also to the current investable cash flow. The primary rationale for distinguishing the cash
flow in this context is that current cash flows are typically more easily

(i.e., costlessly) allocated than are existing asset holdings. Since
transactions costs constitute, in the first instance, the underlying
motivation for using a model that admits discrepancies between actual

and desired portfolio holdings,23 it is worthwhile to model the implications of transactions costs with some care. The optimal marginal
adjustment model is an approximation that incorporates in a tractable
form the differential transactions costs between the investor's allocation of a new cash flow and the reallocation of existing asset holdings

by positing the allocation of the current cash flow according to
whatever proportions (1) indicates are desired for the total portfolio;
specifically, given an investor's beginning-of-period wealth and current-period cash flow,24
= O(Wt_ia — A_1) + Wta,
(9)
where the equilibrium allocations a; follow from (1) and 0 is a matrix
of adjustment coefficients that, from the relevant "adding-up" constraint, must exhibit identical column sums.

Since the optimal marginal adjustment model's primary advantage is that it captures the easier short-run "transactability" of
the investor's new cash flow
in comparison with existing assets
We_i, as suggested empirically by the contrast between Tables I and
II, it indicates that in the short run a shift of wealth ownership from

one sector to another can have a major impact on the structure of
market yields even if it is small in comparison with the different
sectors' total asset holdings—as long as it is large in comparison with
their typical respective cash flows. For transfers from households to
pension funds in the United States, this implication is potentially very
important. The average annual ratio of net financial asset accumulation to beginning-of-period wealth, for the decade included in Table
II, was 0.045 for households, 0.075 for private pension funds, and 0.117
for state and local government pension funds.

Expansion of (9) with (1) substituted for a shows that the
23. See Foley [1975] for a useful analysis of this issue.
24. Here W_1 differs from the W in Section I, in that it excludes the new cash
inflow
Heuristically, the first term on the right-hand side of (9) represents the
reallocation, according to a standard multivariate stock-adjustment model, of the investor's existing asset holdings A_1 (which satisfy A—1'1 = W_1), while the second
term represents the allocation of the investor's current-period cash flow
according
to the equilibrium proportions a, (which satisfy at 1 = 1).

582

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

TABLE III
ESTIMATES OF BOND DEMAND RESPONSIVENESS TO BOND YIELDS

Estimate
Friedman [19771
Friedman [19801
Friedman and Roley [19791

Mean of the three estimates
Note: Numbers its parentheses

Households

Private
pension
funds

State and local
government
pension funds

0.032 (4.4)
.077 (5.1)
.124 (5.2)

0.155 (6.5)
.100 (3.1)
.069 (5.9)

0.099 (4.7)
.077 (2.0)
.209 (4.5)

.075

.108

.128

ratios of estimates

combined operational model of desired portfolio allocation and
portfolio adjustment provides direct estimates of the elements of the
key Jacobian B (on the assumption that they are constant) as the
coefficients of single right-hand-side regressors. Hence estimation
of such equations indicates the way in which different groups of investors not only exhibit distinct portfolio preferences for any given
structure of asset yields but also change their portfolio preferences
in distinct ways as asset yields change.25 Table III presents the estimates (together with their standard error ratios26) for the on-diagonal

element of B corresponding to the own-yield in the demand for

long-term bonds, for households and the two categories of pension
funds, from the three papers cited above. Although the estimates are
somewhat irregular, on the whole they do support the further inference that pension funds' preferences for holding long-term bonds are
systematically more sensitive to bond yields than are households'
preferences for bonds.
III. INTEREST RATE EFFECTS OF TRANSFERS FROM
HOUSEHOLDS TO PENSION FUNDS

The analysis in Section I, together with the empirical evidence
presented in Section II, suggests that increasing the asset accumu-

lation which individuals do through pension funds while correspondingly reducing the asset accumulation which individuals do
25. It is impossible to infer such information from simple inspection of data such

as those in Tables land II.
26. Because the equations were in each case estimated using an instrumentalvariables procedure (to allow for the simultaneity between yield and demand), these
ratios are asymptotically distributed as t-statistics but are not necessarily distributed
as t-statistics in small samples.

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

583

TABLE IV
TERM STRUCTURE SIMULATIONS, 1967-1973

Long-short yield spread
Difference
from control
Average

1967—1973

Actual
Control simulation

1.10%
1.12

0.02%

$10 billion saving shift
$25 billion saving shift

0.75
0.20

0.37
0.92

$10 billion saving increase
$25 billion saving increase

0.72
0.13

0.40
0.99

—

Note: First four linescorrespond to plots in Figure 1; saving increase simulations not plotted.

directly would reduce the average slope of the term-structure yield
curve. What magnitude effect would be likely to follow from such a
rechanneling of saving in reasonable magnitudes?
Table IV and Figure I summarize the results of partial-equilib-

rium experiments based on the bond demand equations estimated
in Friedman [1977] for six categories of bond investors and the bond
supply equations estimated in Friedman [1979] for two categories of
Yield Spread

in Percent

FIGURE I

Dynamic Simulation Results for Long-Short Yield Spread

584

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

bond issuers, using quarterly U. S. data for 1960:I_1973:IV.27 Following (6), combining these eight equations with a market-clearing
equilibrium condition provides a nine-equation model that (for given
values of wealth endowments, cash flows, and yields on other assets)
determines the eight bond quantities and the own-yield on bonds. The

experiments considered here assess the term-structure effect of
shifting wealth ownership from households to pension funds by using

this model to simulate the value of the long-term bond yield under
different sets of assumptions about wealth distributions, while holding
fixed all other variables (including, in particular, short-term interest

rates).
It is important to note at the outset that, since these experiments
hold a great many variables fixed—for example, there are no feedbacks from nonfinancial economic activity—they are, like (6), only
a partial-equilibrium account of the determination of the structure
of asset yields. If monetary policy acts to hold short-term yields fixed
while the pattern of wealth ownership shifts, for example, then effects
on the term structure will translate directly into effects on long-term
yields that presumably either stimulate or retard saving and investment. Alternatively, if monetary policy holds money stock growth
fixed while wealth ownership shifts, then both short- and long-term
yields will presumably change, and nonfinancial economic activity
will respond in yet different ways. Hence a complete general equilibrium analysis, using a comprehensive model of all asset markets
and all nonfinancial markets, would in general give somewhat different estimates. Such a large-scale analysis lies beyond the scope of
this paper. Since the starting point of the analysis is the asset markets,
however, a partial-equilibrium analysis of term-structure effects is
instructive nonetheless.28

The heavy solid line in Figure I plots the observed historical
values of the difference between long- and short-term interest rates,
as measured by the Aa utility new-issue yield and the 4—6 month
prime commercial paper yield, respectively, over the 1960—1973
27. The bond investors include life insurance companies, other insurance companies, private pension funds, state and local government pension funds, mutual savings
banks, and households; as of yearend 1975 these six groups held 95 percent of all cor-

porate bonds issued in the United States. The bond issuers include domestic nonfinancial corporate businesses and finance companies; as of yearend 1975 these two
groups accounted for 90 percent of all corporate bonds issued in the United States. See
Friedman [1977, 1979] for details of the estimation procedure and for a complete listing
of the eight equations.
28. In fact, most of the literature of asset market behavior in general and interest
rate behavior in particular, at both the theoretical and the empirical levels, has adopted

such a partial-equilibrium approach. See, for example, the references cited in
Section I.

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

585

sample period used in estimating the eight bond demand and supply
equations. The yield curve slope, as measured here, varied substantially during these years. Long-term yields usually exceeded shortterm yields, and the greatest spread between the two emerged during
the economic recoveries of 1961—1962 and 1971—1972. During several

episodes of restrictive monetary policy, however, short-term yields
exceeded long-term yields. As Table IV shows, the mean long-short
yield spread during 1967—1973 (the second half of the sample period)
was 1.10 percent (i.e., 110 basis points).
The light solid line in Figure I piots the corresponding values of

this yield spread produced by a "control" simulation of the nineequation bond market model using historical values of all exogenous
variables (including the short-term yield). The control simulation is

fully dynamic in that, after the first quarter of the simulation, the
solution uses internally generated values for the lagged stocks of bonds
either held or issued by each of the eight groups of bond investors and
issuers, as well as for the series of lagged own-yields on bonds (which
plays an important role in determining expectations of holding-period
yields in some of these equations).

This control simulation indicates that the nine-equation partial
equilibrium model of the long-term bond market reproduces the
relevant historical experience with reasonable accuracy. There is no
significant bias for any of the model's nine jointly determined variables, and the mean simulated value of the long-short yield spread
is (to two decimal places) identical to the historical mean. For the eight
bond demand and supply variables, the root-mean-square simulation
errors are about in line with those of the respective estimated equations, indicating that the errors made by individual equations have

no observable tendency to compound one another. For the termstructure spread itself, the root-mean-square error is 0.21 percent (i.e.,
21 basis points)—about comparable to the "fit" achieved by previous
researchers who have directly estimated reduced-form equations for
long-term interest rates given the path of short-term interest rates.29

This within-sample performance seems quite creditable, especially
since the structural modeling methodology applied here does not
29. For example, Modigliani and Shiller's [1973] preferred equation had SE =

0.13 percent for the less volatile Aaa yield (again given the short-term yield) over the

sample period 1955:111—1971:11, but reestimating the equation using the Aa yield and
the 1960:I—1973:IV sample period leads to SE = 0.22 percent. Similarly, Feldstein and

Eckstein's [1970] preferred equation (which excluded the short-term yield) had SE

= 0.09 percent for the Aaa yield over the sample period 1954:1—1969:11, but reestimating
the equation using the Aa yield and the 1960:I—1973:IV sample period leads to SE =
0.29 percent.

586

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

estimate an equation directly for either the long-term yield or the
long-short spread but, instead, implies an equation for the long-term
yield (given the short-term yield) that is restricted by the underlying
structural hypotheses about bond investors' and bond issuers' portfolio behavior.30 As Table IV shows, the simulated mean long-short
yield spread during 1967—1973 is 1.12 percent, practically identical
to the historical mean.
What effect on the term structure will follow due to a shift away
from direct individual saving toward saving via pension funds? The
broken line in Figure I plots the values of the long-short yield spread
from a second simulation which differs from the control in that annual

asset accumulation in the amount of $10 billion is shifted from
households to pensions funds during the second half of the simulation
period (1967—1973).' This simulation therefore directly corresponds
to the analysis in Section Tin that, in comparison with the control, it

assumes a shift in the distribution of wealth holding without any
change in the total. As the data in Section II suggest, this redistribution toward investors with preferences for long-term assets sharply
reduces long- relative to short-term yields. Table IV summarizes this

effect, showing that the average long-short yield spread during
1967—1973, after the $10 billion redistribution, is 0.75 percent—0.37
percent less than in the control simulation. An analogous annual redistribution in the amount of $25 billion, indicated by the dotted line

in Figure I, leads to a similar but even larger effect, almost entirely
eliminating the average upward slope of the yield curve. As Table IV
shows, the average long-short yield spread during 1967—1973, after
the $25 billion redistribution, is only 0.20 percent—0.92 percent less
than in the control simulation.
Since the question of individuals' saving response to the level of
pension contributions is currently the object of much research,32 it
is useful to consider alternatives to the extreme assumption, under30. This point is especially relevant to the presence of other long-term yields in
the estimated bond demand equations for several categories of investors. Including
other long-term yields as independent variables in an unrestricted equation with the
bond yield as dependent variable would presumably increase greatly such an equation's
fit. In the context of the structural model, however, the contribution of other long-term
yields is restricted to their role in influencing the net purchases variables. See Friedman
[1977] and Friedman and Roley [1977] for a discussion of the structural modeling

methodology as specifically applied to the determination of long-term interest
rates.
31. Specifically, the asset accumulation is shifted entirely to state and local government pension funds. Recent pension legislation (especially the 1974 Act) suggests
that, in the future, -private pension funds' portfolio preferences may come to resemble
the pattern reflected in recent years by state and local government pension funds.
32. See again Feldstein [1974, 1978].

THE EFFECT OF SHIFTING WEALTH OWNERSHIP

587

lying the two simulation experiments plotted in Figure I, that the
reduction in individuals' direct saving exactly matches the increase
in pension accumulations, thereby leaving the total of their direct and
indirect saving unchanged. For purposes of comparison, therefore,
Table IV also indicates the results of two further simulations that
adopt the opposite extreme assumption—i.e., that individuals do not
reduce their direct saving at all in response to increased pension
contributions. These simulations represent annual increases of either
$10 billion or $25 billion in total financial asset accumulation, with
all of the increase going to pension funds. As Table IV shows, the
flattening of the term structure associated with these pension-oriented
saving increases is slightly greater than the corresponding effects due
to a redistribution toward pension funds with no increase in total
saving. Nevertheless, as indicated above, the partial-equilibrium
nature of these experiments is not adequate to assess the full implications of a change in the volume of total saving. For example, if individuals save more via pensions yet save no less directly, they must
consume less, and hence the overall level of economic activity and
income must change; but these simulations take income as given.
Similarly, if total saving rises, investment must rise also; but, while
these simulations allow for corporations' shifting toward bond financing as the yield curve flattens, they take as given firms' investment expenditures and external deficits. Both of these problems arise
immediately in the case of the "saving increase" simulations but not
the "saving shift" simulations that are more directly in the spirit of
the analysis in Section I.

Even the pure "saving shift" experiments reported here are
subject to some qualification because of the partial-equilibrium nature
of the analysis, so that these simulations clearly do not provide the
last word on the term-structure effects of redistributions from individuals to pension funds. Moreover, following the discussion in Sec-

tion II, the estimated effects reported in Table IV represent a form
of upper bound in that they assume that households do no rearranging

of their directly held assets to offset the asset selections made by
pension funds. Nevertheless, two conclusions stand out strongly from
this empirical analysis. First, the estimated model of the long-term
bond market does imply, as both theoretical analysis and other a priori
considerations suggest, that a shift in the form of wealth ownership
leads to a corresponding shift in the structure of asset yields. Second,
such wealth redistributions in plausible magnitude can lead to major
shifts in asset yields in comparison with historical relationships.

588

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

IV. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

Although economists have most often considered influencing the
structure of asset yields by altering relative asset supplies, in a world
of heterogeneous investors equivalent effects may also follow from

redistributions among wealth holders, or among forms of wealth
holding, exhibiting different portfolio preferences. A redistribution
in favor of less risk-averse investors, for example, reduces the premium

that the market in aggregate associates with risky assets. A redistribution in favor of investors who typically prefer long-term assets reduces the slope of the term-structure yield curve.
Empirical evidence for the United States shows that pension
funds exhibit portfolio preferences that are markedly different from
those of individuals. Pension funds hold far greater shares of their
total financial assets in long-term instruments than do individuals,
and the difference in their respective allocations of new cash flows is
even more pronounced. Econometric evidence also indicates that
pension funds' portfolio behavior is more interest-sensitive in this
regard than is individuals' behavior.
Partial-equilibrium simuhtion experiments based on a model
of the U. S. long-term bond market indicate that redistributions of
saving flows from individuals to pension funds, in plausible magnitudes, can have major effects on the term structure of interest rates.
A change in this direction from the historical pattern of saving during
1967—1973, in the amount of either $10 billion or $25 billion annually,

would have reduced the average slope of the yield curve from the
historical 1.12 percent to 0.75 percent or to 0.20 percent, respectively.

Such shifts in the term structure are substantial in comparison to
those discussed in the context of the "Operation Twist" surrogate debt
management effort of the early 1960s, and they would probably be

sufficient to have major implications for nonfinancial economic
activity.
HARVARD UNIVERSITY

REFERENCES
Arrow, Kenneth J., Essays in the Theory of Risk Bearing (Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Company, 1970).
Borch, K., "A Note on Uncertainty and Indifference Curves," Review of Economic
Studies, XXXVI (Jan. 1969), 1—4.
Bosworth, Barry, and James S. Duesenberry, "A Flow of Funds Model and Its Implications," Issues in Federal Debt Management (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston, 1973).

589
Brainard, William C., and James Tobin, "Pitfalls in Financial Model-Building,"
American Economic Review, LVIII (May 1968), 99—122.
David, Paul A., and John L. Scadding, "Private Savings: Ultrarationality, Aggregation,
and 'Denison's Law,' "JournalofPoliticalEconomy, LXXXII (March/April 1974),
225—49.

DeLeeuw, Frank, "A Model of Financial Behavior." Duesenberry et al., eds., The
Brookings Quarterly Econometric Model of the United States (Chicago: Rand
McNally & Company, 1965).

Drucker, Peter F., How Socialism Came to America (New York: Harper & Row,
1976).

Fama, Eugene F., "Multiperiod Consumption-Investment Decisions," American
Economic Review, LX (March 1970), 163—74.
Feldstein, Martin S., "Mean-Variance Analysis in the Theory of Liquidity Preference

and Portfolio Selection," Review of Economic Studies, XXXVI (Jan. 1969),
5—12.

——, "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate Capital Accumulation,"

Journal of Political Economy, LXXXII (Sept.IOct. 1974), 905—26.

"The Social Security Fund and National Capital Accumulation," Funding

Pensions: Issues and Implications for Financial Markets (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1976).
"Do Private Pensions Increase National Saving?" Journal of Public Economics,

X (Dec. 1978), 277—93.
——, and Otto Eckstein, "The Fundamental Determinants of the Interest Rate,"
Review of Economics and Statistics, LII (Nov. 1970), 363—75.
Foley, Duncan K., "On Two Specifications of Asset Equilibrium in Macroeconomic
Models," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXIII (April 1975), 303—24.

Friedman, Benjamin M., "Public Pension Funding and U. S. Capital Formation: A
Medium-Run View," Funding Pensions: Issues and Implications for Capital
Markets (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1976).
"Financial Flow Variables and the Short-Run Determination of Long-Term
Interest Rates," Journal of Political Economy, LXXXV (Aug. 1977), 661—89.
"Crowding Out or Crowding In? The Economic Consequences of Financing
Government Deficits," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 3 (1978),
593—641.

——, "Price Inflation, Portfolio Choice, and Nominal Interest Rates," American
Economic Review, LXX (March 1980), 32—80.
——, "Substitution and Expectation Effects on Long-Term Borrowing Behavior and

Long-Term Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, XI (May
1979), 131—50.

——, and V. Vance Roley, "Structural Models of Interest Rate Determination and
Portfolio Behavior in the Corporate and Government Bond Markets," American

Statistical Association, Proceedings of the Business and Economic Statistics
Section (1977), 142—51.
and
, "Investors' Portfolio Behavior Under Alternative Models of Long-Term

Interest Rate Expectations: Unitary, Rational or Autoregressive," Econometrica,
XLVII (Nov. 1979), 1475—97.

Friedman, Milton, "The Quantity Theory of Money: A Restatement," Friedman, ed.,
Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1956).

Friend, Irwin, and Marshall E. Blume, "The Demand for Risky Assets," American
Economic Review, LXV (Dec. 1975), 900—22.

Hendershott, Patric H., Understanding Capital Markets Volume I: A Flow-of-Funds
Model (Lexington: D. C. Heath & Company, 1977).
Hicks, J. R., "Liquidity," Economic Journal, LXXII (Dec. 1962), 671—709.
Lintner, John, "The Valuation of Risky Assets and the Selection of Risky Investments
in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets," Review of Economics and Statistics,
XLVII (Feb. 1965), 13—37.
——, "The Aggregation of Investor's Diverse Judgments and Preferences in Purely

Competitive Security Markets," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis,
IV (Dec. 1969), 347—400.

Markowitz, Harry, "Portfolio Selection," Journal of Finance, VII (March 1952),
77—91.

590

QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS

Merton, Robert C., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection Under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time Case," Review of Economics and Statistics, LI (Aug. 1969), 247—57.
Modigliani, Franco, and Robert J. Shiller, "Inflation, Rational Expectations, and the
Term Structure of Interest Rates," Economica, XL (Feb. 1973), 12—43.
——, and ——, "Coupon and Tax Effects on New and Seasoned Bond Yields and the
Measurement of the Cost of Debt Capital," Journal of Financial Economics, VII
(Sept. 1979), 297—318.

Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Sutch, "Innovations in Interest Rate Policy,"
——, and ——, "Debt Management and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: An
Empirical Analysis of Recent Experience," Journal of Political Economy, LXXV
(Aug. 1967), 569—89.

Mossin, Jan, "Optimal Multiperiod Portfolio Policies," Journal of Business, XLI (April
1968), 215—29.

Munnell, Alicia H., and Ann M. Connolly, "Funding Government Pensions: StateLocal, Civil Service and Military," Funding Pensions: Issues and Implications
for Financial Markets (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1976).
Murray, Roger F., Economic Aspects of Pensions: A Summary Report (New York:
National Bureau of Economic Research, 1968).
Oldfield, George S., "Financial Aspects of the Private Pension System," Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, IX (Feb. 1977), 48—54.

Patinkin, Don, Money, Interest, and Prices, 2nd ed. (New York: Harper & Row,

1965).
Roley, V. Vance, "A Structural Model of the U. S. Government Securities Market,"
Ph.D. thesis, Harvard University, 1977.
"A Theory of Federal Debt Management," American Economic Review, LXIX
(Dec. 1979), 915—26.

Samuelson, Paul A., "Lifetime Portfolio Selection by Dynamic Stochastic Programming," Review of Economics and Statistics, LI (Aug. 1969), 239—46.
"The Fundamental Approximation Theorem of Portfolio Analysis in Terms of
Means, Variances, and Higher Moments," Review of Economic Studies, XXX VII
(Oct. 1970), 537—42.
Sharpe, William F., "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under

Conditions of Risk," Journal of Finance, XIX (Sept. 1964), 425—42.
Soldofsky, Robert M., Institutional Holdings of Common Stock 1900—2000 (Ann Arbor:

University of Michigan, Graduate School of Business Administration, Bureau
of Business Research, 1971).
Stiglitz, J. E., "A Consumption-Oriented Theory of the Demand for Financial Assets
and the Term Structure of Interest Rates," Review of Economic Studies, XXXVII
(July 1970), 321—51.

Tobin, James, "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Toward Risk," Review of Economic
Studies, XXV (Feb. 1958), 65—86.
"An Essay on the Principles of Debt Management," Commission on Money and
Credit, Fiscal and Debt Management Policies (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall,
Inc., 1963).
"A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory," Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, I (Feb. 1969), 15—29.
Tsiang, S. C., "The Rationale of the Mean-Standard Deviation Analysis, Skewness
Preference, and the Demand for Money," American Economic Review, LXII (June
1972), 354—71.

