DETERMINANTS OF PEDIATRIC
CARE UTILIZATION*
ANN D. COLLE
MICHAEL GROSSMAN

ABSTRACT
The purpose of this paper is to understand the determinants of utilization of
pediatric care—care rendered to children by all physicians. Multivariate

techniques are employed to examine four measures of pediatric care
utilization in a national sample of children between the ages of 1 and 5. These
measures are the probability of contacting a physician within the past year,
the probability of obtaining a preventive physical examination within the past
year, the number of office visits to physicians in private practice by children
with positive visits, and the average quality of these visits.

The role of children's health in the determination of economic and social
well-being is a subject of increasing concern for medicine, social science, and

public policy. Numerous studies have demonstrated that adults' earnings
and life expectancy depend on their schooling, health, and ability. Others
suggest important causal relationships from health to cognitive development
at early stages in the life cycle, from both these variables to years of formal
schooling completed, and from schooling to adults' health.1 A common
theme in these studies as well as in the massive literature on the effects of
Colle is with the National Bureau of Economic Research. Grossman is with the National Bureau
and the City University of New York Graduate School.

Research for this paper was supported by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research. We would like to thank Ronald
Andersen, Study Director of the 1971 health survey conducted by the National Opinion
Research Center and the Center for Health Administration Studies of the University of
Chicago, for generously making the data available for this study and Charles Phelps for
providing us with a cost-of-living deflator. We are indebted to Ates Dagli, Linda Edwards,

Bernard Friedman, Victor Fuchs, Arleen Leibowitz, Joseph Newhouse, and Charles
Phelps for helpful comments and suggestions. This paper has not yet undergone the review

accorded official NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted for
approval by the Board of Directors.
I For a partial survey of the literature on relationships among earnings, schooling, health,
and intelligence of adults and children, see Grossman [19] and Edwards and Grossman
[12].

The Journal of Human Resources • XIII • Supplement 1978
NBER Conference on "The Economics of Physician and Patient Behavior"

116

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

home environmental variables on children is that well-being at later stages in
the life cycle depends on well-being at early stages.

The purpose of this paper is to understand the determinants of

utilization of pediatric care—care rendered to children by all physicians.
Appropriate pediatric care is a vehicle for maintaining children's health and

an object of government policy via programs such as Medicaid, the
neighborhood health center program, maternal and child health services,

and children and youth projects. Despite these programs, there are
substantial variations, especially according to race and socioeconomic class

of parents, in utilization of pediatric care services [34, 46, 5]. These
variations have led to proposals by Newberger, Newberger, and Richmond
[35], Keniston and the Carnegie Council on Children [27],and Marmor [30]

to restrict a national health insurance system, at least initially, to rather
complete coverage of prenatal and pediatric care. Bills with this aim have
been introduced in Congress by Senator Jacob K. Javits and Congressman
James H. Scheuer, both of New York.

In this paper, we use multivariate techniques to identify the main
sources of variation in the decision to obtain pediatric care, the number of
pediatric visits to physicians, and the composition of visits among various
types of physicians. Our research addresses a basic question put forward by
the Harvard Child Health Project [23, Vol. I, p. 43]: "What basic forces
influence the use of medical services by children?" This question must be
answered in order to improve the primary-care system for children. The

selection of variables to analyze is guided by models of utilization of

physicians' services that have been developed by economists and
sociologists. The resulting estimates of demand functions for pediatric care
are not based on one particular model. Instead, the insights contained in

several models are used to shed light on the most effective means of
increasing utilization by certain groups of children and to provide useful
infonnation for calculations of the effect of national health insurance on the
total cost of pediatric care. The data source for the demand estimates is a
representative sample of all children in the United States—the 1971 health
survey conducted by the National Opinion Research Center and the Center
for Health Administration Studies of the University of Chicago. Previous
studies in this area have used samples in specific cities in the United States
(for example, Haggerty, Roghmann, and Pless [21]; Inman [24]; Goldman
and Grossman [17]) or have examined a small number of determinants for a
national sample (for example, Friedman and Leibowitz [14]).

ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
Whenever decision-makers such as firms or households must allocate scarce

Colle and Grossman

I

117

resources among competing goals, economists can provide useful insights

into their behavior. Parent-child relationships clearly involve such
allocation. That parents wish to increase the current and future economic
well-being of their children is an assumption that is surely consistent with the

behavior of most parents in the United States, notwithstanding reported

instances of child abuse and neglect. And even though it is noteasy to defme
what is meant by the "well-being" of children, factors such as their health,
intelligence, school performance, school attainment, social behavior, and

lifetime earnings undoubtedly play an important role. To enhance any of
these components of children's welfare, parents must allocate to their
children some part of their own scarce resources—goods and services
purchased in the market, or their own time.
Our analytical framework is based on two propositions. One is the
above notion that parents must allocate scarce resources between a child's
well-being (the child's life "quality") and other competing goals. These
competing goals include not only the parents' own consumption, but also the

number and the consumption of other children in the family. Thus the
framework builds upon the important distinction between the quantity and

"quality" of children that is stressed in much of the literature on the
economics of fertility and optimum family size (for example, Becker and
Lewis [8], Willis [50], O'Hara [39]). The second proposition, embedded in
the household production function approach to consumer behavior, is that
consumers produce their basic objects of choice with inputs of goods and
services purchased in the market and their own time (Becker [7], Lancaster
[29], Muth [33]). This insight is of particular relevance in dealing with
children's health, cognitive development, and other aspects of their wellbeing because parents obviously do not buy these objects of choice directly
in the market.
In the specific instance of children's health, one can conceive of it being

formed according to a multivariate production function. This production
function would involve such factors as the child's genetic endowment, his or
her previous health history, various kinds of medical services, parents' time,
nutrition, housing quality, air pollution, and home environmental factors

that are shaped to a large extent by parents. The production function
interacts with parents' income, their preferences, various prices, and the
number of children in the family to determine the level of health of each
child. In more formal economic language, this interaction generates a
demand curve for children's health. It also generates demand curves for

endogenous inputs in the production function such as medical care,
nutrition, and parents' time. The number of children enters these functions
because the more children there are in a family, the more costly it is to raise
their average level of health.
Within the preceding general framework, we employ the insights in

118

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

several specific models to study the utilization of pediatric care. Since the

consumer's time is required to produce health and obtain medical care, the
relevant price in the demand function for care contains both a money price
component and a time price component [20,36,37, 1,2,42]. In the instance
of pediatric care, since the mother typically is responsible for the child, the

opportunity cost of one hour of time can be evaluated by her actual or
potential hourly wage rate (w) [24, 16, 18]. Thus, the "shadow price" of a
visit to a physician for pediatric care (irk) is

(1)

1Tp+Wt

where p is the money price of the visit (the payment to the physician) and t is
the sum of the time spent traveling to reach the physician. and return home

and waiting to see the physician at the source of care.2
In most studies, the measure of utilization of physicians' services by
nonhospitalized patients is the annual number of visits to physicians.3 The
number of visits, however is not the ideal dependent variable to employ in
demand function estimates. In any given year a substantial fraction of the
population does not visit a physician. For example, in the group of preschool

children between the ages of 1 and 5 that is analyzed in this paper,
approximately 26 percent did not see a physician in 1970. It is plausible that
consumers confront substantial entry costs in the medical care market due to
imperfect information (discussed in more detail below). Thus, the decision

to obtain care and the number of visits should be treated as separate
dependent variables.4
Even among patients with positive visits, the number of visits is not a
completely accurate measure of total services. If possible, one should
distinguish between preventive and curative (remedial) services because
these two services are likely to be separate inputs in the health production
function and to be associated with different kinds of health output [24, 16].
With the type of care held constant, the average quality or productivity of a
visit might vary among physicians [15, 36, 37, 13, 17]. Quality differences
can be traced in turn to different levels of investment in human capital by
physicians. For instance, medical schooling, internships, and residencytraining programs can differ in quality; and physicians may or may not
2 If the trip to the source of care is made by a mode of transportation other than walking, the
direct cost of the trip would be included in the shadow price of the visit.
3 Contacts between physicians and patients who are not hospitalized can occur in physicians'
offices or private clinics, hospital emergency rooms, hospital outpatient departments,
neighborhood health centers or other clinics not associated with hospitals, schools or work
health-service departments, patients' homes, and by telephone. We exclude health-service
department, home, and telephone contacts in this section and in our empirical work. For a
more complete discussion of this point, see the following section.
4 For an elaboration of this argument, see Newhouse and Phelps [36].

Colle and Grossman

I

119

obtain primary-practice status in a specialty, board certification in that
specialty, faculty status, and memberships in peer professional societies.

One implication of the existence of quality differences is that the
relevant money price variable is quality-adjusted price ( = p/q, where q is
quality per visit). A second implication, which is stressed by Goldman and
Grossman [171, is that there are separate demand curves for the quantity
(measured in terms of visits) and quality of pediatric care with somewhat
different properties. This proposition follows if visits and quality enter the
production function of child health as separate variables. It is particularly

relevant in the presence of a "fixed cost" of a visit. Such a cost is
independent of the quality of a visit and coincides with the time or forgone
earnings price of a visit in equation (1). Goldman and Grossman show that
the magnitude and in some instances the direction of the fixed-cost effect can

differ from the corresponding quality-adjusted price effect in a given
demand function.5
Studies that investigate aspects of children's well-being or quality6 in
the context of intergenerational transfer models make predictions about
differences in demand curves for pediatric care between high- and lowincome families [14,25,9, 11,49]. In these studies, the family's time horizon
is divided into two periods: a period during which children are dependent
upon their parents for financial support, and a period during which children
are financially independent. It is assumed that the quality of a given child
depends solely on his or her lifetime wealth, which parents can affect in two
ways. They can make investments, including health investments, in the
child's human capital in the period of dependence, and they can make a

financial transfer (a bequest) to the child at the onset of the period of
independence. The marginal rate of return on an investment in human
capital diminishes with the amount invested, while the marginal rate of
return on a financial transfer is independent of the size of the transfer.
The final ingredient in the intergenerational transfer models is the
solvency constraint that parents cannot leave net debts to their children or
that the financial transfer cannot be smaller than zero. This implies a tworegime specification of demand functions for children's health and for health
inputs such as pediatric care. Parents who do not make financial transfers
5 Specifically, the price of quality relative to the price of a visit is directly related to the
quality-adjusted price of a visit and inversely related to the fixed costs of a visit. An
increase in quality-adjusted price induces consumers to substitute away from quality and
toward visits. Although visits need not rise absolutely, the ratio of visits to quality will be
positively related to quality-adjusted price. A rise in the fixed cost of a visit would lead

consumers to substitute quality for visits. Consequently, the fixed cost and qualityadjusted price variables would have opposite effects on the demand for quality. For
derivations and qualifications of these propositions, see Goldman and Grossman [17].
6 The reader is cautioned not to confuse the concept of quality of children with the concept of
quality of pediatric care.

120

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

are members of Regime 1, while parents who do make financial transfers are

members of Regime 2. The demand functions in the two regimes have
different properties. In particular, parents' income has a positive effect on
pediatric care in Regime 1, but no effect in Regime 2. The higher the
parents' income, the more likely it is that they are members of Regime 2.
Therefore, income should have a positive effect on pediatric care utilization
at relatively low income levels, but should have no effect (or a weaker effect)
at relatively high income levels.
Other aspects of the processes by which health and medical services are
produced and supplied in the household and in the market suggest additional
determinants of pediatric-care utilization. Parents' schooling is an obvious

example of a home environmental factor in the production function of
children's health. Recent studies have established the importance of
mother's schooling in particular in the determination of childen's health and
pediatric-care utilization [28, 14, 21, 24,44, 11, 17]. Several mechanisms by
which this variable affects utilization have been identified, but the relative

importance of each remains an open issue. Michael [32] argues that
schooling is a positive correlate of efficiency in the production of many
household commodities. Suchman [47, 48], Rosenstock et al. [43], and
Andersen [3] advance the hypothesis that schooling is related to specific
knowledge of appropriate health practices.7 These same authors also

suggest that it determines attitudes or preferences toward health and
medical care. Slesinger [44] finds that health knowledge and attitudes are
significant predictors of pediatric care in a sample of black children in
Washington, D.C. On the other hand, Haggerty, Roghmann, and Pless[21]
find no impact of these variables on care in a sample of children of all races in

Rochester, New York.8
Many persons have pointed out that physicians play a rather unique role

in the market for medical care services. This has led to theoretical
discussions and empirical estimates of the "availability effect." By this is
meant the notion that the physician can directly influence the demand for his

or her services. Existing estimates of the availability effect pertain to
utilization by the population at large orby adults. In their interstate model of
the market for physicians' services, Fuchs and Kramer [15] report that the
elasticity of physicians' visits per capita with respect to physicians per capita
is approximately equal to .4. This estimate is obtained from a demand curve
for visits in which income and the money price of a visit are held constant.
7 The distinction between general efficiency and specific knowledge of health practices is

analogous to the distinction between general and specific on-the-job training first
introduced by Becker [6].
8 The effect of schooling on the demand for care is ambiguous whether it reflects general
efficiency, specific health knowledge, or preferences. This follows because the demand for
care is derived from the more basic demand for health.

Colle and Grossman

I

121

This finding is not direct evidence in favor of the availability effect. For
example, the travel, waiting, inconvenience, and information costs of
obtaining physicians' services should fall as the number of physicians per
capita rises. Yet many persons would argue that the elasticity is too large to
be explained entirely by this factor. Moreover, in a study that controls for
travel and waiting time, May [311 finds a statistically significant availability

effect. His estimate, however, is only half as large as that of Fuchs and
Kramer.
DATA AND ESTIMATION
The Data

Our data set is the 1971 health survey conducted by the Center for Health
Administration Studies and the National Opinion Research Center of the
University of Chicago (the NORC sample). This is national sample of the
noninstitutionalized population of the United States in which the inner-city
poor, the aged, and rural farm residents are overrepresented. It contains
information on socioeconomic characteristics, health insurance coverage,
health status, and utilization of various kinds of medical care services during
the calender year 1970 for 11,822 adults and children from 3,880 families.9
The empirical analysis is restricted to utilization of physicians' services

by preschool children ages 1 through 5. Infants under 1 are eliminated
because we wish to focus on pediatric care for the health problems that are
encountered beyond the first year of life. These problems are very different

from those of infants, as reflected by mortality rates that are as high for
infants as for persons ages 55 to 64 and very low beyond age 1. Infants are not
analyzed as a separate group because the sample size is too small to permit
reliable coefficient estimates. Children beyond age 5 are excluded since our

primary interest is in pediatric care initiated by the parents, and care
received by children in this older age group may be dictated in part by school

regulations. Moreover, this procedure takes account of the differences in
the nature of health conditions at the preschool as compared to the school
stage of a child's life cycle. Finally, the group ages 1 through 5 is of special
interest because inadequate pediatric care at this stage is likely to have a
particularly detrimental influence on the child's current and future health.
Due to the considerable interest in the low level of economic and social
well-being of blacks relative to whites, part of the empirical work is focused
on an analysis of black-white differences in the utilization of pediatric care.

The NORC sample is well suited for such an analysis because the
oversampling of the inner-city poor resulted in a sample that is 32 percent
9 For a detailed description of the sample, see Andersen, Lion, and Anderson [4).

122

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

black. The comparable figure for the population of the United States is

approximately 12 percent.1° Mexican, Puerto Rican, Oriental, and
American Indian children are omitted from the empircal work. These
groups are extremely small, and their parents might behave in different ways

than either blacks or whites.
The sample is further limited by the exclusion of children who do not
live with their mother or for whom the mother's years of formal schooling is

unknown. This reflects our concern with the role of the mother in the
determination of pediatric care utilization.11 Note that children who live
with their mother but not their father are included in our sample. Finally,
observations are omitted if a dependent variable is unknown. This occurs
only in the case of the average quality of visits to physicians in private
practice. The final sample size is 839 children, of which 511 are whites and
328 are blacks.
Measurement of Variables
Table

1 contains defmitions of the dependent, independent, and

intermediate variables in the demand functions for pediatric care. The
intermediate variables are used to construct some of the independent
variables. Tables Al and A2 in the appendix contain pooled and racespecific unweighted means and standard deviations of the dependent and
independent variables. The demand functions are concerned with contacts
between physician and children who are not currently hospitalized and who
have to travel to reach the physician (ambulatory contacts).12 The most
comprehensive measure of these contacts (USE) is a dichtomous variable
that equals one if a child had at least one ambulatory contact with a physician
in 1970 and equals zero if a child had no contacts. By definition, ambulatory
contacts can take place in physicians' offices or private clinics, hospital

emergency rooms, hospital outpatient departments, and neighborhood
health centers or other public clinics not associated with hospitals. Excluded
are contacts while a child is hospitalized, contacts in a child's home, contacts

in school health-service departments, and telephone contacts between
10 The oversampling of the aged is not relevant for our analysis except that there are fewer
children in the NORC sample than in a random sample of all families in the United States.
The degree of oversampling of rural farm residents is very small. Nine percent of the
sample reside on farms, compared to 7 percent of the U.S. population.
11 When there are unknown values of independent variables other than mother's schooling,
the race-specific weighted mean value of the relevant variable is substituted. The weights
employed correct for oversampling and make the means representative of the population
of the United States. Throughout this paper the term weighted mean is used to denote a
mean that is corrected for oversampling. The term unweighied mean is used to denote a
mean that is not corrected for oversampling.
12 We exclude contacts between children and ophthalmologists in this paper.

Colle and Grossman

I

123

parents and physicians. We focus on ambulatory care because relatively few

children are hospitalized, visits in school health departments rarely are
initiated by parents, there is no information in the sample on telephone
contacts, and home visits have declined in importance over time.13
Preventive pediatric care (PREVENT) is measured by a dichotomous
variable that equals one if a child had a physical examination within the past
year because it was time to have an examination, and equals zero otherwise.
Thus, PREVENT equals zero if a child had an examination within the past
year because he or she was ill, because it was required, or if a child did not

have an examination within the past year. it is intended to measure
discretionary preventive care that is initiated, at least in part, by parents.'4
The other two dependent variables (VISITS and QUAL) pertain to
pediatric care rendered by private-practice physicians in their office. This
source of care is emphasized because detailed information is available on the

characteristics of the physicians who delivered it and on their fees.
Characteristics are available because parents were asked to identify by name

all physicians who saw their children during 1970. The type of primary
practice and board-certification status of these physicians were obtained
from the American Medical Association Directory. Since parents frequently
do not know the names of physicians who saw their children at other sites,
there is little information on such physicians. Therefore, when VISITS or
QUAL is the dependent variable, children with no office visits to physicians
in private practice (VISITS) are excluded from the regressions. There are
420 children in the sample of those with positive visits, of whom 336 are
whites and 84 are blacks.
Quality per visit (QUAL) is estimated from mean office prices of five
types of physicians seen by children in the NORC sample (see Table 2). It is

expressed as an index number with the quality of a visit to a general
practitioner set equal to one. Thus if a child in a given family made all of his
or her visits to a board-certified pediatrician, quality per visit would equal

1.362 for that child. In cases where the child saw more than one type of
physician, quality per visit is defined as a weighted average of the quality of
each type, where the weights are the percentage of visits to that type. Even if
the higher fees associated with visits to board-certified specialists do not

solely reflect quality in some objective sense, the demand functions for
quality convey useful information. In particular, by showing the factors that
13 According to data in Andersen, Lion, and Anderson [4], home visits accounted for 11
percent of total out-of-hospital physician visits in 1958 for the population as a whole. The
corresponding figure in 1970 was 2 percent. For children under age 5, home visits
accounted for 1 percent of total out-of-hospital visits in 1970.
14 The mean difference between PREVENT and a variable that equals one if a child had an
examination for preventive reasons or because it was required within the past year is very
small.

124

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

TABLE 1
DEFINITION OF VARIABLES

Variable Name

A. Dependent Variables
I. USE

2. PREVENT
3. VISiTS
4. QUAL

Definition
Child visited a physician during 1970 = I
Child had a physical exam for preventive reasons
during 1970 = 1
Annual number of visits to physicians in private practice
Average quality of a visit to physicians in private
practice

B. Intermediate (') and
independent Variables
1. DFAMJNC
Deflated annual family income in thousands of dollars
2. DY6
Deflated annual family income $6,000 =
3. DYII
Deflated annual family income $11,000 =
Deflated annual expenditures, including health
4. DEXPEND()

5. QUALVISITS()
6. DQUALPRJCE(*)

7. DNETPRICE

8. MEDICAID

9. INS
10. WELFARE

II. MEDUCAT
12. KNOW
13. TASTE

14. HO
15. RAD

16. HG, HF, HP

insurance benefits, for visits to physicians in private
practice
Annual number of quality-adjusted visits to physicians
in private practice: QUALVISITS = QUAL X VISITS
Deflated quality-adjusted price of a visit to a physician
in private practice: DQUALPRICE = DEXPEND/
QUALVISITS
Deflated net quality-adjusted price of a visit to a
physician in private practice: DNETPRICE = (coinsurance rate) x DQUALPRICE (used only when
QUAL or VISITS is the dependent variable)
Medicaid recipient = I (used only when QUAL or
VISITS is the dependent variable)
Child had office-visit insurance coverage = I (used
only when USE or PREVENT is the dependent
variable)
Welfare recipient = I (used only when USE or
PREVENT is the dependent variable)
Years of formal schooling completed by mother
A measure of the parents' knowledge of signs of disease
A measure of the parents' taste for medical services
or attitude toward the value of medical services
Child hospitalized during 1970 =
Number of days during 1970 that child's activity was
restricted due to illness or injury
Evaluation of child's health by parent: HP = I if
health is poor; HF = 1 if health is fair; HG = I if
health is good; omitted class if health is excellent

Colle and Grossman

I

125

TABLE 1 (Continued)
Variable Name

Definition

17. WT!ME(5)

Usual waiting time in the office per visit to usual
source of care
18. TTIME(5)
Round-trip travel time per visit to usual source of care
19. NLF(5)
Mother did not work during 1970 =
20. DMWA GE(S)
Deflated mother's actual hourly wage if she worked
and predicted hourly wage if she did not
21. DWT
Deflated travel and waiting time cost per visit: DWT =
DMWAGE x (TTIME + WTIME)
22. DWTNLF
Interaction between deflated travel and waiting time
cost and labor force status: DWTNLF = NLF x
[DMWAGE x (TTIME + WTIME)]
23. DELAY
Usual number of days, except for emergencies, that
child has to wait to get an appointment with usual
source of care
24. WALK
Mode of transportation to usual source of care is
walking = I; omitted class if mode is by car, by taxi,
or by public transportation
25. NOREG
Child has no regular source of care = 1
Size of place of residence: SSMSA = 1 if location is in
26. SSMSA, URBAN,
RURALNF, FARM(5) some SMSA other than the 10 largest SMSAs in the
country; URBAN = 1 if location is in an urban area
that is not part of an SMSA; RURAL = I if location
is in a rural area and not a farm; FARM = 1 if location
is a farm; omitted class is location in one of the 10
largest SMSAs in the country
27. MD
Number of nonfederal physicians per hundred population in the primary sampling unit
28. MDSSMSA,
Interactions between residence and number of nonMD URBAN,
federal physicians per hundred population in the
MDRURALNF,
primary sampling unit: MDSSMSA = MD X SSMSA;
MDFARM
MDURBAN = MD x URBAN; MDRURALNF =
MD x RURALNF; MDFARM = MD X FARM
29. AC
Age of child
30. NC
Number of children in the family
31. MALE
Child is male = 1
32. BLACK
Race of child is black =

determine the choice of relatively high-priced physicians, the demand
estimates can be used to predict how the total cost of pediatric care would be
affected by alternative government policies.
We discussed the roles of family income, fixed cost, quality-adjusted

126

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

TABLE 2
MEAN OFFICE PRICES BY TYPE OF pHySIC1ANa

Type

Weighted
Mean
Price

Price Relative
to Price of
General Practitioner

$10.80
9.65

1.362
1.217

13.57

1.711

11.71

1.477
1.000

Board-certified pediatrician
Nonboard-certified pediatrician
Board-certified specialist other
than pediatrician
Nonboard-certified specialist
other than pediatrician
General practitioner

7.93

a The weights employed correct for oversamplmg and make the means representative of the
population of the United States.

price, mother's schooling, knowledge of appropriate health practices, taste
for medical services, and physicians per hundred population in the primary
sampling unit in the demand functions in the first section. Therefore, in the
remainder of this section we clarify some of the definitions of independent
variables in Table 1 and comment briefly on the effects of certain variables
and on alternative specifications of the equations to be estimated. To take
account of differences in the cost of living among areas, money family
income in 1970 is deflated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics' [10] estimate of
the annual costs of an intermediate budget for an urban four-person family
to obtain deflated family income (DFAMINC). The BLS cost-of-living
variable is available for 40 cities and four nonmetropolitan areas (Northeast,
North Central, South, and West). Where possible, the primary sampling
units in the NORC survey were matched with the cities in the BLS survey.
For rural primary sampling units, the region-specific nonmetropolitan area
cost figure was used. The same cost-of-living variable was employed to
obtain the other deflated variables in Table 1.15
In some of the multivariate estimates in the following section, where the

results are reported, deflated family income is entered as a continuous
variable. In others, two marginal income variables (DY6 and DY11) are

entered. This enables us to test the proposition derived from the

intergeneraticnal transfer model that the income effect should diminish as
15 Obviqusly, there are errors of measurement in the cost-of-living variable. Results obtained

with undeflated variables (not shown) are, however, very similar to the estimates
presented in the following section on "Results."

Colic and Grossman

I

127

income rises. The coding scheme for the income dummy variables was
selected because it divides the sample into three groups of roughly equal size
(deflated family income less than $6,000; deflated family income between

$6,000 and $10,999; and deflated family income equal to or greater than
$11,000).
The deflated quality-adjusted price of an office visit to a physician in

private practice (DQUALPRICE) is measured as deflated annual
expenditures, including health insurance benefits, for visits to these
physicians divided by quality-adjusted visits (QUALVISITS). Following
Newhouse and Phelps [36,37] and Goldman and Grossman [17], we assume
that cross-sectional variations in quality-adjusted price primarily can be

traced to imperfect information due to positive costs of search. As
Newhouse, Phelps, and many others have stressed, the relevant price in the
demand function is net quality-adjusted price (DNETPRICE), defined as
gross quality-adjusted price multiplied by the coinsurance rate for physician
office visits by children specified in the family's health insurance policy. If
the family had a policy with no deductible that covered its children, the
coinsurance rate is computed as out-of-pocket outlays for visits to physicians
in private practice by a given child divided by total outlays. If the family had
a major medical policy with a deductible that had not been exceeded, the

coinsurance rate is set equal to one. If the deductible was exceeded, the
coinsurance rate is obtained directly from the policy for those policies that

were verified with insurance companies by NORC. In the case of
nonverified major medical policies, the coinsurance rate is set equal to 20
percent, the most common value in the verified policies. Of course, the
coinsurance rate equals one when there is no health insurance for doctoroffice visits by children. 16

If a family receives Medicaid benefits (MEDICAID), net price
nominally is zero. Not all physicians, however, will accept Medicaid
recipients as their patients. Inclusion of the dummy variable MEDICAID
controls for this factor. Of course, the impact of Medicaid on pediatric care
utilization is of considerable interest and importance for public policy.
Net price and Medicaid cannot be employed as independent variables
in the use and preventive-care functions. Net price cannot be computed

when a child has had no office visits. Receipt of Medicaid benefits is
mechanically related to a dependent variable such as use because a child
cannot receive benefits if he or she had no use. Therefore, in the use and
preventive-care functions, net price is replaced by a dummy variable that
16 Keeler, Newhouse, and Phelps [261 show that ii is extremely difficult to define the
appropriate net price variable when a policy contains a deductible. Our procedure is
identical to the one used by Newhouse and Phelps [37] and Phelps [42]. Newhouse and
Phelps [36] exclude observations with a deductible that has not been met. We have not
pursued this option because our main focus is not on the net price effect.

128

J

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

equals one if a child has doctor-office-visit insurance (INS), regardless of

whether health insurance benefits were actually received. Medicaid is
replaced by a dummy variable that equals one if a family had welfare income

(WELFARE), regardless of whether Medicaid benefits were actually
received. These variables are designed to capture the potential impacts of
health insurance for doctor-office visits and the welfare system on the use of
pediatric care and on preventive care.
Knowledge of signs of disease (KNOW), taste for medical care or
attitudes toward the value of medical care (TASTE), and the child's health
are potential correlates of mother's schooling (MED UCA 7) and mechanisms by which the gross effect of schooling on pediatric care might operate.
The child's health is included here because of evidence that health and

mother's schooling are positively related (for example, Edwards and
Grossman [12]). Under fairly weak assumptions, Grossman [20] and Phelps
[41] show that the quantity of medical care demanded will rise as health falls.
Note that in our framework, the parents' basic object of choice is the child's

ultimate level of health at the age when he or she becomes financially
independent. Even with current health held constant, income, prices, and
other variables can affect pediatric care by means of their effects on ultimate

health.
Knowledge of signs of disease (KNOW) is based on the answers to 10
questions such as: Is shortness of breath after light exercise a sign of cancer?

Are open sores or ulcers that do not heal a possible sign of cancer? Is
unexplained loss of weight a possible sign of tuberculosis? Correct answers

are given higher scores than are incorrect ones, and the final variable
measures the parents' total score on the 10 questions. It is used as a proxy for
their health-specific knowledge. Taste for medical care or attitudes toward
the value of medical care (TASTE) is based on the answers to six questions
such as: Do you agree or disagree that, if you wait long enough, you can get
over most any disease without getting medical aid? Do you agree or disagree
that modem medicine can cure almost any illness? Do you agree or disagree
that some home remedies are still better than prescribed drugs for curing illness? Responses that indicate favorable attitudes toward the value of medical

services are scored higher, and a total score on the six questions is
computed.'7 The child's health is measured by whether the child was
hospitalized during 1970 (HO), by the number of restricted-activity days due
to illness or injury during 1970 (RAD), and by the parents' evaluation of the
child's health (HP, HF, HG). These variables are all negative correlates of
good health and should have positive effects on utilization.'8
For more detailed descriptions of the variables KNOW and TASTE, see Andersen [3].
18 In the preventive-care equation, good health and utilization might be positively related
rather than negatively related. In a production function context, such a relationship
indicates reverse causality from preventive-care inputs to health outcomes. In a more

17

Colle and Grossman

I

129

The deflated hourly wage rate of mothers who worked in 1970 is
calculated as deflated annual earnings in 1970 divided by the product of
weeks worked in 1970 and usual hours worked per week. If the mother did
not work in 1970, her wage is estimated from a race-specific regression of the

natural logarithm of the hourly wage rate of working mothers on mother's
years of formal schooling, mother's years of experience in the labor market
(defined as mother's age minus her years of formal schooling completed
minus six years), years of experience squared, and the number of children in

the family (a positive correlate of interruptions in the labor market
experience).

The actual or predicted wage rate is multiplied by the sum of round-trip

travel time per visit to the child's usual source of medical care and usual
waiting time to see the physician at that source to obtain the deflated time or

fixed cost of a visit (DWT). The regression specification of the demand
function allows for the estimation of a time cost effect for mothers who work
(given by the coefficient of DWT) and a time cost effect for mothers who do
not work (given by the sum of the coefficients of DWTand D WTNLF). The
time cost effect is allowed to vary with labor force status because the shadow
value of time of a mother who does not work exceeds her potential market
wage rate. In turn, her potential wage might differ from the actual wage of a
working mother with similar measured characteristics.
The net price of an office visit and the time or forgone earnings price do
not fully reflect all costs that families incur to receive pediatric services. In
addition, there are transporation costs, inconvenience costs, and information costs. Transportation costs are proxied by a dummy variable that equals

one if the mode of transportation to the usual source of care is walking
(WALK). Obviously, this variable is a negative correlate of these costs.
Information and inconvenience costs arise because of imperfect knowledge
about many aspects of the pediatric care market. For example, mothers do
not have complete information about the characteristics of physicians, the

nature of their practices, and their fees. Information and inconvenience

costs are reflected in part by the absence of a regular source of care
(NOREG) and by the usual number of days, except for emergencies, that a

child has to wait to get an appointment with the usual source of care
(DELAY).'9
mechanical context, relatively healthy children are not likely to have undergone their most
recent physical examination because they were ill. Thus, the health effects in the
19

preventive-care function should be interpreted with caution.
If a child did not have a regular source of care, his or her parents were not asked about
travel or visiting time. For such children, waiting or travel time is set equal to the racespecific mean value of the relevant variable. This procedure does not introduce biases
because equations fit with the subsample of children who had a regular source of care are
almost identical in all respects to the ones presented in the "Results" section below.

130

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

The coefficients of the number of nonfederal physicians per hundred
population in the primary sampling unit in which a given child resides (MD)

provide estimates of the size of the availability effect in the market for
pediatric care. Pauly [40] argues that the availability effect is due in part to

demand manipulation by physicians in the presence of imperfect
information. It follows that the availability effect should be larger in large
metropolitan areas where consumers have more physicians to choose from
and less information on any given physician. To test this proposition, the
physician variable is interacted with size of place of residence (SSMSA,
URBAN, RURALNF, FARM). This procedure also supplies useful insights

concerning the effects of policies to reallocate the existing stock of
physicians or to increase the stock in certain areas.20 It should be noted that
significant MD coefficients need not solely reflect an availability effect due

to demand manipulation by physicians. Alternative explanations are
discussed when the results are presented in the following section.
The final four variables in the empirical analysis are the number of
children in the family (NC), the child's age (AC), the child's sex (MALE),
and the child's race (BLACK). An increase in the number of children in a
family increases the cost of raising their average level of health and lowers
the quantity of pediatric care demanded.21 Among preschool children, visits
to physicians fall with age and are larger for males than for females (for

example, National Center for Health Statistics [34]). The male-female
differential reflects differences in the health problems encountered by
preschool boys as compared to preschool girls. These problems might not be
completely captured by the measures of children's health in Table 1. The
race dummy variable controls for differences in pediatric care utilization
between black and white children that are not due to differences in the other

independent variables. We are particularly interested in estimating the
portion of the gross (no other variable held constant) difference between the

black and white mean values of a given dependent variable that can be
explained by differences between black and white mean values of the
independent variables.

20 It might be argued that the number of general practitioners in private practice and the
number of pediatricians in private practice are better indexes of availability of pediatric

care than the number of nonfederal physicians. On the other hand, the former two
variables do not measure the availability of public care. The latter component is reflected
in part by nonfederal physicians who work in hospitals and in public clinics not connected
with hospitals.

21 The number of children is an endogenous variable, but to treat it in such a manner is
beyond the scope of this paper. In a somewhat different context, Tomes 49] reports similar
estimates of demand functions for children's schooling whether the number of children is
treated as exogenous or endogenous.

Colle and Grossman

131

Estimation Techniques

Since the dependent variables for ambulatory use of physician services
(USE) and for a preventive physical examination within the past year are
dichotomous variables, dichotomous logit USE and PREVENT functions
are estimated by the method of maximum likelihood. This technique

assumes, for example, that the probability that the ith child had an
ambulatory contact with a physician (0k) is given by the logistic function

0 = 1/(1 + eae-bxi)
where x is a vector of independent variables and b is a vector of logit
(2)

coefficients. After fitting (2), we compute the marginal effect of X on 0, (the
change in 0 due to a one-unit change in x,) as

(aojax,) = b01(1 — e)
(3)
These computations are made at the unweighted sample mean value of 0.
They are very similar to computations made at the weighted sample mean
value (not shown). We also have fitted USE and PREVENT functions by
ordinary least squares and have obtained identical results in terms of signs
and statistical significance of all variables.
Demand functions for visits (VISITS) and quality (QUAL) are
estimated by ordinary least squares. A potential problem in these equations

arises because the quality-adjusted price variable (DQUALPRICE) is
identical to observed price (the ratio of expenditures to visits) divided by
quality (QUAL). Therefore, errors of measurement in quality or in visits
are negatively correlated with errors of measurement in net price. Under
certain conditions this will lead to an overestimation in absolute value of the
net price elasticities of quality and visits if the demand functions are fitted by
ordinary least squares. This same bias arises in the context of a search model
in which quality-adjusted price is an endogenous variable that falls as the
optimal amount of quality or visits rises. Both factors suggest an estimation

procedure in which QUALPRICE is predicted by a set of instrumental
variables. Yet we have found in preliminary work that demand functions for
quality and visits fitted by two-stage least squares do not differ much from

ordinary least squares estimates. Therefore, we rely on ordinary least
squares estimation in this paper.
We do not present separate equations for white and black children
because for three of the four dependent variables the hypothesis of equality
between sets of coefficients for white and black children was accepted at the
1 percent level of significance.22 The hypothesis was rejected for quality, but
22 Specifically, we performed a Chow test of the hypothesis that slope coefficients but not
intercepts for white and black children are the same. For USE and PREVENTthe test was
based on ordinary least squares regressions rather than on logit functions.

132

THE JOURNAl OF HUMAN RESOURCES

the sample of black children for whom quality can be computed is too small
(n = 84) to permit reliable coefficient estimates. Moreover, the parameter
estimates of the quality function for the pooled sample are similar to those
for the white sample.

RESULTS

Maximum likelihood dichotomous logit equations for the dependent
variables USE and PREVENT are given in Table A3 in the appendix.
Ordinary least squares multiple regression equations for the dependent

variables VISITS and QUAL are given in Table A4 in the appendix. The
discussion of the results is focused around the effects of six independent
variables or related sets of independent variables on the four dependent
variables. The variable sets are as follows: (1) family income; (2) net price
and related variables (Medicaid recipient, welfare recipient, presence of

health insurance for physician visits); (3) mother's schooling and its
correlates (knowledge of signs of disease, taste for medical services, child's
health status); (4) time costs and other indirect costs (no regular source of
care, mode of transportation to the source or care, appointment delay); (5)
physicians per hundred population and its interactions with size of place of
residence; and (6) other family and child characteristics (child's age, child's
sex, number of children in the family). After the results are discussed, there
is an analysis of differences between black and white mean values of the
dependent variables.
Effects of Independent Variables
1. Family Income. Panel A of Table 3 contains coefficients of family income.
In preliminary estimation, no evidence was found of a diminishing income
effect in the visit or quality equation. Therefore, the income measure in the

final estimates of these two equations is the continuous deflated family
income variable (DFAMINC). On the other hand, evidence was found of
diminishing income effects in the use and preventive-care equations.
Therefore, the marginal family income dummy variables for deflated family
income equal to or greater than $6,000 (DY6) and equal to or greater than
$11,000 (D Yl 1) are employed in the final estimates of the logit functions.
According to the coefficients of DY6, children from families with an

income between $6,000 and $10,999 are more likely to have had an
ambulatory contact with a physician and a preventive physical examination
than children from families with an income under $6,000. As shown by the
coefficients of DYI 1, however, use and preventive care are approximately
the same for children from families with an income of $11,000 or over as for
children from families with an income between $6,000 and $10,999. These

Colle and Grossman

133

I

TABLE 3
COEFFICIENTS OF FAMILY INCOME AND INCOME ELASTICITIES

Dependent Variables
QUAL

USE

PREVENT

.175

004

—

—

(4.12)
—

(2.45)
—

1.07

.110
(2.16)

VISITS

A. Coefficients of
Family Incomea
DFAMINC
DY6

DYII

—

—

(2.10)
.063
(1.11)

—.034

(—0.69)

B. Income Elastici:iesb

WHITE
BLACK
TOTAL

.398
.284
.379

.036
.021

.033

—
—
—

—

—
—

a Source: Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4. 1-ratios are in parentheses. The critical :-ratios at the 5
percent level of significance are 1.64 for a one-tailed test and 1.96 for a two-tailed test. For
USE and PREVENT, marginal effects (and asymptotic 1-ratios) from maximum likelihood
estimates of dichotomous logit functions are given.

b Computations were made using income coefficients from the total sample and relevant
unweighted means of the white, black, and total samples, respectively.

findings are consistent with the prediction of an intergenerational transfer

model in which financial transfers from parents to children cannot be
negative and are subject to a constant rate of return if they are positive. By
assumption, investments in children's human capital, including health, are
subject to a diminishing marginal rate of return. Consequently, parents who
make financial transfers would not increase health investments as their
income rises.

To be sure, there are alternative interpretations of the diminishing

income effect. For example, the marginal rate of return on health
investments might diminish at a more rapid rate than the marginal rates of

return on other kinds of investments in children's human capital.
Alternatively, since pediatric care has a positive income elasticity (see Panel
B of Table 3), a family's entry price into the pediatric care market (that price
at which it is willing to consume a positive amount of the good) is a positive

function of income. In this context, the diminishing income effect might
simply reflect little variation in entry prices above a certain income.

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

134

Deflated family income has positive and statistically significant
regression coefficients in the demand curves for visits and quality. As shown
in Panel B of Table 3, the income elasticity of visits is much larger than the

income elasticity of quality. When total sample mean values of income,

visits, and quality are used to compute these elasticities, the income
elasticity of visits is .38 and the income elasticity of quality is .03. Similar
conclusions emerge when the computations are based on mean values of
white children or mean values of black children.23 Goldman and Grossman

[17] report that pediatric visits are more responsive to income than the
quality of these visits in a sample of New York City residents. They attribute
this result to the presence of a fixed (time) cost component in the total cost of
a visit, which causes the shadow price of quality to rise at a more rapid rate
with income than the shadow price of a visit. Our results also might be due in

part to the rather narrow range of variation in quality (coefficient of
variation = 18.26 percent) relative to visits (coefficient of variation = 127.31
percent) in the NORC sample.
Regardless of the way in which specific income effects are interpreted, a
clear message of Table 3 is that family income is an important determinant of

pediatric care utilization. This finding controls for variables that could
contribute to an observed gross relationship such as net price, mother's
schooling, family size, and race. The finding should be contrasted with the
insignificant effect of family income on physicians' services for adults in
almost all studies cited in this paper.
2. Net Price and Related Variables. Deflated net price (DNETPRJCE)

has a negative and statistically significant regression coefficient in the

demand curve for quality (see Table 4). The same variable has an
insignificant negative regression coefficient in the demand curve for visits.
In their quality-quantity (visit) substitution model, Goldman and Grossman
[17] show that an increase in net price raises the price of quality relative to
that of visits and causes the ratio of quality to visits to fall. If one accepts the
null hypothesis that net price has no impact on visits, then our findings are
consistent with this prediction. Note, however, that the price elasticity of
visits exceeds the price elasticity of quality in absolute value (—.11 vs. — .04
at the total sample means in Panel B of Table 4). This result is not consistent
with the quality-quantity substitution model.
The coefficients of the Medicaid dummy variable suggest that families
who receive Medicaid benefits do not behave as if they faced a zero net
price. For example, the coefficient of Medicaid in the visit equation shows
that a child who received Medicaid benefits made approximatly one fewer
23 The computations of income elasticities are based on unweighted sample mean values.
Computations based on weighted sample mean values are very similar to the unweighted
estimates. The same comment applies to the price elasticities presented in Panel B of Table

4.

Colle and Grossman

135

TABLE 4
COEFFICIENTS OF NET PRICE AND RELATED VARIABLES
AND NET PRICE ELASTICITIES

Dependent Variables
VISITS

QUAL

- .082

- .008
(—2.73)

USE PREVENT

A. Coefficients of Net
Price and Related
Variab/esa
DNETPRICE

MEDICAID
INS

WELFARE
B. Net Price Elastici:iesb
WHITE
BLACK

TOTAL

(—1.14)
—.936

—.115

(—0.84)

(—2.56)

—
—

-.104
-.116
-.106

—

—

—

—

—

-.068

.002

—

(—1.33)
.139

(0.05)

(2.31)

(1.87)

—
—
—

—
—
—

-.041
-.036
-.039

.109

a Source: Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4. s-ratios are in parentheses. The critical i-ratios at the 5
percent level of significance are 1.64 for a one-tailed test and 1.96 for a two-tailed test. For

USE and PREVENT, marginal effects (and asymptotic s-ratios) from maximum likelihood
estimates of dichotomous logit functions are given.

b Computations were made using price coefficients from the total sample and relevant
unweighted means of the white, black, and total samples, respectively.

visit than one would predict by extrapolating the demand curve to the point
where net price is zero. Although the one-visit differential is not statistically

significant, the large and negative quality differential is statistically
significant. Indeed, children who received Medicaid benefits made fewer
visits and had visits of lower average quality than did children whose families

paid the mean price in the sample of non-Medicaid recipients.24 An
explanation of these findings is that some physicians in private practice are
reluctant to accept Medicaid recipients as their patients. In particular, the
24 Suppose that the demand curve for visits is VISITS = a + b1DNETPRICE + b2MEDICAID, where b1 <0. Let the subscriptsm and n denote mean values of a given variable for
Medicaid recipients and other children, respectively. Then, b2 = VJSITSm — VISITS +
b1DNETPRICE. Since DNETPRICE = $6.64, b2 equals — .936, and b1 equals
—
.082, VISITSm — VISITS,, equals — .392. Along similar lines, QUALm — QUALM
equals — .062.

.010

(2.17)

.003

(0.60)

.003
(0.67)
(0.63)

.003

.002

(0.00)

.158

(0.82)

.007

(—1.14)

—.011

TASTE

(1.36)

—.279

(—2.39)

(—4.28)

(—2M0)

— .017

(—0.18)

—.002

KNOW

—.511

.035

(4.03)

.038

.040
(4.39)

MEDUCAT

(4.57)

(4.08)

.034

MEDUCAT

.118
(3.06)

(0.00)

.043

(—1.29)

—.101

(1.74)

.183

HO

(0.69)

.001

(1.41)

.036

(1.67)

.004

(4.20)

.024

RAD

Correlates Included

(1.50)

.034

(1.57)

.897

(—1.52)

— .061

(1.39)

.061

HG

— .113

.147
(1.42)

HF

(0.17)

.008

2.788
(2.42)

(—1.26)

.

(—0.20)

—.021

16.749
(6.84)

(—1.40)

— .369

.199
(1.00)

HP

a Source: Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4. Equations with correlates omitted (not shown) hold all other variables constant, f-ratiosare in parentheses.
The critical(-ratiosat the 5 percent level of significance are 1.64 for a one-tailedtest and 1.96 for a two-tailedtest. For USE and PREVENT, marginal
effects (and asymptotic f-ratios) from maximum likelihood estimates of dichotomous logit functions are given.

QUAL

VISITS

PREVENT

USE

Dependent
Variable

Correlates
Omitted

TABLE 5

COEFFICIENTS OF MOTHER'S SCHOOLING AND CORRELATESa

Colle and Grossman

I

137

sizable quality differential can be attributed to the failure of many Medicaid

reimbursement schedules to recognize physician speciality (for example,
Sloan, Mitchell, and Cromwell [45]).
The dummy variable for receipt of welfare income in 1970 (WEL-

FARE) has positive and statistically significant effects on USE and
PREVENT. Thus, there is a sharp contrast between the role of Medicaid in

the visit and quality equations and the role of welfare in the use and
preventive-care equations. The welfare program, of which Medicaid is an
integral part, encourages poor families to take their children to a physician
at least once during a year and to take their children for a preventive physical
examination. These same families, however, encounter substantial barriers
when they try to see specialists or to make a relatively large number of
pediatric visits to physicians in private practice.

The dummy variable denoting whether or not the child has health
insurance coverage for doctor-office visits has an insignificant negative
effect on the decision to use ambulatory care and an insignificant positive
effect on the decision to obtain preventive care. For several reasons these
results are not surprising. Health insurance policies typically do not cover
preventive care. The presence of health insurance is an imperfect measure of
net price, especially if the policy contains a deductible. Moreover, net price
is not a significant predictor of the number of visits.
3. Mother's Schooling and Correlates of Schooling. Table 5 contains
coefficients of mother's schooling and coefficients of variables that we have

identified as correlates of mother's schooling. These variables are the
parents' knowledge of signs of disease (KNOW), the parents' taste for
medical care (TASTE), and the child's health (HO, RAD, HG, HF, HP)?--5

When the correlates are held constant, mother's schooling has positive
effects on USE, PREVENT, and QUAL and has a negative effect on
VISITS. Except in the case of quality, these relationships are statistically
significant. When the correlates are excluded, the same signs and the same

pattern of statistical significance emerge. The negative coefficient of
schooling on the number of visits is, however, much larger in absolute value.

Put differently, the absolute value of the visit coefficient falls by
approximately 40 percent when the correlates are held constant. The source
25

In addition to knowledge of appropriate health practices, taste for medical care, and the
child's health, other independent variables can be regarded as closely related correlates of
mother's schooling. For example, a negative effect of mother's schooling on the number of
children in a family has been found in many studies. To cite another illustration, schooling
raises the actual or potential market wage rate and therefore influences the time cost of a
visit. Thus our selection of the closely related correlates is somewhat arbitrary. Of course,
the schooling effects in Table 5 that control for knowledge, taste, and health status also
control for the effects of all other independent variables in the basic equations. The same
comment applies to the schooling effects in the table that do not control for knowledge,
taste, and health status.

138

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

of this reduction is that mother's schooling is negatively related to the
measures of poor health (HO, RAD, HG, HF, HP). In turn, these variables
have positive effects on the number of visits.
The finding that the number of visits falls as mother's schooling rises is
somewhat surprising. It contradicts the positive relationship between these
two variables in the U.S. Health Interview Survey reported by Friedman
and Leibowitz{14]. Moreover, the negative effect of schooling on visits in
Table 5 is rather large in absolute value, even after the correlates are held
constant. Specifically, a one-year increase in schooling is associated with a

reduction in visits equal to three-tenths of one visit. Thus, children of
mothers with a college education make approximately one fewer visit per
year than children of mothers with a high school education.

A full explanation of the negative relationship between visits and
schooling in the NORC sample is both difficult and challenging, but a
number of relevant factors can be mentioned. At an empirical level, the
finding is not due to a failure to control adequately for mother's labor force
status with the interaction variable between time cost and labor force status

(WTNLF). When a dummy variable for mother's labor force status is
directly entered in the regression, the coefficient of schooling is almost the
same as in Table 5. Another empirical consideration is that our visit variable

excludes telephone contacts, while Friedman and Leibowitz's variable
includes these contacts. Goldman and Grossman [18] show that telephone

contacts rise with mother's schooling in a sample of New York City
residents. Indeed, a doctor may be willing to rely on a well-educated
mother's description of the child's symptoms, her ability to follow his
directions and to monitor the child's progress, whereas he may encourage a
less educated mother to bring the child to his office for a visit and possibly a
follow-up visit. Therefore, the substitution of telephone contacts for office
visits might be expected to increase as mother's schooling increases.

At a theoretical level, Michael [32] has described the impact of a
"neutral" improvement in efficiency in the production of all household
commodities due to schooling. With money income held constant, he shows
that the demand for inputs associated with a given commodity would fall
with schooling if the income elasticity of the commodity were less than one.
We find that the income elasticity of visits is less than one (see Panel B of
Table 3), so that the negative schooling coefficient is consistent with the
predictions of Michael's model.
An additional insight into the schooling effect is gained by viewing the
observed number of visits (z) as the product of the probability of positive

ambulatory contacts in a year (0) multiplied by the number of visits
conditional on positive use (v):

(4)

z=Ov

Colle and Grossman

I

139

Differentiation of equation (4) with respect to mother's schooling (s)yields
az/as = O(43v/ös) + v(aO/as)
According to the use equation in Table 5, aO/asequals + .040, and according
to the visit equation, av/as equals — .279. Therefore, if az/as is evaluated
at the total sample mean values of 0 and v, it equals +.012. This derivative
equals — .029 at the white sample mean values, and it equals + .034 at the
black sample mean values. Put differently, more educated mothers are more

(5)

likely to take their children to a physician at least once a year, but these
mothers take their children to the physician fewer times per year given
positive use. The computations of az/as imply that the relationship between
schooling and visits might well be positive if children with no visits were
included in the regression. In fact, Friedman and Leibowitz [14] include such
children in their visit regressions.26
A final consideration revolves around the relationships among mother's
schooling, children's health, and the use of preventive-care services. To the

extent that the health proxies are imperfect measures of health status,
mother's schooling might capture part of the negative effect of good health

on utilization of curative pediatric care services. In addition, mother's
schooling has a positive effect in the preventive-care function, and preventive
and curative care might be negatively related.27
With regard to the effects of the correlates of mother's schooling, in the
use, visit, and quality equations, 14 of the 15 coefficients of the correlates of

poor health are positive.28 Thus, these three measures of pediatric care
utilization rise as the child's health declines. Two of the health variables are
significant in the use equation (HO and RAD); two are significant in the visit
equation (HF and HP); and one is significant in the quality equation (HO).

The parents' taste for medical care (TASTE) never is significant. The

parents' knowledge of signs of disease (KNOW) is positively related to visits
26 We are indebted to Arleen Leibowitz for helping us to reconcile our findings with hers. She
points out that the "selectivity biases" that arise when one estimates labor force
participation and hours of work equations for married women might also arise when one
estimates use and visit equations. In future research we plan to take account of selectivity
biases by using estimation methods developed by Hanoch [22].
27 We have explored the last proposition with a crude estimate of the number of curative visits

for the sample of children with positive visits. The estimation is defined as
NETVISITS VISITS — PREVENT. We have regressed NETVISJTS on the same set of
variables that enter the visit equation and PREVENT. The coefficient of PREVENT in
this equation is —1.179 (t = —2.03). The coefficient of mother's schooling, however, is
only slightly smaller than in Table 5. Specifically, it equals — .272 (t = —2.26). Clearly,
more refined measures of preventive medical and nonmedical inputs and an allowance for
the "lagged effect" of preventive inputs on health output arc required to understand fully
the impact of mother's schooling on the number of visits.
28 For an interpretation of the four negative health coefficients in the PREVENT equation,
see fn. 18.

140

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

TABLE 6
COEFFICIENTS OF TIME COST AND
OTHER INDIRECT COSTh OF A V1SIT

Dependent
Variable
USE

PREVENT
VISITS

QUAL

DWT

DWTNLF DELAY

WALK

NOREG

—.012

—.003

.183

—.245

(—1.40)

(—0.84)

(1.96)

(—3.65)

.007
(0.75)

.005

-.125

.051

(—1.66)

(1.82)

(—1.72)

(0.65)

.124

.037

—.032

3.140

—1.115

—.004
(—0.50)

- .012

(1.08)

(0.26)

(—0.80)

(2.58)

(—0.25)

.003
(0.69)

-.003

.001

-.052

.003

(—0.52)

(0.57)

(—1.06)

(0.57)

a Source: Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4. 1-ratios are in parentheses. The critical 1-ratios at the
5 percent level of significance are 1.64 for a one-tailed test and 1.96 for a two-tailed test. For
USE and PREVENT, marginal effects (and asymptotic 1-ratios) from maximum likelihood
estimates of dichotomous logit functions are given.

and quality, but is negatively related to the probability of positive use and to
the probability of a preventive physician examination within the past year.

The quality and preventive-care effects of KNOW are statistically
significant. There is little evidence that the mother's schooling effect
operates via this variable because schooling has no impact on quality and has
a positive impact on the probability of a preventive physical examination.
4. Time Cost and Other Indirect Costs. Table 6 contains coefficients of

the time cost of a pediatric visit (DWT), coefficients of the interaction
between this variable and the mother's labor force status (D WTNLF), and
coefficients of other indirect cost variables. Goldman and Grossman [17]
show that an increase in the time or fixed cost of a visit causes a substitution
away from visits and toward quality. Empirically, they indicate that the time
cost of a visit has a negative effect on the number of pediatric visits and a
positive effect on the quality of a visit in a sample of New York City families.

Inman [24] also reports a negative relationship between the number of
pediatric visits and the time cost of a visit in a sample of Washington, D. C.,
families. We do not find evidence of a negative time cost coefficient in the

demand curve for visits in Table 6. Indeed, the coefficient of DWT is
positive, but not statistically significant. We do find a positive time cost
effect in the demand curve for quality for mothers who work, but the
estimated coefficient is not statistically significant. The effect of time cost on

Colle and Grossman

I

141

quality for women who do not work, given by the sum of the coefficients of
DWT and D WTNLF, is equal to zero.
Our failure to uncover a negative time cost effect in the demand curve

for visits is puzzling. It is not due to a failure to control adequately for
differences in the value of time between mothers who work and those who

do not by means of the interaction variable DWTNLF. The time cost
coefficients in the four equations in Table 6 are hardly altered when a
dummy variable for mother's labor force status is included in the equations
as an additional independent variable. The dummy variable itself has no
effect on visits. One way to reconcile the theory with our empirical results is
to recognize that the time parents spend with their children in the household
is an additional input in the health production function. In this context, an
increase in the wage rate raises the price of time relative to the price of a visit

and generates a substitution toward visits in the production of a given
amount of health.29 In comparing our results to those of Inman [24] and
Goldman and Grossman [17], it should be kept in mind that theirs pertain to
samples in particular cities, while ours pertain to a national sample.
An important result in Table 6 is that the time cost of a visit for mothers
who work has a negative and statistically significant effect on the probability
that a child obtained a preventive physical examination within the past year.

The probability of an ambulatory contact within the past year also is
negatively related to the time cost of mothers who work, but the coefficient

is not statistically significant. These results are noteworthy because the

decisions to contact a physician and to take a child for a preventive
examination probably have a larger discretionary component from the
mother's point of view than the decision with regard to the number of visits
given positive use. The latter decision depends at least to some extent on the
physician. At the total sample mean values, a one dollar per visit increase in

the time cost of a visit for mothers who work lowers the probability of
29 To fit the above model, one would have to include the mother's actual or potential wage
rate, the time cost of a visit, and the net price of pediatric care as separate variables in the
demand curve for Visits. We have not attemptd to estimate such an equation because of
potential multicollinearity problems due to interrelationships among the wage rate, the

time cost of a visit, and the mother's schooling. Note that Nichols, Smolensky, and
Tideman [38] and others have argued that travel and waiting time are endogenous
variables that are selected by choosing a physician to minimize the cost of a visit, by trading

more travel and waiting time per visit for a lower money fee, and by search. No reverse
causality from visits to time per visit is created by the fee-time tradeoff. Search to acquire
information about travel and waiting time would introduce reverse causality from an
increase in visits to a reduction in time, but this factor could not explain the sign of our
estimated time-cost effect. If mothers with high wage rates lived closer to specialists than to
general practitioners, the relationship between time cost and quality might reflect in part a
nonrandom locational distribution of physicians and families. The nature of locational
patterns could not, however, account for the positive relationship between time costs and
visits in the NORC sample.

142

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

obtaining preventive care by 1.2 percentage points. The corresponding
reduction for women who do not work equals 0.5 percentage points, which is
consistent with the notion that the cost of time of mothers who work exceeds
that of mothers who do not work. As shown, however, by the coefficient of

DWTNLF in the PREVENT equation, the difference between these two
effects is not statistically significant.
With regard to the other independent variables in Table 6, the direct
cost of transportation to the usual source of care is proxied in a negative
manner by a dummy variable that equals one if the mode of transportation is
walking (WALK). The transportation cost of a visit, like the time cost, is a
fixed cost that does not depend on quality. Therefore, the number of visits
should fall and the quality per visit should rise as transportation cost rises.

Consequently, the dummy variable WALK should raise visits and lower
quality, which is consistent with the coefficients in Table 6. The absence of a
regular source of care (NOREG) has a negative and significant coefficient in

the USE equation, but is not a significant variable in the other three
equations. Finally, appointment delay (DELAY) does not appear to be an
important nonprice rationing mechanism in the pediatric care market.
5. Physician per Hundred Population and Residence Interaction. Table
7 shows coefficients of physicians per hundred population in the primary
sampling unit (MD) with and without the interactions between this variable
and size of place of residence (MDSSMSA, MD URBAN, MDRURALNF,
MDFARM). When the interactions are included, the coefficient of MD
gives the effect of an increase in this variable in large metropolitan areas.
These areas are defined as the ten largest SMSAs in the United States. The
coefficient of a given MD-residence interaction variable indicates the
difference between the MD effect in large metropolitan areas and the MD
effect in the given area. In the use or preventive-care equation, there is a
statistically significant interaction effect between MD and size of place of
residence at the 5 percent level. In the visit or quality equation, however, the
interaction effect is not statisticaly significant.30
According to the results in Table 7, not only is there no interaction
effect in the visit equation, but also no MD effect. On the other hand, MD
has a positive and statistically significant effect in the demand curve for
quality. In the use and preventive-care equations, which contain significant
30 Specifically, in the logit functions chi-square tests of the null hypothesis that no member of
the set of four interaction variables has a nonzero effect result in a chi-square of 11.36 in the
use equation and 16.56 in the preventive-care equation. The F-statistic from testing the
same hypothesis in the visit or quality regression is 1.37 for visits and 1.70 for quality. Note
that the interaction variables are retained in the basic regression specification in Table A4,
although they are not statistically significant. The coefficients and I-ratios of the other
independent variables are, however, altered only slightly by the inclusion of the MTh
residence interactions.

Colle and Grossman

143

I

TABLE 7
COEFFICIENTS OF PHYSICIANS PER HUNDRED POPULATION WITH
AND WITHOUT RESIDENCE INTERACTIONS5

Dependent
Variable
USE

PREVENT

No
Interactions

With Residence Interactions

MD

MD MDSSMSA MDURBAN MDRURALNF MDFARM

.156
(0.34)
2.121

(5.22)
VISITS

QUAL

.595

—.713

—.316

(1.17)

(—1.98)

(—0.34)

2.508
(5.51)

—.716

—1.441

1.378

1.376

(—2.24)

(—1.61)

(1.70)

(0.90)
9.202
(0.46)

1.844
(1.81)

—.769

(—0.44)

—1.398
(—0.26)

—.122

—9.178

—15.403

—1.751

(0.00)

(—1.76)

(—1.43)

(—0.17)

.712
(3.30)

.626

.048

-.888

.105

.340

(2.70)

(0.22)

(—2.03)

(0.24)

(0.41)

Source: Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4. Equations with interactions omitted (not shown) hold all

other variables constant. The coefficients and 1-ratios of these other variables are altered only
slightly by the exclusion of the MD-residence interactions. 1-ratios are in parentheses. The critical:ratios at the 5 percent level of significance are 1.64 for a one-tailed test and 1.96 for a two-tailed
test. For USE and PREVENT, marginal effects (and asymptotic 1-ratios) from maximum
likelihood estimates of dichotomous logit functions are given.

interactions, the relationship between a given MD variable and the
probability of an ambulatory-care contact or the probability of a preventive
physical examination is positive in eight out of ten cases. The two exceptions
are that the probability of an ambulatory contact falls as the physician stock

rises in farm areas (shown by the sum of the coefficients of MD and
MDFARM) and in SMSAs other than the ten largest (shown by the sum of
the coefficients of MD and MDSSMSA). The MD coefficients are uniformly
larger in the ten largest SMSAs than in other SMSAs or other urban areas.
The coefficients are smaller in the ten largest SMSAs than in rural nonfarm
areas, and there are no significant differences between effects in farm areas
and in the ten largest SMSAs.
In his penetrating survey of the sources of the availability effect in the
medical care market, Pauly [40] deals in some detail with a model in which
physicians manipulate the demand curve for their services in the presence of

imperfect information. This model contains the implication that the
availability effect should be larger in a sample of consumers with positive

utilization than in a sample of all consumers. Moreover, it gives no

144

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

foundation for expecting an availability effect in an equation that explains
the probability of contacting a physician or the probability of obtaining a
preventive physical examination. Therefore, there is little evidence in Table
7 in support of an information manipulation model of the availability effect
in the pediatric care market. Further, in a study that includes all persons in
the NORC sample, May [31] reports an insignificant availability effect if
persons with no visits are excluded from the sample. If they are included,
however, the effect is significant.

Sherwin Rosen has proposed an explanation of the availability
relationships in studies like May's and ours. He argues that there will be
relatively more specialization in areas where physicians are more numerous.

Thus, board-certified pediatricians in areas where physicians are more
numerous will be more highly skilled than board-certified pediatricians in
general. Hence quality per physician depends on the number of physicians in

a local market as well as on their characteristics. In the context of our
estimated equations, an increase in the MD variable may be viewed as a
reduction in net quality-adjusted price. According to Table 4, there is no

significant relationship between net price and visits, and there is a
significant relationship between net price and quality per visit. Therefore,
the signs of the MD coefficients in the demand functions for visits and
quality are in agreement with the signs of the net price coefficients.
Along similar lines, the relationship between MD and the probability of
an ambulatory contact or the probability of a preventive examination might
simply reflect the greater incentive to use services as true net price falls.

Alternatively, the MD variable might be negatively related to the
information, inconvenience, and other kinds of entry costs in the pediatric
care market. These costs are not reflected perfectly by factors such as the
time cost of a visit and the absence of a regular source of care. As they fall,
the probability of use of services rises. For reasons that are not entirely clear,
the entry-cost effect is important in large metropolitan areas, where the
physician-population ratio is relatively high, and in rural nonfarm areas,

where the physician-population ratio is relatively low. Perhaps the
magnitude of this effect is related to the variation in the physicianpopulation ratio within an area as well as to its absolute level.
6. Other Family and Child Characteristics. Table 8 contains coefficients
of the child's age (AC), the child's sex (MALE), and the number of children
in the family (NC). In general, the effects of age and sex replicate the results
of other studies and do not merit additional discussion. The number of
children in the family is negatively related to all four measures of pediatric
care. Except in the quality demand function, the coefficients of this variable
are statistically significant. The most straightforward interpretation of the
family-size effect is that the more children there are in a family, the more

costly it is to raise their average level of health. To the extent that the

Colle and Grossman

14.5

TABLE 8
COEFFICIENTS OF OTHER FAMILY AND CHILD CHARACTERISTICSa

Dependent
Variable

NC

AC

-.052

-.044

(—4.78)

(—2.93)

USE

MALE
.046
(1.13)

- .031

- .047

(—2.89)

(—3.46)

.069
(1.83)

— .581

— .651

1.449

PREVENT
VISITS

(—3.41)

(—3.46)

— .008

— .010

(—1.20)

(—1.26)

QUALITY

(2.68)
— .028

(—1.30)

a Source: Appendix Tables A-3 and A-4. 1-ratios are in parentheses. The critical 1-ratios at the
5 percent level of significance are 1.64 for a one-tailed test and 1.96 for a two-tailed test. For
USE and PREVENT, marginal effects (and asymptotic 1-ratios) from maximum likelihood
estimates of dichotomous logit functions are given.

TABLE 9
DIFFERENCE IN USE, PREVENT, VISITS, AND QUAL BETWEEN
WHITE AND BLACK CHILDREN
Gross

Variable
USEb

PREVEN1'
VISITS

Difference
.242

.143

(7.25)

(3.42)

Explained
Differencec
.099

.060

.019

(1.81)

(0.14)

.926

—.129
(—0.16)

1.055

—.051
(—1.60)

.054

(1.29)

QUAL

Net
Difference

.003

(0.11)

.041

a 1-ratios are in parentheses. The critical 1-ratios at the 5 percent level of significance are 1.64
for a one-tailed test and 1.96 for a two-tailed test.
b Differences are based on ordinary least squares estimates.

c Explained Difference = Gross Difference — Net Difference.

146

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

number of childen and their quality, measured in part by health, are
simultaneously determined, these relationships reflect planned substitution
away from quality and toward numbers by some parents.
Race Differences in Pediatric Care Utilization
Table 9 contains gross and net differences between white and black mean

values of the probability of an ambulatory contact with a physician, the
probability of a preventive physical examination, the number of visits, and
the quality of a visit. The net difference equals the negative of the coefficient
of the race dummy variable (BLACK) in a multiple regression that controls

for all other independent variables that were discussed above. The gross
difference equals the race coefficient in a simple regression that does not
hold constant these other variables. For reasons mentioned in note 32, the
use and preventive-care differences are taken from multiple regression
equations rather than from logit equations.
According to the gross differences, white children have higher mean
values of all four dependent variables than do black children. Only the use
and preventive-care differentials, however, are statistically significant.
According to the net differences, only in the case of use of ambulatory care is

there a positive and significant race effect with all other variables held
constant.31 An important result in Table 9 is that the significant gross

differences in USE and in PREVENT are much larger than the net
differences. The gross difference in the probability of use between white and
black children equals 24.2 percentage points, while the net difference equals

14.3 percentage points. The gross difference in the probability of a
preventive physical examination is 6.0 percentage points, while the net
difference is 1.9 percentage points. These findings indicate that differences
in characteristics other than race between white and black families explain
part of the differences in use of care and in preventive care between white

and black children. Indeed, in a statistical sense differences in these
characteristics fully explain the preventive care differential.
Table 10 shows how much of the white-black differences in use of care
and in preventive care can be accounted for by specific factors or sets of

factors. More specifically, the coefficients of ordinary least squares
regressions of USE or PREVENT and the differences in mean values of
independent variables between white and black children are used to obtain
the estimates in Table 10.32 These estimates show how much of the gross

difference in USE and PREVENT between white and black children
31 As shown in Table A3, identical conclusions emerge from the coefficients of the race
dummy variable in the logit functions.

32 Ordinary least-squares equations are employed instead of logit equations because the
observed race-specific mean value of USE or PREVENT lies on the regression line.

Colle and Grossman

I

147

TABLE 10
POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE COMPONENTS OF THE DIFFERENCE IN
USE AND PREVENT BETWEEN WHITE AND BLACK CHILDREN

Component

Contribution Contribution
to Difference to Difference
in USE
in PREVENT

A. Explained Difference

Family income $6,000

Familyincome$11,000
Welfare recipient
Mother's schooling
Number of children
Insurance coverage
Knowledge
Taste
Child's health
Time cost
Delay
Walk
No regular source of care
Physicians per hundred population
Age of child
Child is male

+.034
+.012
— .043

+.039

+.033
—.006
— .024

+054

+.027
+.026

— .008

— .0001

—.001

— .020

—.015

+.011
+.014
+.008
+.009

+.004
+.01l
—.004
—.016

—.004

÷.008
+.023
+.005

+.004

+001

+.00l

+099

+.041

B. Net Difference

+.143

+ .019

C. Gross Difference (A + B)

+.242

+.060

Total

—.044

+.007

disappear if black children are given the same mean values of the
independent variables as white children.
Several results in Table 10 are noteworthy. Whether use or preventive

care is the dependent variable, the positive family-income distribution
component is almost entirely offset by the negative welfare component. For
instance, in the case of use of services, the income-distribution component

(the sum of the two family-income components) amounts to a positive
differential of 4.6 percentage points, while the welfare component amounts
to 4.3 percentage points. For preventive care, the corresponding figures are
a positive income-distribution component of 2.7 percentage points and a
negative welfare component of 2.4 percentage points. Put differently, the
welfare program, which is aimed specifically at low-income families, is an

ThE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

148

effective policy tool for eliminating income-related differences in the
utilization of certain kinds of pediatric care between black and white
children. Table 10 also reveals that mother's schooling and the number of
childen in the family make extremely large contributions to the black deficits
in use of services and in preventive care. Suppose that mother's schooling

and family size were equalized between blacks and whites by increasing
years of formal schooling completed by black mothers by one year and by
reducing the number of children in black families by one child. These
changes would reduce the black deficit in the probability of preventive care
by 5.3 percentage points, which would result in a gross deficit of less than I
percentage point.
Table 9 contains the findings that black children make more visits and
have a larger average quality than white children with all other variables
held constant. These findings might reflect aspects of a selectivity process.
Black children are less likely than white children to have had at least one
physician contact during the past year. Among children with positive
contacts, blacks are much more likely to have had visits at "public care" sites

(hospital emergency rooms, hospital outpatient departments, and public
clinics not connected with hospitals) than in physicians' offices. Therefore,
the parents of black children with positive office visits might have a strong
preference for pediatric care as opposed to other goods. Alternatively, their
children might have been in worse health, which is not fully reflected by the

available health measures. The statement concerning the propensity of
blacks to use the public-care sector is based on a multiple regression analysis
of the ratio of public visits to total visits (private plus public) for children

with positive contacts (not shown). In general, this propensity cannot be
explained by the independent variables that have been employed in this
paper. The determinants of the decision to use public care and the quality of

this care as opposed to private care are subjects to explore in future
research.
SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS
In this study multivariate techniques have been employed to examine four
measures of pediatric care utilization for children between the ages of 1 and
5. These measures are the probability of contacting a physician within the
past year, the probability of obtaining a preventive physical examination
within the past year, the number of office visits to physicians in private
practice by children with positive visits, and the average quality of these
visits. The most important empirical results and their policy implications are
indicated below.
Family income has positive and statistically significant effects on all four

Colle and Grossman

I

149

dependent variables. The net quality-adjusted price of a pediatric office visit

has negative effects on the number of visits and on the average quality of
these visits, although the former relationship is not statistically significant.
Since the income elasticity of office visits exceeds the price elasticity, it
might be more efficient to increase these visits by means of direct cash
subsidies rather than by means of national health insurance. This conclusion

would be modified if the aim of government policy is to stimulate the
demand for quality because the net price elasticity of quality is slightly larger
than the income elasticity. Regardless of the specific aim of national health

insurance, a plan that pays a fixed percentage of the fee of a visit would
increase the demand for specialists relative to general practitioners. Such a
plan might be more costly than one that caused the relative demand for visits
to rise if the supply elasticity of visits exceeded that of quality.

The welfare program, of which Medicaid is an integral part, is an
effective method of raising the probability of an ambulatory contact and the

probability of a preventive physical examination for children from lowincome families.. Indeed, the welfare program almost completely eliminates
income-related differences in these two indexes of pediatric care between

white and black children. Poor families who receive Medicaid benefits
encounter substantial barriers, however, when they try to take their children

to specialists or to make a relatively large number of pediatric visits to
physicians in private practice. This suggests that certain modifications in the
incentive structure of Medicaid reimbursement formulas might be desirable.
An increase in the number of physicians per capita in an area has no
impact on the number of visits, but has positive impacts on the quality of

pediatric visits, on the probability of an ambulatory contact, and on the
probability of a preventive physical examination. These relationships are
particularly important in large metropolitan areas and in rural nonfarm
areas. Such findings have obvious implications for government policies to
raise the stock of physicians in certain areas or to reallocate the existing
stock.

Mother's schooling and the number of children in a family are
extremely important determinants of pediatric care utilization. Family
size discourages utilization of services, however measured. Mother's
schooling is a positive correlate of the probability of an ambulatory contact
and the probability of obtaining a preventive physical examination, but it is a
negative correlate of the number of visits. Black-white differences in use of
services would be dramatically altered by eliminating black-white differences in mother's schooling and in family size.
We began this paper by indicating that our research would address a

fundamental question put forward by the HarvardChild Health Project
[23, Vol. I, p. 43]: "What basic forces influence the use of medical services
by children?" Based on our analysis of the probabilities of use of services

150

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

and of preventive care, the two basic forces are mother's schooling and the
number of children in a family. Yetfrom both a positive and a normative
point of view, it is not clear that differences due to schooling and to family
size are a legitimate concern of public policy. From a positive point of view,
the large changes in schooling or in family size that are required to eliminate
black-white differences might be extremely costly to achieve. Moreover, in
the case of schooling in particular, the mechanisms by which this variable

operates still are not firmly established. Until these mechanisms are
pinpointed more precisely, the appropriate kinds of government intervention cannot be identified. From a normative point of view, the results of our
study and others indicate that black families have more children and spend
less on the medical care and other quality aspects of each child, with income
and market prices held constant. If these outcomes reflect planned decisions
made with relatively complete information, they should not be a legitimate
concern of public policy. Of course this conclusion must be modified if the
decisions are made in the context of imperfect information or if they are due
in part to racial discrimination.
We conclude this paper with an empirical observation and a proposal
for future research. The empirical observation is that policies to reduce
variations in family income and in the net price of pediatric care might have
little or no impact on the substantial variations in care due to the strong
effects of mother's schooling and family size. The proposal is for future
research directed toward explaining the sources of black-white differences
in family size and the effects of schooling and family size on pediatric care.
Given government interest in increasing the utilization of pediatric care,

such research would be beneficial in the evaluation and selection of
alternative government intervention strategies.

REFERENCES
1. Jan P. Acton. "Demand for Health Care Among the Urban Poor, with Special
Emphasis on the Role of Time." In The Role of Health Insurance in the Health
Services Sector, ed. Richard Rosett. New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1976.
. "Nonmonetary Factors in the Demand for Medical Care: Some
Empirical Evidence." Journal of Political Economy 83 (June 1975).
3. Ronald Andersen. A Behavioral Model of Families' Use of Health Services.
Chicago: Center for Health Administration Studies, 1968.

2.

4. Ronald Andersen, Joanna Lion, and Odin W. Anderson. Two Decades of
Health Services: Social Survey Trends in Use and Expenditure. Cambridge,
Mass.: Ballmger Publishing Co., 1976.
5. Diane L. Beauchesne and David S. Mundel. "Determinants of Utilization of
Children's Health Services." In Developing a Better Health Care System, Vol.

Colle and Grossman

I

151

III of the report of the Harvard Child Health Project Task Force. Cambridge,
Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1977.
6. Gary S. Becker. Human Capital. New York: Columbia University Press for
the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1964.
7.

.

"A Theory of the Allocation of Time." Economic Journal 75

(September 1965).

8. Gary S. Becker and H. Gregg Lewis. "On the Interaction Between the
Quantity and Quality of Children." In New Economic Approaches to Fertility,

ed. T. W. Schultz. Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the National

Bureau of Economic Research and the Population Council. Journal of
Political Economy 81 (March/April 1973), Pt. H.
9. Gary S. Becker and Nigel Tomes. "Child Endowments and the Quantity and
Quality of Children." Journal of Political Economy 84 (August 1976), Pt. II.
10. Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Spring 1970 Cost Estimates for Urban Family
Budgets." Washington: BLS, 1970.

II. Linda N. Edwards and Michael Grossman. "An Economic Analysis of
Children's Health and Intellectual Development." National Bureau of
12.

Economic Research Working Paper No. 180, May 1977.
. "The Relationship Between Children's Health and Intellectual
Development." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
213, November 1977.

13. Roger Feldman. "Price and Quality Differences in the Physicians' Service
Market." Paper presented at the annual meetings of the Allied Social Science
Associations, Dallas, Texas, December 1975.

14. Bernard Friedman and Arleen Leibowitz. "The Bequest Motive in Human
Capital and the Health Care of Children." Unpublished paper, 1975.
15. Victor R. Fuchs and Marcia J. Kramer. Determinants of Expenditures for
Physicians' Services in the United States, 1948—68. New York: National
Bureau of Economic Research/HEW, 1973.
16. Jacob Gesthalter. "Effects of Mother's Education on Child Health and the
Demand for Health Inputs." Ph.D. dissertation, City University of New York
Graduate School, 1978.
17. Fred Goldman and Michael Grossman. "The Demand for Pediatric Care: An
Hedonic Approach." Journal of Political Economy 86 (April 1978).
18.
. "The Demand for Pediatric Care: An Hedonic Approach." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 134, April 1976.

19. Michael Grossman. "The Correlation Between Health and Schooling." In
Household Production and Consumption, ed. Nestor E. Terleckyj. New York:
Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research,
1975.

20.

. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.
New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1972.
21. Robert J. Haggerty, Klaus J. Roghmann, and Ivan B. Pless. Child Health and
the Community. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1975.

22. Giora Hanoch. "A Multivariate Model of Labor Supply: Methodology for
Estimation." R-1869-HEW. Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand Corporation,
September 1976.

152

I

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

23. Harvard Child Health Project. Toward a Primary Medical Care System
Responsive to Children's Needs. Vol. I of the report of the Harvard Child
Health Project Task Force. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Co.,
1977.

24. Robert P. Inman. "The Family Provision of Children's Health: An Economic
Analysis." In The Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services Sector, ed.
Richard Rosett. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1976.
25. Tsuneo Ishikawa. "Family Structures and Family Values in the Theory of
Income Distribution." Journal of Political Economy 83 (October 1975).
26. Emmett B. Keeler, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Charles E. Phelps. "Deductibles and the Demand for Medical Care Services: The Theory of a Consumer
Facing a Variable Price Schedule Under Uncertainty." Econometrica 45
(April 1977).
27. Kenneth Kenniston and the Carnegie Council on Children. All Our Children:
The American Family Under Pressure. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1977.
28. David M. Kessner. Assessment of Medical Care for Children. Contrasts in
Health Status, Vol. 3. Washington: Institute of Medicine, 1974.
29. Kelvin J. Lancaster. "A New Approach to Consumer Theory." Journal of
Political Economy 74 (April 1966).
30. Theodore R. Marmor. "Rethinking National Health Insurance." The Public
Interest 46 (Winter 1977).

31. J. Joel May. "Utilization of Health Services and the Availability of
Resources." In Equity in Health Services, eds. Ronald Andersen, Joanna
Kravits, and Odin W. Anderson. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing
Co., 1975.
32. Robert T. Michael. The Effect of Education on Efficiency in Consumption.
New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1972.

33. Richard F. Muth. "Household Production and Consumer Demand Functions." Econometrica 34 (July 1966).
34. National Center for Health Statistics. Physician Visits—Volume and Interval
Since Last Visit—U.S., 1971. U.S. Department of Health, Education and
Welfare, Public Health Publication No. 1000—Series 10—No. 97, 1975.

35. Eli H. Newberger, Carolyn Moore Newberger, and Julius B. Richmond.
"Child Health in America: Toward a Rational Public Policy." Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly 54 (Summer 1976).

36. Joseph P. Newhouse and Charles E. Phelps. "New Estimates of Price and
Income Elasticities of Medical Care Services." In The Role of Health Insurance
in the Health Services Sector, ed. Richard Rosett. New York: National Bureau

37.

of Economic Research, 1976.
. "Price and Income Elasticities for Medical Care Services." In The

Economics of Health and Medical Care, ed. Mark Perlman. London:
Macmillan, 1974.
38. Donald A. Nichols, Eugene SmOlensky, and T. N. Tideman. "Discrimination
by Waiting Time." American Economic Review 61 (June 1971), Pt. 1.

Colle and Grossman

I

153

39. Donald J. O'Hara. "Microeconomic Aspects of the Demographic Transition." Journal of Political Economy 83 (December 1975).
40. Mark V. Pauly. "Doctors and Their Workshops: Physician Influences on the
Use of Medical Resources." Unpublished manuscript, 1978.

41. Charles E. Phelps. "Demand for Health Insurance: A Theoretical and
Empirical Investigation." R-1054-OEO. Santa Monica, Calif.: Rand Corporation, July 1973.
42.
. "Effects of Insurance on Demand for Medical Care." In Equity in

Health Services, eds. Ronald Andersen, Joanna Kravits, and Odin W.
Anderson. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing co., 1975.
43. Irwin M. Rosenstock. "Why People Use Health Services." Mi/bank Memorial
Fund Quarterly 44 (1966), Pt. II.
44. Doris P. Slesinger. "The Utilization of Preventive Medical Services by Urban
Black Mothers." In The Growth of Bureaucratic Medicine: An Inquiry into the
Dynamics of Patient Behavior and the Organization of Medical Care, ed. David
Mechanic. New York: Wiley-Interscience, 1976.
45. Frank Sloan, Janet Mitchell, and Jerry Cromwell. "Physician Participation in
State Medicaid Programs." Journal of Human Resources 13 (1978 Supp).

46. Kurt J. Snapper et al. The Status of Children 1975. Washington: Social
Research Group, George Washington University, 1975.
47. Edward A. Suchman. "Preventive Health Behavior: A Model for Research on
Community Health Campaigns." Journal of Health and Human Behavior 8
(1967).
48.
. "Social Patterns of Illness and Medical Care." Journal of Health and
Human Behavior 6 (1965).

49. Nigel Tomes. "Intergenerational Transfers of Human and Non-Human
Capital in a Model of Quality-Quantity Interaction." Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Chicago, 1978.

50. Robert Willis. "A New Approach to the Economic Theory of Fertility

Behavior." In New Economic Approaches to Fertility, ed. T. W. Schultz.
Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic
Research and the Population Council. Journal of Political Economy 81
(March/April 1973), Pt. II.

154

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

TABLE A-i
UNWEIGHTED MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS
OF THE TOTAL SAMPLE

Black

White
Variable

USE
PREVENT
MALE
NC

AC
MEDUCAT
DELAY
NOREG
WALK
DWT
DWTNLF
MD
MDSSMSA
MDURBAN

MDRURALNF
MDFARM
iNS
WELFARE
DY6

DYII
KNOW
TASTE

HO
RAD

HG
HF
HP
BLACK
n

Pooled

Standard
Standard
Standard
Mean Deviation Mean Deviation Mean Deviation

.714
.346
.530
2.965

.452

.473

.500

.620

.486

.476

.287

.453

.468

.500

.515

.501

1.728

4.165
3.354
10.654
1.763
.116
.137
4.000
2.357

2.509
1.347
2.480
5.098
.320
.321

.323
.524
3.434

3.190

1.351

11.711

2.689

3.644
.082
.024
2.913

7.291

1.813
.102
.041

.275
.145

2.628
2.197
.053
.062

.137
.083
.002
.002

.015
.015
.003
.305

.031

.461

.149

.076

.256

.793

.406
.474

.439
.390
.092
13.187
10.005
.058
2.597
.481
.072
.017

.339
14.598
11.708

.030
.014

2.325

2.328

.082

.275

4.809

10. 180

.386

.486
.199
.108

.041

.012
511

.001

328

3.932

3.003
.038

.068
.011
.015
.007
.357
.497
.489
.289
1.855
1.772
.234
7.879
.493
.255
.123

.500
2.149

3.254

1.351

11.298
2.908

2.658

.095

.068
3.338
2.026
.116
.057
.010
.010
.002
.244

6.583
.294
.237

3.243
2.555
.051
.067
.026

.026
.012

.430

.218

.413

.635

.482
.429
2.260
2.284

.242
14.046
11.043
.073
3.944
.423
.054
.014
.391
839

.260
9.405

.490
.223

.114
.488

Colle and Grossman

155

I

TABLE A-2
UN WEIGHTED MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF SAMPLE
WITH A POSITIVE NUMBER OF ViSITS TO PHYSICIANS
IN PRIVATE PRACTICE

White

Black

Standard

Total

Standard

Mean

VISITS
QUAL
DFAM!NC(000)
DNETPRICE

4.807

6.282

1.211

.222

10.947
6.081
.569
2.676
3.021
12.207

7.286
4.090
1.385

3.155

1.973
1.410

2.568

11.339

2.400

3.714

7.417

.890

1.823

.042
.031

.200
.170

.187
.374

2.834

2.651

1.639

1.901

.036
.172
3.145
1.854

.103

.055

MDSSMSA

.037

MDURBAN
MDRURALNF
MDFARM
MEDICAID
KNOW
TASTE

.014
.017
.004
.060

.059
.030
.032
.016
.237

MALE
NC
AC
MEDUCAT
DELAY
NOREG
WALK
DWT
DWTNLF
MD

HO
RAD

HG
HF
HP
BLACK
n

14.591
11.885

.107
5.898
.392
.054
.015
336

Standard

Deviation Mean Deviation Mean Deviation

Variable

.496
1.516

2.387

2.297
.310
11.000
.488
.226
.121

3.881
1.208
6.295

5.510
.512
3.191

.132
.086

.004
.002
.001

.274
13.204
10.016
.048
5.607
.452
.083
.012
84

3.842
.219
4.339
4.338
.503

1.892

4.621
1.210
10.016

5.967
.557
2.779
3.048
12.033
3.149
.041

.059
2.896

2.343
.039

1.682

.067

.046
.012
.014
.003
.102
14.314

.018
.013
.005

.449
1.695
1.597

.214
13.428
.501
.278
.109

.109

11.514
.095

5.840
.404
.061)

.014
.200
420

5.883
.221

7.046
4.142
.497
1.628

1.390

2.556
6.777
.197
.232
2.519
1.996
.054
.064
.029
.030
.014
.304
2.331

2.299
.294
11.510
.490
.237
.119
.401

DYI1

WELFARE
DY6

INS

MDSSMSA
MDURBAN
MDRURALNF
MDFARM

MD

DWTNLF

DWT

WALK

DELAY
NOREG

MEDUCAT

AC

NC

MALE

Independent
Variable

.588
.454
.268
1.11

2.31
2.10

—0.44

—1.33

—.713
—.316
1.844
—.769
—.068

—1.98
—0.34
1.81

—.290

.595

1.17

.139
.107
.063

.183
—.004
—.012

—.003
—.254

.040
.022

.215
.161

.030
11.468
—3.275
—6.590
6.303
6.290
.011
.499
.501
—.156

—.054

.233

—.572

—

.314

—.142

.046

Logit
Coefficient

—.052
—.044

Marginal
Effect

—0.84
—3.65
1.96
—0.50
—1.40

4.39

1.13
—4.78
—2.93

Asymptotic
(-ratio

2.525
—3.027
—1.342
7.827
—3.263

—.015
—.052

1.077
.775

—.011

.193
—.222
—.188
.171

Logit
Coefficient

USE

—0.69

2.16

1.87

0.90
0.05

1.82
—1.72
0.65
—1.66
0.75
5.51
—2.24
1.61
1.70

4.03

1.83
—2.89
—3.46

Asymptotic
(-ratio

PREVENT

—.034

.002
.109
.110

—.716
—1.441
1.378
1.376

.007
2.508

—.012

0.51

.035
.005
—.125

—.031
— .047

.069

Marginal
Effect

TABLE A-3
MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATES OF DICHOTOMOUSLOGIT USE AND PREVENT FUNCTIONS

0

839

254.87

.778
.101
.259
.624
.843
.028

—.692
—.007
—.047

1.00

1.42

1.39

—1.14
1.74
4.20

—2.97
—0.18

.061
.147
.199

.024

.183

—.163
—.002
—.011

—2.253
173.35
839

-1.686

—.079
.034
—.460
.017
—2.77
—.519

—.111

.007

—.113

-.369
-1.40

—.061

.004

—1.29
1.67
—1.52
—1.26

—.101

—.017

0.82

— .024

—0.47
—2.00

a The critical1-ratios at the 5 percent level of significance are I .64for a one-tailedtest and 1.96 for a two-tailed test. The marginaleffects are evaluated
at the sample means.

Chi-square
n

Constant

HF
HP

HO
RAD
HG

BLACK
KNOW
TASTE

I-

158

THE JOURNAL OF HUMAN RESOURCES

TABLE A-4
ORDINARY LEAST SQUARES ESTIMATES OF VISITS AND QUA L

VISITS

Independent
Variable

Regression
Coefficient

WALK

DWT
DWTNLF
MD
MDSSMSA

MDURBAN
MDRURALNF
MDFARM
MEDICAID
BLACK
KNOW
TASTE

HO
RAD

HG
HF
HP

I-ratio

Regression
Coefficient

.175

4.12

.004

2.45

—1.14

—.008
—.028
—.008
—.010

—2.73
—1.30
—1.20
—1.26

0.60
0.18

1.449

2.68

—.581
—.651
.279
—.032
—1.115

—3.41
—3.46

—0.80
—0.79

.003
.001
.033

3.140
.124
.037

2.58

—.052

1.08

.003

0.69

0.26

— .003

—0.52

— .122

.626

2.70

—15.403
—1.751

—0.00
—1.76
—1.43
—0.17

9.202

-

-2.37

0.22

—.888

—2.03

0.46

.105
.340

0.24
0.41

—.936
.129
.158
.002
.043
.036
.897

—0.84

—.115

0.17

—2.56
1.60

2.788
16.749

2.42
6.84

.051
.010
.003
.118
.001
.034
.008

1.36

0.00
0.00
1.41

1.57

—.021

6.492

.970

Adj. R2

.219
5.69
420

2.74
420

n

0.57
—1.06

.048

—9.178

Constant

F

i-ratio

—.082

DFAMINC (000)

DNETPRICE
MALE
NC
AC
MEDUCAT
DELAY
NOREG

QUAL

2.17
0.63
3.06
0.69
1.50

0.17
—0.20

.094

a The critical 1-ratios at the 5 percent level of significance are I .64 for a one-tailed test and 1.96

for a two-tailed test.

