Personal Taxation, Portfolio Choice, and the
Effect of the Corporation Income Tax




Martin S. Feldstein
Harvard University and the Natwnal Bureau of Econamic Research


Joel Slemrod
Unisersjty o/ Minnesota and the National Bureau of Economic Research




      Extending the traditional treatment of the corporate tax to an econ-
      omy with a progressive personal tax fundamentally changes the
      analysis. While the corporate tax system (CTS) does increase the total
      tax rate on corporate source income br some investors, the exclu-
      sioti of retained earnings implies that the Cl'S lowers the tax rate for
      high-income investors. Analyzing such an economy requires replac-
      ing the traditional "equal—yield" equilibrium condition with a more
      general portfolio balance model. In this model, introducing a CTS
      can actually increase the corporate share of the capital stock even
      though the relative tax rate on corporate income rises.



The current theory of public finance views the corporate income tax
as an extra tax on income in the corporate sector.' This implies that
the corporate income tax penalizes activity in the corporate sector. As
a result, the corporate sector uses a smaller fraction of the nation's
capital stock than it would use if corporations were taxed like partner-
ships.
  This paper is part of the National Bureau of Economic Research's program of
research in Business Taxation and Finance. The views expressed here are the authors'
and should not be attributed to any institution. We are grateful to the referee for his
very helpful comments on the earlier version of this paper.
  1
    Harberger (1962) is the best and most widely known statement of this theory. The
more recent analyses by Shoven and Whalley (1972) and Shoven (1976) also start from
this premise.
JoorvrnI of PolÜuot Economy, 1980. vol. 88, no. 5]
   1980 by The University of Chicago. 0022-380818018805-0004$01.50


                                                     854
CORPORATION INCOME TAX                                               855
   This widely accepted conclusion rests on the simplifying assump-
tion that all investors have the same personal tax rate. In fact, of
course, personal tax rates vary greatly. Some investors pay no per-
sonal income tax while others pay tax rates of up to 70 percent. The
present paper shows that this variation in the personal tax rate may be
very important for understanding the allocative effect of the corpo-
rate income tax.
  Recognizing differences in personal income tax rates significantly
changes the analytic structure of the problem and implies that our
corporate income tax system could actually increase the fraction of
the nation's capital stock that is employed in the corporate sector. The
basic reason is that, under the corporate income tax system, retained
earnings are not subject to the personal income tax. While dividends
are taxed twice, retained earnings are taxed only at the corporate
income tax rate, which is lower than the personal rate for many
shareholders. Although personal tax may eventually be paid on the
increase in share value that results from the retained earnings, this tax
would be at the lower capital gain rate and could be postponed for a
long time. For those high-income investors whose marginal rates of
personal income tax are significantly greater than the corporate tax
rate, the corporate income tax shelters retained earnings from the
higher rate of personal income tax. Thus, although the corporate
income tax system represents an increase in the total tax on corpo-
rate sector income (i.e., on the pretax profits of corporations) for
lower-income and middle-income investors, for many investors with
high tax rates the corporate tax system actually lowers the effective
tax rate on corporate-source income to less than the tax rate on
income from noncorporate investments.
  If all investors are considered together, the corporate tax system
does represent a double taxation of dividends and does on balance
raise the effective tax rate on corporate-source income. But it is
inappropriate for an analysis of the allocative effects of the tax to
combine investors in this way if high- and low-income investors differ
in their sensitivity to after-tax yields on corporate and noncorporate
investments. If the high-income investors for whom the corporate tax
system lowers the effective tax rate on corporate income are more
responsive to the after-tax yield differential than the lower-income
investors for whom the corporate tax system raises the effective tax
rate, the net effect of the corporate income tax may be to increase the
amount of capital used in the corporate sector.
  This paper presents a portfolio model of the corporate income tax
in an economy in which investors have different personal tax rates.
The structure of the model is presented in the next section. Numeri-
cal simulations are presented in Section II. The final section corn-
                                    JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
856
ments briefly on the implications of this new model for the incidence
and efficiency effects of the corporate income tax and suggests di-
rections for extending the current analysis.

I. A General Equilibrium Model with Portfolio Behavior
The basic features of our problem can be represented by an economy
with two classes of investors, a high-income group (denoted by a
subscript H) and a low-income group (denoted by a subscript L). The
low-income investors pay a personal tax rate of 1}' on investment in-
come in unincorporated activities and an effective tax rate on corpo-
rate-source investment income (including both the corporate and per-
sonal income taxes) of t. For this group, we make the usual assump-
tion that a corporate tax system implies t. > LY. For the high-income
group, the corresponding tax rates are t and t. We shall draw the
line between "high" and "low" so that t > t, that is, so that the
high-income group pays a lower effective tax rate on corporate in-
come than on unincorporated income.2 In the next section we shall
also consider the case in which t < t but in which the additional
corporate tax burden is relatively more important to the low-income
group.
   The unequal tax rates create an immediate problem for the tradi-
tional model of investor equilibrium. Harberger (1959, 1962, 1966)
and others have always assumed that the risk-adjusted after-tax yields
on corporate and noncorporate investments were equal in equilib-
rium. With ty. > t. and t < t, this equality of after-tax yields cannot
be true for both classes of investors. To see this explicitly, letF be the
marginal product of capital in the corporate sector and F be the
marginal product of capital in the unincorporated sector. Let the
corporate sector good be chosen as numeraire (so that its price is 1)
while the price of the unincorporated sector's good isp. The after-tax
return on corporate investment to investors in class i is thus (1 —
while the corresponding after-tax return on unincorporated invest-
ment is (1 — ti')pF$. Since [(1 — ty)I(1 —       [(1 — t)/(1 — tx)], it is
clear that after-tax yields cannot be equal for both groups in both
sectors.
  If unequal after-tax yields are incompatible with equilibrium, both
classes of investors cannot own both types of assets. To see this,
  2 To see that this is possible with our actual tax rates, consider an individual with a
marginal personal tax rate of 70 percent. This is his effective rate of tax on additional
income from unincorporated investments. If he invests in a corporation that earns $100
of taxable profit, the corporation pays $48 of corporate income tax. If 40 percent of the
remaining $52 is paid as dividends, the individual pays an additional 0.7($20) = $14 of
personal tax. His total tax is thus $62, substantially lower than the personal tax rate.
Even if the $30 of retained earnings is subject to capital gains tax in the future, the
present value of that tax is unlikely to be as large as the $8.00 differential.
   CORPORATION INCOME TAX
                                                                                       857
  consider what happens if the lower-income group does hold both
  types of assets, that is, if (I —  = (1 — t)pFj. Since t > t, this
  implies F >          The high-income investors will then hold only
  corporate investments becauseF >pF and t <t implies (1 — t)F1,
  > (1 —
     Such specialization is not consistent with the observed ownership of
  corporate and noncorporate investments. High-income investors do
  make investments in real estate and other unincorporated businesses
  as well as in corporate equity.4 To reconcile observed asset ownership
  with the existence of unequal relative tax rates, it is necessary to
  replace the equal-net-yield model of equilibrium asset ownership with
  a more general portfolio balance description of this equilibrium.
    In an economy in which both corporate and rioncorporate invest-
 ments have uncertain yields, individual investors will want to hold
 both assets in their portfolios. The relative quantities of both assets
 that an individual demands depend on their expected net-of-tax
 yields and on the net-of-tax risk structure of the assets. We shallnot
 derive explicit portfolio choice equations from a basic model of utility
 maximization but will posit a constant-elasticity asset demand equa-
 tion relating the fraction of his portfolio that an individual holds in
 each asset to the relative expected yields of the two assets and the
 relative standard deviations of those yields. We recognize that this
 equation, like the production functions and commodity demand
 equations of our model that are introduced below, is only a rough
 approximation of reality.
    In this framework, we shall write F and F for the expected margi-
 nal products of the corporate and unincorporated sectors, respec-
 tively.6 We also write o. and o for the pretax standard deviations
 of these returns. For the high-income investors, the after-tax ex-
 pected returns are thus (1 — t)F and (1 — t)pF, and the after-tax
standard deviations of these returns are (1 — t)o-(. and (1 — 1},)o-. If
K,, denotes the total amount of capital owned by high-income indi-
viduals and K, the amount of that capital invested in the corporate
sector, the constant-elasticity portfolio demand equation for high-
income investors can be written
                           —
                           —      (1 —
                               " (1   —
                                          t)F 1"[    (1
                                                          —
                                                              t)o ]"                  ' 1)
                                          tY,)pIj [(1     —
                                                              t,)o.,,   j
    Note that specialization does not require < t but only that [(1 — t,)/( I —        [(1
— 1)1)1(1 —   Ifl].
    See,   e.g., the evidence in Projector and Weiss (1966).
    For a useful statement of basic portfolio theory in a model with two risky assets, see
Tobin (1965). For analyses that deal explicitly with tax considerations in such a model,
see Richter (1960), Feldstein (1969), and Stiglitz (1969). For a brief summary of this
theory
  6
       and of more general contributions, see Feldstein (1976).
    Recall    that the corporate good is numeraire in our model so that its price is
implicitly one.
                                             JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
858
where H > 0 and 1H                0, and kH is the share of the capital of
high-income individuals that would be invested in the corporate sec-
tor if the expected net yields and associated net risks were the same in
both sectors. Changes in the sectoral allocation of capital and labor
will change the expected marginal products of capital according to
production-function conditions which we shall specify below. There is
no obvious way to specify the determination of the relative pretax
risk,         It would not be unreasonable to assume that these stan-
dard deviations were independent of the respective means and that
        is therefore a constant. Alternatively, the relative pretax risks
might remain constant, making rki proportional to FJpF. We
specify a more general constant-elasticity relation which includes both
possibilities as special cases:
                                                                                  (2)
                                          kpflH
Substituting equation (2) into equation (1) yields
                      K — f P5, \H+l'?IHf 1
                                                i   —

                                                    —t)
where XH = RHkff, the share of the capital of high-income indi'iduals
                                                                                  ' )


that would be invested in the corporate sector if there were no taxes
and the expected yields were equal. Note that in the special case of
constant relative pretax risk (y = 1), equation (3) implies that the
demand for corporate capital depends only on the relative net-of-tax
expected yields.7 A similar equation describes the portfolio equilib-
rium of the low-income group.
  These two portfolio balance equations can be embodied in a general
equilibrium model that is a natural generalization of Harberger's
1962 analysis extended to an economy with two groups of capital
owners.8 We follow Harberger in specifying (1) a production function
for each sector, (2) a labor market equilibrium condition that the
marginal revenue product of labor must be equal in both sectors, and
(3) a simple demand equation in which the relative demand for
corporate and noncorporate goods depends on the relative price and
not on the distribution of income. For each class of investors, there is a
constraint that the total available capital must be divided exhaustively
between the two sectors. For each sector, there is a constraint that the
total capital used in production is the sum of the capital received from

   For evidence of the ability of this simple model to explain individual portfolio
composition, see Feldsiein (1976). We assume that p., + i, > 0, i.e., that the expected
net yield dominates the net risk as a determinant of portfolio allocation.
    The full model is stated explicitly in NBER Working Paper no. 241-R, an earlier but
more complete version of the current paper.
CORPORATION INCOME TAX                                                  859
the two classes of investors. Finally, a constraint that the total labor (L)
is divided between the corporate (LC) and noncorporate (LU) uses
completes the model. These 11 equations determine the 11 endoge-
nous variables: the outputs of the two sectors, the relative price of the
two goods, and the allocation of labor and capital (Le, LU, Kc, KU, K,
Ky,, K, Kfl. The exogenous variables of the model are the total labor
supply (L), the capital stocks of the two income classes (K,, and KL),
and the four tax rates.
  In this more general model, substituting a corporate income tax
system for the partnership method of taxing corporate-sector income
can actually increase the share of total capital that is used in the
corporate sector even though the average tax rate on corporate in-
come is then higher than it would be if the same pattern of ownership
were taxed by the partnership method. More formally, K'/KU can rise
when we replace a tax system in which t = i and t, = tY, by one in
which t > t} and t, < ly, even though tKi +             > zK + tY,K,.
  This "counterintuitive" result can occur if the capital that is with-
drawn from the corporate sector by low-income investors (because t
> 1) is less than the capital that is added by the high-income investors
(because t, < ty,). The likelihood of this occurring depends on the
relative amounts of capital owned by each group (KL and KH), the
differentials in the tax rates under the corporate tax system, and
the relative asset demand elasticities of both groups (the p1's and
m's). Consider an obvious extreme case: If y = 1 and P'L + 71L = 0
while ,, + 'q,, > 0, the corporate capital stock would be increased by a
corporate tax system since high-income investors would switch assets
to the corporate sector while low-income investors would leave their
portfolios unchanged. Such an extreme assumption is not necessary.
The next section presents an explicit numerical calculation to show
that this surprising effect of the corporate tax system is possible with
more plausible parameter values. More generally, the analysis of the
next section shows that, with more realistic parameter values, recog-
nition of portfolio behavior does not reverse the usual direction of the
capital flow but does substantially reduce its magnitude.


II. Numerical Solutions of the Model for
     Alternative Tax Rules
We have used a specific numerical version of the model presented in
the previous section to calculate how the allocation of the nation's
capital stock between the corporate and noncorporate sectors could
change if the current corporate tax system were eliminated and the
profits arising in corporate activities were instead taxed like ordinary
86o                                            JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

income. The initial values of the model with the corporate income tax
in place are a stylized characterization of the U.S. economy in 1973.
  To create two classes of investors, we have drawn a dividing line at
$50,000 of adjusted gross income. With the help of a microeconomic
simulation model which incorporates some 28,000 individual tax re-
turns for 1973, we are able to calculate the average tax rates on
additional corporate and noncorporate income for the high- and low-
income investors defined in this way.9
   On the basis of Kendrick's (1976) recent estimates of national
wealth, we take total privately owned capital in 1973 to be about $3.6
trillion. Twenty-five percent, or $0.9 trillion, we assign to the corpo-
rate sector.1° To divide the ownership of this capital between high-
and low-income investors, we have used the Federal Reserve Board
Survey of Financial Character,stics of Consvrnerc (Projector and Weiss
1966); although this survey is becoming dated, it remains the only
source of such information. The survey showed that households with
1962 incomes over $25,000 owned approximately 25 percent of total
wealth and 45 percent of publicly traded corporate stock. Since per
capita personal income in 1973 was 2.1 times the 1962 level, we use
these proportions to describe the wealth holdings corresponding to
the $50,000 income level in 1973. These approximations imply that
the $3.6 trillion capital stock is divided as follows: High-income in-
vestors own $405 billion of corporate equity and $495 billion of
other assets while low-income investors own $495 billion of corporate
equity and $2,205 billion of other assets."
  The production functions for the two sectors are specified to be
Cobb-Douglas. The parameter values, based on the two-sector version
of the recent analysis by Shoven (1976),12 have a capital coefficient of

  "For a description of this IAXSIM computer model and Its use with corporate-source
income, see Feldstein and Frisch (1977).
  iO The flow-of-funds accounts list the market value of corporate equities in 1973 to be
$911 billion.
  ° Our analysis classifies corporate debt with 'other assets' because the corporate
income tax applies only to the equity component of corporate capital. We regard this as
a crude approximation since we believe that debt and equity cannot be regarded as
independent in this way. We also regard the Harhergci--Shoven-Whallev assumption of
a fixed debt-equity ratio as unsatisfactory. The probleno of including corporate debt is
compounded by the fact that much of the debt is held by financial intermediaries and
not by the individuals themselves. This analysis, in common with l)1eVi0U5 studies of the
corporation tax, ignores the role of financial intermediaries. Because of the special tax
rules applicable to banks and insurance companies, this indirect form of ownership
cannot be treated as if it were the same as direct ownership by individuals. We reiterate
that our current analysis is intended to illustrate the effect of the corporate tax system
in a stylized economy and cannot accurately portray the U.S. economy.
   12 Shoven's table 2 presents his corrected version of 1-larberger's original data. By
reallocating 45 percent of the corporate capital and labor (the approximate percentage
not backed by equity) to the noncorporate sector, the new factor shares can be calcu-
lated. Our noncorporate sector, a mix of Shoven's corporate sector and highly capital-
  CORPORATION INCOME TAX                                            86i
  .207 in the corporate sector and .320 in the noncorporate sector. Our
  labor allocations are based in a similar fashion on the wage bills paid
  in 1973 by the corporate and noncorporate sectors; we have 253
  billion units in the corporate sector and 263 billion units in the
 noncorporate sector.'3 In specifying the demand function, we follow
 the original assumption of Harberger that the share of national in-
 come spent on corporate-sector goods is not affected by the relative
 price of these goods or by changes in the distribution of income.14
   With realistic values of the tax rates and dividend payout ratios, the
 corporate tax system is not a "shelter" for the group that we refer to as
 high-income investors. Nevertheless, the simulation shows that disag-
gregating by income class and using a plausible portfolio response
elasticity can substantially alter the conclusions of the traditional
analysis. For this calculation, we assume an effective corporate tax
rate of 0.491; this is the average ratio of corporate tax payments to
real corporate profits (after adjusting inventory profits and capital
consumption for inflation) for the period 1965_75.15 The ratid of
dividends to real after-tax profitsduring the period 1956—75, 0.659,
will be used as the dividend payout rate for the simulations.
  The weighted-average marginal personal tax rate for individuals
whose adjusted gross incomes exceeded $50,000 in 1973 was 0.568.
For individuals with adjusted gross incomes below $50,000, the
weighted-average rate was 0.257. We take these to be the two tax rates
on distributed dividends and on income from unincorporated in-
vestments: t = 0.257 and ty1 = 0.568. Finally, we assume that the
effective tax rate Ofl the capital gains resulting from retained earnings
is one-fourth of the individual's ordinary marginal tax rate.16
   With these assumptions, the overall tax rates on corporate-source
income are t = 0.706 for the high-income group and t = 0.588 for
the low-income group.'7 Note that both of these corporate income
Intensive noncorporate sector, is thus less capital-intensive than Shoven's noncorporate
sector.
  13
       The corporate wage bill in 1973 was $460.6 billion, the private noncorporate
 approximately $55.6. Allocating 45 percent of the corporate wage bill to our noncorpo-
  rate sector yields these numbers.
     u Our other assumptions determine this share to be about 45 percent.
     "This makes no adjustment for the real gains that corporations accrue as inflation
 lowers the real value of their debt. Making such an adjustment would strengthen our
 conclusion by lowering the effective corporate tax rate. This would require an offset-
 ting change in the effective tax rate on the debt income. These compensating changes
are difficult to make within the framework of the current analysis. More generally, see
 Feldstein and Summers (1979).
    ' Recall that 50 percent of long-term capital gains are excluded in calculating taxable
income and that the tax is collected only when (and if) the stock is sold. This implies that
the effective capital gains rate is 0.142 for the high-income group and 0.064 for the
low-income group.
    ' The calculations are 0.491 + 0.509[0.659(O.568) + 0.34 1(0.142)] = 0.706 for the
high-income group and 0.491 + 0.509[0.659(0.257) + 0.34 1(0.064)] = 0.588 for the
low-income group.
862                                            JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

rates exceed the corresponding rates on unincorporated income: t} =
0.568 and t = 0.257. Since the corporate tax system raises the tax rate
on corporate-source income for both groups, there is an unambigu-
ous shift of capital away from the corporate sector. The extent of this
shift depends, however, on the nature of portfolio behavior. If we
assume that the portfolio balance elasticities are both equal to 0.5,18
the effect of integration would be to raise the corporate capital stock
from $900 billion to $1.045 trillion, an increase of $145 billion or 16
percent. The corporate capital stock of the high-income group in-
creases by 10 percent while the corporate capital stock of the low-
income group rises by more than 20 percent.
  These calculations differ significantly from the capital shift implied
by the traditional two-sector model that aggregates all individuals and
assumes an infinite elasticity of substitution between corporate and
noncorporate assets in investors' portfolios. Combining the two classes
of investors implies a weighted overall tax rate on unincorporated
income of 1" = 0.397 and a corresponding rate on corporate income
of t = 0.641.' With these tax rates and the requirement that the
net-of-tax yields are equal now and would again be equalized after
integration, the switch from the current rule to an integrated system
would increase the corporate capital stock from $900 billion to $1.29!
trillion. This is an increase of 43 percent, nearly three times as great as
the shift implied by the disaggregated model.
  With parameter values that are somewhat less realistic, our model
can imply that integration actually reduces capital in the corporate
sector. Consider an effective corporate tax rate of 0.40, a dividend
payout rate of 0.30, and no effective tax on capital gains. With per-
sonal tax rates of t = 0.257 and t} = 0.568, these assumptions imply
total taxes on corporate-source income of = 0.446 and t = 0.502.
Since the relative tax rates on the two kinds of capital income are now
reversed, the switch to an integrated tax will have the counterintuitive
effect of reducing corporate capital if the portfolio balance response
of the high-income group is sufficiently greater than the portfolio
balance response of the low-income group (i.e., if p. + 7H iS
sufficiently greater than /.LL + 71L).
  A greater portfolio balance response for the high-income group
  1 That is, ,, + ILH = L + LJ = 0.5.
  19 Recall that the tax rates use a weighted average of personal marginal tax rates using
dividends as the weights. Since the low-income group receives 55 percent of the
dividends, the disaggregated rates (t}', 17,, etc.) are combined in the 11:9 ratio. To insure
that the equilibrium corporate capital stock under the current tax system is 900 billion,
the share of national income spent on corporate goods was increased to 0.46. Note that
this implies a slightly different equilibrium allocation of labor than the one presented
earlier (259 billion Units in the corporate sector and 257 billion units in the noncorpo-
rate sector).
 CORPORATION INCOME TAX                                                                863
 seems plausible; their greater wealth provides a greater variety of
 investment opportunities and a greater incentive to be concerned
 about their investment strategies. With portfolio balance elasticities of
       +=   0.80 for the high-income group and 71L + L = 0.29 for the
 low-income group, a switch from the corporate tax system to an
 integrated system with equal tax yield has no effect on the total
 corporate capital stock. The corporate capital of the low-income in-
 vestors rises from $495.0 billion to $538.5 billion while the corporate
capital of the high-income group falls by an equal amount. With a
smaller difference between the portfolio balance elasticities, the
switch from the corporate tax system to the integrated system has the
traditional effect of increasing the total corporate capital. With a
greater difference between the price sensitivities, the switch in tax
regimes has the counterintuitive effect of decreasing corporate-sector
capital.2°
  It is clear that the traditional view of the allocative effect of the
corporate tax system deserves careful reconsideration. A central
feature in any such analysis should be a model of portfolio behavior
that goes beyond the conventional assumption of equal net yields.
The disaggregation of investors by income class emphasizes the im-
portance of such portfolio behavior and opens the possibility of dif-
ferences in sensitivity among different income groups. Obviously,
more empirical information on such portfolio behavior is needed to
reach any valid conclusions about the actual effects of the corporate
income tax system.

III. Conclusion
 In this paper we have extended the traditional analysis of the corpo-
rate income tax to an economy with a progressive personal income
tax. This extension implies a fundamental change in the analysis of
the corporation tax itself. Analyzing such an economy requires re-
placing the traditional equilibrium condition that after-tax yields are
equal on corporate and noncorporate investment with a more general
portfolio balance requirement.21 Our analysis of this more realistic
model shows that the introduction of a corporate income tax system
could actually increase the fraction of the nation's capital stock that is
used in the corporate sector even though the overall effective tax rate
on corporate investment income is increased. Section II showed that
this surprising result can occur even for quite feasible values of the
  20
     See table I of our NBER Working Paper no. 241-R for specific numerical results.
   21 Note that this portfolio balance model is appropriate even if t, > 17, as long as the
relative net yields cannot be equated, i.e., as long as [(1 —    — 17,)]    [(1 —         —
864                                          JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

portfolio balance behavioral elasticities. With parameter values that
are a more realistic description of the current U.S. corporate tax
system we showed that the more general disaggregated portfolio
balance model implies a very substantial reduction in the extent to
which the corporate tax system shifts the capital stock.
   Our analysis has dealt with the effect of the corporate tax system on
the allocation of the capital stock but not with the incidence of the
corporate income tax. With the special assumptions of Section II that
the technology is Cobb-Douglas in both sectors and that the shares of
expenditure on the corporate and noncorporate goods are fixed, the
form of the tax system does not affect the incidence of the tax: All of
the tax is borne by capital. The Cobb-Douglas technologies and com-
petitive markets imply that labor receives fixed shares of the value of
each sector's product regardless of the tax system; the fixed shares of
expenditure going to each sector then imply that labor receives a fixed
fraction of total national income. With labor income fixed, capital
must bear the cost of any resources collected by the government. This
is exactly the same reasoning that applies to the Cobb-Douglas model
in Harberger's 1962 paper; the disaggregation of capital ownership is
irrelevant for this even when it affects the sectoral allocation of total
capital.22 But if a more general technology or expenditure behavior is
assumed, the distribution of income will generally depend on the
form of the tax and the magnitudes of the portfolio balance elas-
ticities.
   Although we have not dealt explicitly with the efficiency aspects of
the corporate income tax, the current paper implies that evaluating
the excess burden of the corporate income tax should involve con-
siderations that have previously been ignored. In the traditional
analysis of the efficiency effects of the corporate income tax,23 the
welfare cost reflects the production inefficiency that results from the
misallocation of capital between the corporate and noncorporate sec-
tors. Since we have seen that the introduction of a corporate tax
system can leave the allocation of total capital unchanged, it is impor-
tant to stress that even in this case the corporate tax still does affect
economic efficiency. Although there is no change in the production
efficiency of the economy, there is a change in the way that risk is
borne (i.e., in what we may call "portfolio efficiency"). Without an
explicit theory of the optimal taxation of risky assets, it is not possible
to say whether a move from equal tax rates on corporate and noncor-
porate investments (i.e., equal for any given taxpayer) to a system of
  22
    This defines incidence in the standard way, without any allowance for risk bearing.
  23
    Harberger is again the pioneer in this analysis; see Harberger (1962). Shoven and
Whalley (1972), Shoven (1976), and Feldstein (1978) present further developments
within this framework.
 CORPORATION INCOME TAX                                                             865
 unequal tax rates causes a welfare gain or welfare loss. More
 generally, a full evaluation of the welfare loss (or gain) that results
 from the introduction of a corporate income tax requires assessing
 the effects on both production efficiency and portfolio efficiency.24
   The present paper shows that quantifying the effects of thecorpo-
 rate income tax requires a better understanding of portfolio behavior
 than we currently have. First, the analysis of portfolio behavior should
 be extended to include the role and special tax treatment of financial
 intermediaries as well as of the portfolios held directly by individuals.
 Second, within this extended model we need reliable estimates of the
 basic portfolio balance elasticities. When this information is available,
 it will be possible to assess more accurately the likely effects of changes
 in corporate tax rules and to evaluate the welfare implications of those
 changes.

 References
 Feldstein, Martin S. "The Effects of Taxation on Risk Taking."J.P.E. 77, no.
   5 (September/October 1969): 755—64.
         "Personal T'axation and Portfolio Composition: An Econometric
   Analysis." Econolne/rlca 44, no. 4 (July 1976): 631—50.
        "The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation."J.P.E. 86, no. 2, Pt. 2
   (April 1978): S29—S51.
 Feldsrein, Martin S., and Frisch, Daniel. "Corporate Tax Integration: The
   Estimated Effects on Capital Accumulation and Tax Distribution of Two
   Integration Proposals." Nat. Tax]. 30, no. 1 (March 1977): 37—52.
 Feldstein, Martin S., and Summers, Lawrence. "Inflation and the Taxation of
   Capital Income in the Corporate Sector." Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. Working
   Paper no. 312, 1979. Nat. Tax]. 32, no. 4 (December 1979): 445—70.
 Harherger, Arnold C. "The Corporation Income Tax: An Empirical Ap-
   praisal." In Tax Reviswn Coinpenthum, House Committee on Ways and
   Means, 1959.
         "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax." J.P.E. 70, no. 3
 (June 1962): 215—40.
       "Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income from Capital." In li/feeLs of
 Corporation Income Tax, edited by Macian Krzyzaniak. Detroit: Wayne State
 Univ. Press, 1966.
Kendrick,John W., with Lee, Kyu Sik, and Lomask, Jean. The National Weal/It
  of the United 5/a/es, b' Major Sector and Indus1,—. New York'. The Conference
  Board, 1976.
  24
     The effect on capital accumulation must also be considered when the simplifying
assumption of fixed capital stocks by income class is dropped. The earlier analysis of
this source of welfare loss by Feldstein (1978) assumed a single class of investors and
therefure that the corporate income tax, by raising the total tax rate on corporate
income, distorted individual choice by raising the relative cost of future consumption.
The current paper shows that the corporate tax system may distort the choices of low-
and high-income investors in opposite directions. It is again necessary to consider the
disaggregated welfare losses since both groups may incur welfare burdens from this
source even if the aggregate consumption pattern is unchanged.
866                                       JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
Projector, Dorothy S., and Weiss, Gertrude S. Survey ofFinancial Characteristics
  of Consume,s. Washington: Fed. Reserve Tech. Papers, 1966.
Richter, Marcel K. "Cardinal Utility, Portfolio Selection, and Taxation." Rev.
 Econ. Studies 27, no. 74 Uune 1960): 152—66.
Shoven, John B. "The Incidence and Efficiency Effects of Taxes on Income
  from Capital." J.P.E. 84, no. 6 (December 1976): 1261—83.
Shoven, John B., and Whalley, John. "A General Equilibrium Calculation of
  the Effects of Differential Taxation of Income from Capital in the U.S."].
  Public Econ. I, no. 3/4 (November 1972): 281—32 1.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. "The Effects of Income, Wealth, and Capital Gains Taxa-
  tion on Risk-Taking." Q.J.E. 83, no. 2 (May 1969): 263—83.
Tobin, James. "The Theory of Portfolio Selection." In The Theory of Interest
 Rates, edited by F. H. Hahn and F. B. R. Brechling. London: Macmillan,
  1965.
