               NBER Working Paper Series




               EDUCATION AND SELF SELECTION

                     Robert J. Willis
               Stanford University and NBER

                            and

                       Sherwin Rosen*
              University of Chicago and NBER

                   Working Paper No.    249




   CENTER FOR ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
               AND SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
  204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305


                         June 1978


                Preliminary; not for quotation.

NBER working papers are distributed informally and in limited
number for comments only.   They should not be quoted without
written permission of the author.

This report has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not yet been submitted
for apprbva1 by the Board of Directors.

*This research was supported by the National Bureau of Economic
 Research. Thanks are due to Sean Becketti for excellent research
 assistance and to Lung Fei Lee for advice on statistical issues.
 The order of the authors' names was selected by a random device.
A draft of this paper was presented at the UK/US Conference on
Human Capital and Income Distribution, Kings College, Cambridge,
England, March 19-23, 1978.
                                                         NBER Working Paper 249
                                                              June 1978

                          EDUCATION AND SELF SELECTION
                       Robert J. Willis and Sherwin Rosen

                                    Abstract

     A structural model of the demand for college attendance is derived
as a selection problem in the theory of comparative advantage, in which
individuals are endowed with different kinds of talents.        Some talents
and abilities are more valuable in the types of work associated with
college education and others are more valuable for work associated with
high school education.     For example, mechanical abilities are less
important for lawyers than for plumbers, whereas verbal abilities are much
more valuable for lawyers.     The market tends to sort people into work
activities for which they have a comparative advantage, as indexed by
expected earnings in each activity.     The structural model also allows
for the influence of parental background in the selection process.
     Estimates are based on NBER-Thorndike data and support the theory.
There is marked heterogeneity in the population and expected financial
gains from college attendance are distributed with substantial variance.
Nevertheless, those with greater expected gains have a much larger
probability of attending college.     The elasticity of demand for college
attendance with respect to the permanent college-high school earnings
differential is 2.0.     Parental background factors also influence demand.
The data support the comparative advantage theory:       Those who did not
attend college would have earned less as college graduates than those
who actually chose to attend.     More surprisingly, those who attended
college would have earned less as high school graduates than did those
who actually chose high school.     There is no "ability bias" in these data.




Address and phone number for both authors, until September 1, 1978:
                         National Bureau of Economic Research
                         204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
                         Stanford, CA 94305
                         415/326-7160
9/1/78:
Robert J. Willis                               Sherwin Rosen
Department of Economics                        Department of Economics
State University of New York                   University of Chicago
  at Stony Brook                               1126 East 59th Street
Stony Brook, New York 11794                    Chicago, IL 60637
                                               312/7 53-4503
                                                                   Revised
                                                                   May 1, 1978




                          EDUCATION AND SELF SELECTION


                      Robert J. Willis and Sherwin Rosen*



I.    INTRODUCTION

      In this paper we specify and estimate a model of the demand for college

education derived from its effect on expected lifetime earnings compared

with its cost.   Attention is focused on specifying the role of earnings ex-

peetations in the derived demand for schooling, which are found to be impor-

tant determinants of the decision to attend college.     In addition to

including financial incentives, the model allows for a host of selectivity

or sorting effects in the data that are related to "ability bias," family

effects and tastes that have occupied other researchers.     Background and

motivation are presented in Section II.    The structure of the model is a

variant of a simultaneous equations problem involving discrete choices and

is derived in Section III.    The estimates, based on data from the NBER-

Thorndike sample, appear in Section IV.    Some implications and conclusions

are found in Section V.


II.   NATURE OF THE PROBLEM

      Estimates of rates of return to education have been controversial be-

cause they are based on ex post realizations and need not reflect structural

parameters necessary for correct predictions.    For example, it is well under-

stood that college and high school graduates may have different abilities
                                         2


so that income foregone during college by the former is not necessarily equal

to observed earnings of the latter.     Our objective here is two-fold:    One is

to estimate life earnings conditioned on actual school choices that are purged

of selection bias.     The other is to determine the extent to which alternative

earnings prospects as distinct from family background and financial constraints

influence the decision to attend college.

    One need go no further than straightforward comparisons of earnings out-

comes among school classes for structural rate of return estimates if educa-

tional wage differentials were everywhere equalizing on the direct, opportunity

and interest costs of schooling.     For then the supplies of graduates (or "de-

mands" for each level of education) would be nearly elastic at the equalizing

wage differentials and the distribution of human wealth would be approximately
                                                l
independent of the distribution of schooling.        However, recent evidence on

the structure of life earnings based on panel data strongly rejects this as a

serious possibility.     Total variance of earnings among people of the same sex,

race, education and market experience is very large, and more than two-thirds

of it is attributable to unobserved components or person-specific effects that
                                                2
probably persist over much of the life cycle.        The panel evidence therefore

suggests that supply elasticities are substantially less than completely elas-

tic at unique wage differentials, and that there are inframarginal "ability

rents."   Put in another way, observed rates of return are not wholly supply

determined and depend on interactions with relative demands for graduates as

well.

    A natural approach has been to incorporate measures of ability into the

statistical analysis, either directly or as indicators of unobserved factors,

in order to, in effect, impute ability rent.        But merely partitioning observed
                                                  3


earnings into schooling and ability components does not use any of the restric-

tions imposed on the data by a school stopping rule and that decision embodies

all the economic content of the problem.                Some of that additional structure is

incorporated here.

       Economic theories of education, be they of the human capital or signaling

varieties, are based on the principle of maximum capital value:                 Schooling is

pursued to the point where its marginal (private) internal rate of return

equals the rate of interest.          It is easy to show that this leads to a recur-

sive econometric model in which (i) schooling is related to a person's ability

and family background; and (ii) earnings are related to "prior" school deci-

sions and ability.          Earnings gains attributable to education do not appear

explicitly in the schooling equation.                 Instead, the cost benefit basis of the

decision is embedded in cross equation restrictions on the overall model, be-

cause the earnings equation is a constraint for the maximum problem that

d et      ·
       erm~nes   ed  '
                  ucat~on        .
                             atta~nment.   3   There are many estimates of recursive models

in the literature, but very few have tested the economic (wealth maximizing)
                 4
hypothesis.

       We begin with the assumption of marked heterogeneity and diversity in the

population implicit in the unobserved component approach to panel data men-

tioned above.        Costs and benefits of alternative school completion levels are

assumed to be randomly distributed among people according to their capacities

to finance education, tastes, perceptions, expectations, and an array of tal-

ents that affect performance in work activities associated with differing

levels of schooling.          Some of these things are observed while others are un-

observed.        Individuals are sorted into educational classes according to the

interaction of a selection criteria (such as maximum present value) and the
                                                                         4


underlying joint distribution of tastes, talents, expectations and parental

wealth.         The selection rule determines a partition of the underlying joint

density, which corresponds to the realized educational distribution.                                               The

supply function of graduates at any level of schooling is "swept out" of the

joint taste, talent, parental wealth distribution as increased wage differ-

entials enlarge the subset of the partition relevant for that class.

     Let Y.. represent the potential lifetime earnings of person
                ~J
                                                                                                            i   if school-

ing level        i        is chosen, X. a vector of observed talent or ability indicators
                                                 ~


of person i and T. an unobserved talent component relevant for person i.
                 -                      ~


Similarly, split family background and taste effects into an observed vector

Z. and an unobserved component                           w.•           Let V.. denote the value of choosing
 ~                                                           ~               ~J


school level               i       for person i.        Then a general school selection model is:

     Y.. = y. (X. , T • )                                        j = l , ••• ,n                                   (2.1)
        ~J            J        ~        ~


     V..
        ~J
             =   g (y . , Z , , w , )
                           J        ~       ~
                                                                                                                  (2.2)

       i belongs to j if V,.
                                                ~J
                                                     = max       {V'l""'V' }
                                                                   ~              ~n
                                                                                                                  (2.3)


       (T ,w)    'V       F (T ,w)                                                                                (2.4)

     Equation (2.1) shows how potential earnings in any given classification

vary     . h ta1 ent and a b'l'
        w~t                 ~ ~ty. 5                         The earnings function differs among school

classes because work activities associated with alternative levels of educa-

tion make use of different combinations of talent.                                               Equation (2.2) trans-

lates the earnings stream from choice                                   i    into a scaler such as present value

and is conditioned on family background to reflect tastes and financial bar-

riers to extending schooling.                                Equation (2.3) is the selection rule:                  The

person chooses the classification that maximizes value, and is observed in

one and only one of the                          ~possibilities open                   to him.     Equation (2.4) closes
                                        5


the model with a specification of the distribution of unobservables.    Since

observed assignments of individuals to schooling classes are selected on

(X,Z,T,W), earnings observed in each class may be nonrandom samples of popu-

lation potential earnings because those with larger net benefits in the class

have a higher probability of being observed in it.
                                                                              6
    This formulation is suggested by the theory of comparative advantage.

It allows for a rather eclectic view of the role of talent in determining

observed outcomes, since the X's may affect earning capacity differently at

different levels of schooling [See equation (2.l)] and covariances among the

unobservables are unrestricted.    Indeed, there may be negative covariance

among talent components.   For example plumbers (high school graduates) may

have very limited potential as highly schooled lawyers, but by the same token

lawyers may have much lower potential as plumbers than those who actually end

up choosing that kind of work.    This contrasts markedly with the one factor

ability-as-IQ specifications in the literature which assume that the best

lawyers would also be the best plumbers and would imply strictly hierarchical

sorting in the absence of financial constraints.     In effect an IQ-ability

model constrains the unobserved ability components to have large positive

covariances--an assumption that is probably erroneous and not necessary for

our methods.   Note also that population mean "rates of return" among alterna-

tive schooling levels have no significance as guides to the social or private

profitability of investments in schooling.    For example, a random member of

the population might achieve a negative return from an engineering degree;

yet those with appropriate talents who choose engineering will obtain a re-

turn on the time and money costs of their training which is at least equal

to the rate of interest.
                                        6


      There are difficult estimation problems associated with selectivity models.

In brief, the unobservables impose distinct limits on the amount of structural

information that can be inferred from realized assignments in the data.    For

example, it would be very desirable to know the marginal distribution of tal-

ents in (2.4), since it would then be possible to construct the socially ef-

ficient assignment of individuals to school classes, defined as the one that

maximizes overall human wealth.    Then the dead weight losses due to capital

market imperfections could be computed by comparing optimal with observed as-

signments.    However, the marginal density is not itself identified, since

both unobserved financial constraints and talent jointly determine observed

outcomes.    These issues will be made precise shortly, but roughly speaking we

do not necessarily know if a person chose college education because he had

talent for it or because he was wealthy.    What can and will be done is to map

out the joint effects of the unobservables embedded in the actual demand curve

for college attendance, which embodies all constraints inherent in the actual

market, but which nevertheless is a valid structural basis for prediction.

Selectivity or "ability bias" in unadjusted rate of return computations that

do not take account of the sorting by talent inherent in observed assignments

can also be computed.

      A few limitations to these methods must be noted at\the outset.   It is

crucial to the spirit of the model, based as it is on human diversity, that

few covariance restrictions be placed on the distribution of unobservables.
  \

This practically mandates the assumption of joint normality, since no other

non-independent multivariate distribution offers anything close to similar

computational advantages.    While the general selection rule specified below

is likely to emerge from a broad class of economic models of school choice,
                                                 7


it is not known how sensitive the results are to the normality' assumptions.

In addition, nonindependence forces some aggregation in the number of choices

considered for computational feasibility, even though the statistical theory
                                                     7
can be worked out for any finite number.                 This rules out of consideration

other selection aspects of the problem that should be considered, such as

choice of school quality.8             All people in our sample have at least a high

school education and we have chosen a dichotomous split between choice of

high school and more than high school (college attendance).                       Some internal

diagnostic tests help check on the validity of this aggregation.                       Experiments

with a college completion or more compared with high school graduation or some

college classification yielded results very similar to                    thos~   reported below.



III.   THE MODEL

       Specification'of the econometric model is tailored to the data at our

disposal.        More detail will be given below, but at this point the important

feature is that earnings are observed at two points in the life cycle for

each person, one point soon after entrance into the labor market and another

point some twenty years later.             The earnings stream is parameterized into a

simple geometric growth process to motivate the decision rule.                       This is a

reasonable approximation to actual life earnings patterns for the period span-

ned by the data.         Two levels of schooling are considered, labeled A (for mo;re

than high school) and B (for high school).

       If person i chooses A, the expected earnings stream is

       y     . (t) = 0
           aJ.
                                                          o   < t   < S


       y . (t) =
        aJ.
                    YaJ.,exp(gaJ..t)                      S < t <    00                  (3.1)
                                                8


where S is the incremental schooling period associated with A over Band t-s

is. market experience.          If alternative B is chosen, the expected earnings

stream is

                                                        o   < t   <   00                  (3.2)


Thus earnings prospects of each person in the sample are characterized by

four parameters:           initial earnings and rates of growth in each of the two

alternatives.        Diversity is represented by a random distribution of the vector
                                                9
(Ya ,   ga' Yb' gb) among the population.

        Equations (3.1) and (3.2) yield convenient expressions for present values.

Assume an infinite horizon, a constant rate of discount for each person, r.,
                                                                                                  ~


with r        > gai' gbi' and ignore direct costs of school.               Then the present value
          i
of earnings is


         v a~.   =       ; . (t)exp(-r.t)dt =                         exp (g . -r . ) s   (3.3)
                     f    a~         ~                                       a~    ~

                     s

if A is chosen and is



                     J:bi<t>exp<-rit>dt    = Ybi/(r i -9bi >                              (3.4)
                     o

if B is chosen.           These are likely to be good approximations since the conse-

quences of ignoring finite life discount corrections and nonlinearities in

earnings paths toward the end of the life cycle are lightly weighted for non-

negligible values of r.
                                                                            9


Selection Rule.

    Assume that person i chooses A if V . > Vb' and chooses B if V , < Vb'.
                                                                                a~    ~                       a~   -       ~



Define I. = In(V ./V ,).                               Substitution from (3.1) - (3.4) yields
        ~       a~  b~

       I, = In Ya ; - In Y ; + (g . - r,)S - In{r. - g ,) + In(r. - gb')
        ~         ~       b~     a~    ~         ~    a~        ~     ~




A Taylor series approximation to the nonlinear terms around their population



                                                                                                                   (3.5)



with




    ex.
             2
                 =   dI/dg
                             a

                     dI/dg           =    -1/(;        gb) < 0                                                     (3.6)
                             b

       ex.
             4
                     arlar       =       -I s   +   <g.- gb) I (r - g.)(r - gb)1
Hence the selection criteria is

                                     Pr{Choose A)         =    Pr (V
                                                                       a
                                                                           > V ) = Pr{I > 0)
                                                                              b
                                                                                                                   (3.7)
                                                                                     Pr (I .::. 0)


Earnings and Discount Functions.

    Let X. represent a set of measured characteristics that influence a
                     ~


person's lifetime earnings potential and let u                                             , .•• ,u   denote permanent
                                                                                      li           4i
person-specific unobserved components reflecting unmeasured factors in-
                                                          lO
fluencing earnings potential.                                    Specify structural (in the sense of pop-

ulation) earnings equations of the form
                                                        10


           In y .           X.S       + u
               a:L           J.   a         li
                                                       if A is chosen                            (3.8)
                 gai   =    X.y
                             J.   a
                                      + u .
                                            2 J.

and


           In Ybi           XiS b + u 3i
                                                       if B is chosen                            (3.9)



The variables on the left hand sides of (3.8) and (3.9) are to be interpreted

as the individual's expectation of initial earnings and growth rates at the

time the choice is made.                    In order to obtain consistent estimates of

(Sa' Ya ' Sb' Yb ) from data on realizations it is assumed that expectations

were unbiased.         Hence forecast errors are assumed to be independently normally

distributed with zero means.

      Let Z. denote another vector of observed variables that influence the
            J.

schooling decision through their effect on the discount rate.

Then

                   r.J. =    Z.o
                              J.
                                      + uS'J.                                                    (3.10)

where Us is a permanent unobserved component influencing financial barriers

to school choice.            The vector (u.) is assumed to be jointly normal with zero
                                                   )

means and variance-covarience matrix                     L   = {cr.J.),l.   L is unrestricted.


Reduced Form.

       The structural model is (3.5), (3.8), (3.9), and (3.10).                         A reduced form

of the selection rule is obtained by sUbstituting (3.8) - (3.10) into (3.5):
                                                    11




            - W1T-e:                                                                            (3.11)

with W = [X,Z] and -e: = a (u - u ) + a u + a u + aSu '                             Thus an observa-
                          l l    3     2 2   3 4     S
tionally equivalent statement to (3.S) and (3.7) is

                                 Pr(A is observed)    =    Pr(W1T > e:) = F(W1T)                (3.12)
                                                                             a
                                                                               e:

where F(') is the standard normal c.d.f. (3.l2) is a probit function deter-

mining sample selection into categories A or B, to be estimated from observed
        11
data.


Selection Bias and Earnings Functions

    The decision rule selects people into observed classes according to largest

expected present value.                  Hence the earnings actually observed in each group

are not random samples of the population, but are truncated nonrandom samples

instead.         The resulting bias in observed means may be calculated as follows.

Note that Pr(observing y (t» = Pr(I > 0) = Pr(W1T > e:).                     Therefore, from (3.8)
                                     a




                                                                W1T
    E{lnyalI > 0)           =   X8 a + alPl E(e:/ae:l~      <   a
                                                      e:            e:




where F is the cumulative normal density and f is its p.d.f.                           Define

    A
        a
             = -f(Wrr/a e: )/F(W1T/a e: )                                                       (3.13)
                                                                                               12


as the truncated mean {with truncation point                                                                W~/a         } of the normal density due
                                                                                                                     £

to selection.               Making use of the definition of PI and A yields
                                                                    a

                                                               a
       E<rny
               a
                 II    > O} = XS
                                                  a
                                                    + -.!£ A
                                                      a     a                                                                              {3.l4}
                                                                   £



A parallel argument for ga' Yb and gb yields

                                                       a
      E(g
             a
               II   > O} = Xy
                                          a
                                            + ~ A
                                              a  a
                                                                                                                                           {3.1S}
                                                           £

                                                               a
                                     = XS b            +       .2£
                                                                a
                                                                               A
                                                                                b
                                                                                                                                           {3.1G}
                                                                       £


                                                       a
                             =       XY           +    ~ A                                                                                 {3.17}
                                          b            a                   b
                                                           £



with

             = E{e:/a e: I£.
                          a
                                      > W~}
                                              a
                                                           =       f(w~/a
                                                                                        £
                                                                                            }/[l -   F{W~/a
                                                                                                               e:
                                                                                                                    }]                     (3.lB)
                                e:                e:

and

                                                                                                                                           (3.1~)



Note from (3.13) that. Aa -
                          < O.                                                  Therefore the observed {conditional} means of

initial earnings and rates of growth among persons in A is greater or less
                                                                                                           <
than their population means as a                                                        £    {and ale:} > 0, from {3.14} and {3.1S}.
                                                                                    l
Conversely, A               ~   0 [See {3.18}], and there is positive or negative selection
             b
bias in initial earnings and growth rates for people observed in class B
         .                                                         >
accord~g            to a
                           3t {and a 4 e:}                         < O.                 Since a
                                                                                                     ij
                                                                                                          is unrestricted, ake: is also un-

restricted and selection bias can go in either way.                                                                         In particular, it is

possible that the bias is positive in both groups, consistent with the com-

parative advantage argument sketched above.                                                                 positive bias in A and negative
                                                     13


bias in B would be consistent with a single factor (hierarchical) interpre-

tation of ability.       Of course neither finding yields a definitive "ability"

interpretation because of the presence of expectational errors and financial

factors (aSk) in (3.19):              The assignments are based on talent, expectations

and wealth, not on talent alone.


Estimation

    Consider the following regressions applied to observed data:

    Iny              S*A a + n
              = XBa+ a
          a                   l

              = Xya+a
                    y*A
                        a
                            + n
                                  2
                                                                                                       (3.20)




Equations (3.14) - (3.17) suggest that S * estimates                           0       /0 ,   y* estimates
                                                          a                        1E     E    a

02E/ OE   and so on.    Including A or A in the regressions along with X cor-
                                   a    b
rects for truncation and selectivity bias, and E(n, ,)
                                                                         J.J
                                                                                   =    0 for j    = 1,4.   In

addition E(n?) is heteroskedastic (See below) because the observations are
                 J.J

truncated and at different points for different people.                                  (3.20) cannot be

implemented directly because A and A are not known. However, it can be
                              a      b
     12
shown   that consistent estimates of (3.20) are obtained by replacing

A and A with their values predicted from the reduced form probit equation
 a     b
(3.12).       These values are

                                             /'..                 /'\
                            A . =       -f(W.~/o )/F(W.~/O )
                            aJ.             J.  E     J.  E
                                                                                                       (3.21)
                                             /'0..                      /\
                                         f(W,~/o )/[1         -   F(W.~/o )]
                                            J.  E                    J.  E
                                                 14


and are entered as least squares regressors along with X.•               Estimation of
                                                                    J.

(3.20) with A. replaced by A. corrects for selectivity bias in the observa-
               J.                 J.

tions.   What is more interesting for the economic theory of educational

choice is that these estimates provide a basis for estimating the structural

selection rule or structural probit function (3.5) and (3.7).              The struc-

tural probit is




from (3.5), (3.7), and (3.10).          Use the consistent estimates of structural

earnings and growth described above to predict earnings gains for each person

in the sample according to


                        ~
                      ln(yaJ.'/Yb"J.   = x.J. (6a - 6b )

                                       = x.y
                                          J. a
                                                                                 (3.23 )




                                                           13
where 6 and yare estimated by the method above.                 These predicted values

are inserted into (3.22) and estimated by the usual probit method to test

the economic restrictions (3.6).14



Other Tests

    Alternative estimates are available to serve as an internal consistency

check on the model.      In particular, the model can be specified using the

observed level of earnings at time t and earnings growth instead of initial

earnings.     From (3.1) and (3.2) it follows that
                                           15


    Iny {t}
       a
              = X.1 {Sa   + Ya t} + u + tU 2
                                     l

                                                                          {3.24}




Substitute for the level equations in {3.8} and {3.9} and this model also can

be estimated as described above.        However, now the structural probit is of

the form




the following restrictions are implied:




Hence we have a check on the validity of the model.       Of course its main vali-

dation is the power to predict behavior and assignments on independent data.



Identification

    Two natural questions regarding identification arise in this model.

    {i}    Estimation of the selection rule or structural probit equation is

possible only if the vectors X and Z have elements that are not in common.

If X and Z are identical, the predicted values of InYa - InYb' ga' and gb

are co-linear with the other explanatory variables in {3.22} and its estima-

tion is precluded.        Note however that even if X and Z are identical, the
                                       16


reduced form probit (3.12) is estimable and it still may be possible to esti-

mate initial earnings and growth rate equations and selection bias.     The

reason is that although the A corrections in (3.20) are functions of the same

variables that enter the XS or Xy parts of these equations, they are nonlin-

ear functions of the measured variables.    Structural earnings equations might

be identified off the nonlinearity, though in any particular application

there may be insufficient nonlinearity if the range of variation in    w~    (See
                               IS
(3.11}) is not large enough.

    In the general discussion of Section II, X was tentatively associated

with measured abilities and Z with measured financial constraints (and

tastes), corresponding to the Beckerian distinction between factors that

shift the marginal rate of return to investment schedule and those that

shift the marginal supply of funds schedule.     Evidently, if one takes a

sufficiently broad view of human investment and in particular of the role

of child care in the new home economics, easy distinctions between the con-

tent of X and of Z become increasingly difficult, if not impossible to

make.   If X and Z are indistinguishable,. the economic theory of school

choice has no empirical content.    In the empirical work below a very strong

dichotomy with no commonalities is maintained:    X is specified as a vector

of ability indicators and Z as a vector of family background variables.

This hypothesis is maintained for two reasons:    First it provides a test

of the theory in its strongest form.   Certainly if the theory is rejected

in this form there is little hope for it.    Second, there have been no sys-

tematic attempts to find empirical counterparts for the things that shift

marginal rate of return and marginal cost of fund schedules that cause

different people to choose different amounts of schooling.     The validity
                                                       17


of the theory rests on the possibility of actually being able to find an op-

erational set of indicators, and this distinction is the most straightforward

possibility.

     (ii)         Given resolution of problem (i), not all parameters in the model

can be estimated.              Some are overidentified and some are underidentified.                              The

selectivity bias corrected structural earnings equations (3.20) directly

estimate Sa' Sb' Y , Y ' and the structural probit (3.22) provides estimates
                  a   b
of (al/o£, a /0£, a /0£, a o/0£).                    Furthermore, from the approximations in
            2      3      4
(3.6), the coefficient on In(Ya/Yb) in (3.22) estimates 1/0£ (given that a l l )

so that it is also possible to estimate population average real rates of in-

terest.           In addition there are 15 parameters in the unobserved component

variance-covariance matrix E.                Following a development similar to the one

leading to (3.14) -             (3.17) it can be shown that the variances of residuals in

(3.20) are


                                             G~n
                                                                  -I
                                       0.
                                                  _1._ A          2
                                                                 1. . ~
                 var (n .. )    o .. + ~                                          j = I, 2
                       1.J       JJ    0                ai        a1.
                                         £
                                             LO"                   --t
                                                                        ,,
                                                                                                        (3.27 )

                                             r;1T
                                                                 A~ I
                                      0.     I, i
                 var (n .. ) = o .. + ~
                       1.J      1.J   0
                                        £
                                             l-cr£ Abi       -
                                                                    1.1
                                                                                  j      3, 4.
                                             !
                                             L                            !



Similar expressions hold for covariances between nil and n i2 and between n i3

and n        •     Hence it is possible to estimate the own population variances                              o ..
        i4                                                                                                        JJ
for j    =       1, ••• ,4, two within group covariances, and four covariances 0.                             for
                                                                                J£
j = l , ... ,4.         These along with the estimate of 0                            provide only 11 statistics
                                                                              £

to estimate 15 parameters.              Evidently all the covariance terms in E cannot

be estimated without additional zero or other restrictions because we never
                                       18


observe the path not taken.    This is the basis for the statement above that

dead weight losses from assignments based jointly on wealth and talent rather

than on talent alone cannot be imputed.      The demand function for college

attendance implicit in (3.22) reflects the joint density of talent, wealth,

tastes, and expectations and their separate effects cannot be disentangled.




IV.   ESTIMATION

      The model has been estimated on a sample of 3611 respondents to the
                                            16
NBER-Thorndike-Hagen survey of 1968-71.          These data refer to male WWII

veterans who applied for the Army Air Corps.        They do not come from a ran-

dom sample of the population since the military screening criteria were

based on certain aspects of ability and physical fitness.        Therefore it is

not possible to extrapolate these results to the population at large.

However, the sample's advantages more than compensate for this.        First, it

covers more than twenty years of labor market experience, far longer than

any other panel of comparable size, and most appropriate for measuring life-

time earnings effects of educational choice as the theory requires.        Second,

it contains extensive information on family background and talent.        While

several other panels are as good on family background, virtually none com-

pare in their range of talent and ability indicators most appropriate to

the theory of comparative advantage.

      The sample actually used is a subset of 5085 total respondents.      Forty-

two observations were dropped for not responding to the age question, another

480 persons were deleted because they were pilots, had extended military

service, or did not report a job in 1969, and 952 were dropped because they
                                        19


did not report both initial (y) and latest (y(t»     earnings required for struc-

tural estimation.     Definitions of variables are given in Table I.   Individuals

were put into two categories:     Group A represents those who entered college

and Group B, those who stopped school after high school graduation.     Not all

members of Group A completed college and a substantial fraction completed more

than a college education.     They are labeled college attendees hereafter.

Descriptive statistics also appear in Table I.     Notice that more than 75% of

the sample chose to attend college for some period, reflecting the unusual

ability distribution in the sample and eligibility. for a liberal college sub-

sidy (the G.I. Bill).     However, the presence of the G.I. Bill is common to

both college attendees and high school graduates.

    There are some obvious differences between the two groups.     Both mean and

relative variance of earnings in both years is smaller for high school grad-

uates, as tends to be true in other samples.     In addition, high school

graduates had smaller earnings growth over the period, had more siblings and

were lower in birth order than college attendees, and were more likely to have

taken vocational training in high school.     Their fathers had less schooling

and were more likely to be blue-collar workers as well.     Four ability measures

have been chosen for analysis, out of some 16 indicators available in the data.

Math and reading scores are related to IQ-type of ability (in fact it is known

that math score is highly correlated with IQ score in these data), while the

other two are more associated with manual skills.     The four together seem well

suited to the comparative advantage logic underlying the formulation of the

model.   High school graduates tend to score lower in the math and reading com-

prehension tests, about the same in manual dexterity and somewhat better on

mechanical ability.     In line with the previous discussion all ability measures
                                             20


in Table I are assigned to X, while the family background measures--reflecting

financial constraints, tastes and perceptions--are assigned to Z.            Experience,

school completion dummies (for Group A) and year of reported earnings are used

exclusively as controls in structural earnings equations.

     The first columns in Table II present estimated coefficients and asymptotic

t-statistics of the reduced form probit selection into Group A--equation

(3.12).          These effects more or less parallel the summary of Table I given above.

Math score has a particularly strong positive effect and mechanical score a

strong negative effect on the college attendance decision.            The effect of

mother I     S   working is somewhat unexpected.   Mother I s home time when the respon-

dent was five years old or younger has virtually no effect on college attendance,

whereas the respondent was more likely to go to college if his mother worked

when he was 6-14 years of age.          This is more supportive of market investment

through relaxation of financial constraints rather than of home investments in
  ' d . 17
k ~n

     structural estimates of earnings and growth equations corrected for selec-

tion are found in Table III.          These are somewhat different from the typical

earnings equations found in the literature, because they include a much sparser

set of regressors.          For example, we know respondents' unemployment experience,

weeks worked, weeks ill, marital status and so forth but have not included them

in the regressions.          The logic of this lies in the model itself:    At the time

the college attendance decision was made, there is no reason to expect that

respondents knew the outcomes of such variables.           It is more in the spirit of

the choice framework of the model to allow these "current" events to be cap-

tured indirectly via their correlations with included variables in order to
                                                                                  .    18
estimate expected or anticipated values relevant to the structural           prob~t.
                                         21


The problem is more difficult in the case of school completion differences

among members of Group A in Table III, and in truth raises an unresolvable

aggregation problem.     The anticipations argument above suggests that school

completion differences within Group A may not enter the earnings equations,

so that included variables pick up average completion experience in the

sample.    Alternatively it can be argued that the level of schooling achieved

within Group A should be controlled by including school completion dummies.

This latter specification is reported in Table III and is the one used to

estimate the structural probit in Table II.    Of course we do not switch on

the school completion dummies to estimate the earnings advantages of college

attendance, since that would clearly stack the deck in favor of finding

strong financial effects.     Earnings and structural probit equations were also

estimated with school dummies deleted and the results were very similar to

those reported here.     However, it is clear that this issue only can be re-

solved by going into a more disaggregated model with multiple classifications.

        with the exception of experience, most of the variables have little

effect on initial earnings in either A or B (See columns 1 and 2 of Table

III).19     Experience effects are the strongest and are known to be most impor-

tant at early and late stages of career patterns, fact borne out in these

data since experience has little effect on later (surveyed around 1969) earn-

ings.     The ability measure that has the largest effect on initial earnings is

math score for college attendees.    Ability indicators are more important for

earnings growth (columns 3 and 4) and later earnings (columns 4 and 5).

Dexterity and reading scores have positive effects on gb and Yb(t) , while math

and reading scores have positive effects on Iny ttl, but exhibit much weaker
                                               a
effects on earnings growth.     Interestingly enough, the effect on mechanical
                                       22


score is negative in all cases, raising obvious questions about what it is

that this test supposedly measures (recall, however, the sample truncation

on high ability-military personnel).   Even so, it seems to have a more impor-

tant negative effect for members of Group A.    This along with the results

for dexterity and math scores lend support to the comparative advantage hy-

pothesis.

    Selectivity biases are particularly interesting in that regard.     The

coefficients of A show no selectivity bias for initial earnings of high
                 b
school graduates, but positive bias for growth rates.     Therefore, observed

earnings patterns of high school graduates show higher rates of growth com-

pared with the pattern that would have been observed for the average member

of this sample had he chosen not to continue school.    On the other hand the

coefficients of A show positive selection bias for initial earnings of
                 a

college attendees and negative bias for earnings growth.    The latter is due
                      "
to the fact that there is no selection effects for late earnings.     Thus

observed earnings patterns among members of Group A is everywhere higher

than the population mean pattern would have been, and converges toward the

population mean late earnings level.   Positive selection among both A and B

also lends support to comparative advantage.

    The most striking empirical results are the structural probit estimates

in Table II, which show how anticipated earnings gains affect the decision

to attend college.   The predicted earnings variables are statistically

significant except for gb in (3.22) and ga in (3.26).20    More striking how-

ever, is the agreement of the sign patterns predicted by the theory (See

equation (3.6) and recall that the structural probit coefficients are nor-

malized by G , from (3.22) and (3.25».      The model passes two internal
            E
                                              23


consistency checks.       The first is restrictions (3.26).       Working backwards to

normalized a estimates from directly estimated e's in column five of Table II
         2l
yields        a predicted (ala) vector of (5.15, 117.62, -38.06) which is remark-
                              €:

ably similar to the direct estimates in column three of (5.15, 138.39,

-44.27).       Working forwards from actual estimates of normalized a to predicted

estimates of e gives prediction (5.15, 28.46, 65.65) compared with actual

(5.15, 7.66, 71.90).      Certainly these comparisons would not be so close if

the two parameter approximation to earnings patterns in (3.1) and (3.2) was

not reasonably good.       Second, equations (3.12) and (3.22) indicate that

estimated coefficients on the Z variables in structural and reduced from pro-

bits should be the same.           Direct comparison of coefficients of Z in Table II

shows extremely close similarity of a 0 in all three equations.            In sum, the
                                     4
results give direct, internally consistent evidence on the validity of the

economic theory of the demand for schooling derived from its (private) in-

vestment value.      The economic       hypothesis is strongly accepted.




V.   CONCLUSIONS

     The structural probit estimates of Table II support the economic hypo-

thesis that expected gains in life earnings influence the decision to attend

college.      They also show important effects of financial constraints and

tastes working through family background indicators, a finding in common with
                                             22
most other studies of school choice.               Availability of the G.I. Bill might

well be expected to dull the observed monetary effects, but they remain

strong enough to persist for a significant fraction of the sample.

     The estimates also show positive sorting or positive selection bias in

observed earnings of both high school graduates and college attendees.
                                                       24


High school graduates had larger lifetime earnings than the average college

graduate would have experienced had he chosen to stop school after high

school.              Conversely the average college graduate's observed earnings were

greater than what the typical high school graduate would have earned had he

continued school.               It is difficult to tell a coherent story for the ob-

served pattern of selection in these data based on the usual discussion of

financial constraints and/or hierarchical ("one factor") ability considera-

tions.               The most attractive and simplest interpretation is the theory of

comparative advantage because hierarchical assignments are not observed.

While the results are consistent with comparative advantage, they do not

prove the case because life persistent luck and random extraneous opportu-

nities could have played just as important roles in the observed assign-

ments as differential talents did.                   For all we know those who decided to

stop school after high school may have married the boss' daughter instead,

or made better career connections in the military, and so forth.                    The im-

portant point is that their prospects in B were higher than average.

            As noted above, the population average rate of discount, r, is an iden-

tifiable statistic in the model.                   Estimates are obtained by applying restric-

tions (3.6) to the estimates in Table II.                   Maintain the hypothesis that

a       =       1.    Then the estimated coefficient of In(ya/y ) in Table II estimates
    l                                                          b
(1/0 ), from equation (3.22).                    Since all the equations of the structural
            E

probit are normed by              0       this estimate provides a basis for estimating the
                                      E

population parameters in (3.6).
                                              25


       Straightforward computations using the observed mean schooling increment

of 4.11 years yields


       (r - ga ) =       .0439
                                                                                    (5.1)



Observed growth rates do not estimate population means because of truncation

and selection.           However, (3.15) and (3.17) imply

                     o
                                 Aa
                                                                                    (5.2)




where g and A are observed sample means and the estimated coefficients

(Ok /0 ) are from Tables III and IV.
   E     E

Apply formula (5.2) to the data in Table I to obtain corrected mean estimates

of ga = .0555 (compared with an observed mean of .0535) and gb = .0175

(compared with .031 observed).           The population mean discount rate, r, is over-

identified.     The first equation of (5.1) yields an estimate of r              = .0994
while the second yields r = .1338.           Two more estimates of r are implied by the

structural probit that uses the late earnings difference rather than the

initial earnings difference.           Using restrictions (3.26) and the corrected

estimates of ga and gb above yields r          =   .1089 and of r   =   .1578.   Even if the

precise derivation and specification of the model in Section III strains the

reader's credulity, it is nonetheless clear that the structural specification

is consistent with more casual derivations and the estimated sign patterns

in the structural probit, if not the precise restrictions among coefficients,
                                          26


would be predicted by virtually any economic model.

    The positivity of earnings selection effects in both groups also implies

that selection bias in simple rate of return estimates could go in either

direction.     The following procedure gives a rough and ready indication in this

sample.     First the 2-parameterization of earnings in (3.1) and (3.2) implies

that the average internal rate of return, i, is estimated by


                 (y /Yb) [(i - gb)/(i - g )]exp(g - i)S = 1.0
                   a                     a       a

where i is the rate of discount that equates average present values.      The un-

adjusted estimate uses sample means in Table I for the y's and the g's and a

schooling increment of 4.11 years.      It is 11 percent.   An adjusted rate is

obtained by using the corrected mean values of the g's above and a similar

correction applied to the Y's.      The resulting estimate of the population mean

internal rate of return is 12 percent, which is actually larger, not smaller

than the observed mean rate of return.




Predictions

    The model    pa~ses   the test of empirical verification of its structural

restrictions.     How well does it do in predicting assignments on independent

data?     The sample used is not a random drawing of the U.S. population and

for this reason cannot be extrapolated to the population at large.       However,

only a subset of the NBER-Thorndike-Hagen sample was used to estimate it and

the remaining remnant is more likely to be a suitable group for prediction

purposes.     The remnant refers to those who did not report initial earnings.

For this reason it may not be a random sample of the relevant population

either.     And while there is no reason to suppose that the censoring of initial
                                        27


earnings was systematically related to the selection mechanism of the model,

it should be noted that a somewhat smaller proportion of these individuals

(66% of them) chose to attend college than in the sample used for structural

estimation.

    One indirect test of the model's predictive content has been calculated.

First, the reduced form probit was re-estimated for the remnant, which does

not involve extrapolations, since the sample selection between A and Band

the content of W = [X,Z] is known for these people.     Results appear in

Table AI.     While there is some conformity with Table II, there are also

many differences between reduced form estimates in the two samples.     In

short, family background coefficients are not too stable.

    The second experiment involves an extrapolation.     Both initial earnings

differences and growth rates were predicted for members of the remnant

sample from the structural earnings estimates of Table III and then used to

re-estimate the structural probit of this group (No t-statistics are reported

for structural probit coefficients because of the large expense of doing so).

The results also appear in Table AI.     The sign reversals on family background

indicators carryover to these estimates too.      Indeed, the coefficients and

signs of the Z variables in the structural estimates are very close to those

found in the reduced form estimates in Table AI.     However, the coefficients

on the earnings differences and growth rates for the remnant sample are very

close to those estimated for the original sample of Table II.


Enrollment Functions

    Perhaps the simplest and most useful summary of the results is obtained

from the demand function for college attendance implicit in the structural

probit estimates.    Recalling the definition of the index function in (3.5), the
                                           28


probability of attending college is given by


                  Pr{A is chosen) = F{I/a )
                                           £


where F is the standard normal cdf.        Let m denote the size of the relevant

population and let N represent the number choosing to attend college.               Then

the number enrolled in college is given by


                  N   mF   (I/O) .                                               (5.3)
                               £




This would be equivalent to a supply function of graduates were it not for

the aggregation involved in Group A.           The supply of graduates is somewhat

different since we do not know how long people outside the sample would stay

in school.      The normality assumptions imply that the enrollment function

(5.3) follows the cumulative normal curve.           It therefore has zero elastic i-

ties at its extremes and positive elasticities in between.              The major point

of interest here is responsiveness of enrollments to earnings opportunities

near the sample mean.        From the definitions of present value in section III,

note that dln(Va/Vb)/dln(ya/y ) = 1.           A one percent change in relative
                             b
initial earnings changes relative capital values by one percent.               To clarify

a possible point of confusion on this conceptual experiment, dln(ya/y )
                                                                     b
represents a permanent-- not a transitory change in lifetime prospects, be-

cause it increases relative differences between potential earnings in A

compared with B not only initially but forevermore [See (3.1) and (3.2)].

Differentiating (5.3) yields an elasticity formula


                                       [F I (I/o ) (0.1/0 )]jF (I/O )
                                                 £      £         £


where I/O       is evaluated at the desired sample proportion.          For example, the
            £
                                      29


elasticity evaluated at a sample proportion of .5 (half in A and half in B)

is 4.1.   On the other hand the initial earnings elasticity at the observed

sample proportion is 1.94, still a substantial response given the presence

of marked diversity in the population.     By way of comparison, an increment

of father's education of 1.59 years (the difference in means of father's

schooling between groups in Table I) elicits a relative response of .0337.
                                           Footnotes


* Thanks   are due to Sean Becketti for excellent research assistance and to

 Lung Fei Lee for advice on statistical issues.            This research was sup-

 ported by the National Bureau of Economic Research, but is not an official

 NBER pUblication.     The order of the authors' names was selected by a ran-

 dom device.


 1.   The equalizing difference model originates with Friedman and Kuznets

      (1954).    Jacob Mincer (1974) has developed it most completely in re-

      cent years.


 2.   See Lillard and Willis (forthcoming) for additional detail and confir-

      mation of these remarks.      Related studies have reached similar conclu-

      sions, e.g. Lillard and Weiss (1976).            Of course, it is conceivable

      but unlikely that educational wage        diff~rentials    are exactly equalizing

      for each individual although considerable lifetime income inequality

      exists among individuals.      This possibility is rejected in the empiri-

      cal findings presented below.


 3.   The basic model is discussed in Becker (1975).            See Rosen (1977) for an

      elaboration of this argument, and a survey of the relevant literature.

      Blaug (1976) also stresses the need for estimating structural demand

      for schooling relationships, and Griliches (1977) discusses the diffi-

      culty of doing so in conventional models.            Part of Griliches' discussion

      is pursued in Griliches, Hall and Hausman (1977).            The model elaborated

      here is conceptually distinct from that work, though some of the statis-

      tical techniques    a~e   similar.     A similar remark applies to the work of

      Kenney, Lee, Maddala and Trost (1977).
                                          31


4.   There is aggregate time series evidence that earnings are important de-

     terminants of professional school enrollment (See Freeman [1968] and

     numerous subsequent studies by the same author); but there is virtually

     no micro evidence even though such data has been most often studied in

     the human capital and signaling framework.


5.   Actually, expository convenience dictates a more restrictive formula-

     tion than is necessary.   X and Z need not be orthogonal.      They may have

     some elements in common, but identification requires that they not have

     all elements in common.   See below.


6. . Roy (1951) gives a surprisingly modern and rigorous treatment of a

     selection problem based on the theory of comparative advantage.        See

     Rosen (forthcoming) for extensions and elaboration on this class of

     problems.   Heckman (1976), Lee (1976) and Maddala (1976) develop the

     appropriate estimation theory.


7.   The problem is that the aggregates are sums of distributions that are

     themselves truncated and selected.        Therefore the distributions under-

     lying the aggregate assignments are not necessarily normal.        We are

     unaware of any systematic analysis of this kind of aggregation problem.


8.   Methods such as conditional logit have been designed to handle high

     dimensioned classifications (MacFadden [1973]) but require indepen-

     dence and other (homogeneity) restrictions that are not tenable for

     this problem.   Hausman and Wise (1978) have worked out computational

     methods on general   n~rmal   assumptions for three choices.    Note also

     that maximum likelihood methods are available, but are extremely expensive
                                                          32


      because multiple integrals need be evaluated.                                Hence we follow the lit-

      er~ture     in using consistent estimators.


 9.   Wise (1974), Lazear (1975), and Zabalza (1977) have used initial earn-

      ings and growth of earnings to study life earnings patterns.                                           The dis-

      tribution of potential earnings and growth is not constrained in our

      model, thus for example allowing the possibility that y                                        and g       are
                                                                                               a             a
      negatively correlated (and similarly for Yb and gb) as in Mincer (1975).

      On this see Hause (1977).


10.   The   TiS   of Section II are related to (u , ••. u ) by a set of implicit
                                                 l       4
      prices that vary across school classifications, as in Mandelbrot (1960).

      See Rosen (forthcoming) for the logic of why these differences in

      valuation can be sustained indefinitely and cannot be arbitraged.


11.   For completeness,      -8    should be redefined to take account of deviations

      between realizations and expectations at the time school decisions were

      made.       Thus, let lnY    0

                                  a~
                                       =   lny . +
                                                a~
                                                         V lO
                                                               ~
                                                                   , where Y
                                                                            a~
                                                                               0    is realized initial

      earnings, Yai is expected initial earnings and v                                   is normally distri-
                                                                                    li
      buted forecast error.            Similarly, forecast errors v                           ' v        ' and v
                                                                                         2i         3i             4i
      are     defined for g 0' lnybo and gbo.                       Then the complete definition of
                             a~             ~        .     ~


      -8    is obtained from replacing u o. with (u 0 0 + v 0 0)' j                                 1, ... ,4, in
                                                     J~                J~          J~

      (3.11).       Clearly this has no operational significance for the model,

      given the assumption of unbiased expectations.


12.   See Heckman (1976) and Lee (1976).


13.   This method is due to Lee (1976) who used it to study unionization status.
                                            33


      Our model differs somewhat in that there is more than one structural

      equation in each classification.


14.   Heckman (l977) and Lee (1977) show that OLS estimates of the standard

      errors of   Sa ,   Y , Sb and Y in (3.20) are biased if a /0
                          a          b                         ke e
                                                                      ~   0 when

      estimated values of A are used in place of their true values.         Lee
                           b
      also shows that the usual estimates of standard errors for the struc-

      tural probit (3.22) are biased when estimated values of,ln(ya/y }, ga
                                                                     b
      and gb are used in place of their true values and derives exact

      assymptotic distributions for these parameters.      We use Lee's results

      to compute consistent estimates of standard errors below.


15.   Heckman (l976) raises some subtle issues regarding specification error

      in selection models.      Elements of Z may be incorrectly specified in

      X and can be statistically significant in least squares regressions

      because of truncation.      Conversely, coefficients on selection bias

      variables A and A can be significant because variables are incorrectly
                 a     b
      attributed to selection when they more properly belong directly in X.

      For example, some might argue that family background belongs in struc-

      tural earnings equations and our selectivity effects work (See below)

      because family background comes in the back door through its indirect

      effect on A.       However, a reversal of the argument suggests that family

      background might have significant estimated direct effects on earnings

      merely because they work through selection and resulting truncation.

      There is no statistically satisfactory way of resolving this problem.

      In any event, we cannot be "agnostic" about specification because both

      the economic and statistical theory require certain nontestable zero
                                            34


      identifying restrictions.      The problem is even more complicated in the

      present context because the theory is based on unobserved talent and

      financial constraint shifters and must have observable counterparts to

      be operational.    Evidently choice among alternative specifications ul-

      timately must rest on predictive performance outside the sample.


16.   These data have been extensively analyzed by other investigators,

      especially Taubman (1975), who also discovered them.      For complete

      documenta tion see NBER (1973).,


17.   Recall that female labor force participation during the war increased.

      The normalized category for mother's work classifications is nonresponse.

      We do not know how many did not respond because no mother was in the

      home.


18.   A related and thorough discussion of this issue appears in Hanoch (1967),

      to which the reader is referred.       It has not escaped our attention that

      current variables such as hours of work and unemployment experience

      might serve as indicators of an unobserved "taste for leisure" component,

      but we have not experimented with that possibility.


19.   Initial earnings is recall data from the 1955 Thorndike survey and re-

      fers to a period as much as nine years prior to that survey date.        Late

      earnings is    clos~r   to the NBER survey date and probably has less recall
                               2
      error in it.    The low R statistics in Tables III and IV are due to the

      'fact that we are looking at within-group variation, whereas most results

      in the' literature get a lot of mileage out of current variables and

      explanation of between-group mean variation.       It is also worth noting
                                          35


      that the standard errors in the earnings and growth equations computed

      from the exact asymptotic distribution reported in the table are virtu-

      ally identical to those estimated by OLS.


20.   Recall (Footnote 14) that the t-statistics for the structural probit in

      Table II are based on consistent estimates of the standard errors, as

      suggested by Lee (1977).     The t-statistics on background variables are

      not very different from the biased values computed by a standard probit

      algorithm.     However, the t-statistics on the predicted earnings and

      growth variables are sUbstantially reduced when corrected for bias;

      e.g., the standard probit estimates of t-values for In(y /Yb)' g         and
                                                                 a         a
      gb in (3.22)    are [10.8 , 8.15, -4.81] compared with the unbiased values

      of [2.25, 1.83, -1.28] in Table II.


21.   The value of t used in these computations is 21.35, which is the total

      sample mean time between reporting initial earnings and late earnings

      (the weighted difference in means of Year 48 and Year 69 variables in
      Table I).
22.   See Kahn, Manski and Mundel (1976) and Radner and Miller (1970) for logit

      models of college choice.     These models contain more detail in personal

      and college attributes but do not make any attempt to assess the effects

      of anticipated earnings in college attendance decisions.       See Abowd (1977)

      for another approach to the selection problem focusing on school quality.
                                    REFERENCES


Abowd, J.M.     "An Econometric Model of the u.S. Market for Higher Education,"

    Ph.D. thesis, University of Chicago, 1977.


Becker, G.S.     Human Capital, 2nd ed., New York:    NBER, 1975.


Blaug, M.     "The Empirical Status of Human Capital Theory:    A Slightly

    Jaundiced Survey," Journal of Economic Literature, 1976.


Freeman, R.    The Labor Market for College Trained Manpower, Cambridge, Har-

    vard University Press, 1971.


Friedman, M. and Kuznets, S.     Income From Independent Professional Practice,

    New York, NBER, 1954.


Griliches, Z., "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Prob-

    lems," Econometrica, 1977.


Griliches, Z., Hall, B., and Hauseman, J.        "Missing Data and Self-Selection

    in Large Panels," Harvard University, 1977.


Hanoch, G.     "An Economic Analysis of Earnings and Schooling," Journal of

    Human Resources, 1976.


Hause, J.     "The Fine Structure of Earnings and the On-the-Job-Training Hypo-

    thesis," University of Minnesota, 1977.


Hausman, J. and Wise, D.     "A Conditional Probit Model for Qualitative Choice,"

    Econometrica, 1978.


Heckman, J.     "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation,

    Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables," Annals of Economic and
                                        37


    Social Measurement, 1976.


                "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error" in J.P.

    Smith, ed., Female Labor Supply:     Theory and Estimation.    Rand Corpora-

    tion, 1977.


Kenny, L., Lee, L., Maddala, G.S., and Trost, R.     "Returns to College Educa-

    tion:    An Investigation of Self-Selection Bias in Project Talent Data,"

    University of Florida, 1977.


Kohn, M.G., Manski, C.F., and Mundel, D.S.     "An Empirical Investigation of

    Factors Which Influence College-Going Behavior," Annals of Economic and

    Social Measurement, 1976.


Lazear, E.    "Age, Experience and Wage Growth," American Economic Review,

    1976.


Lee, Lung Fei     "Estimation of Limited Dependent Variables Models by Two-Stage

    Methods," Ph.D. thesis, University of Rochester, 1976.


                  "unionism and Wage Rates," International Economic Review

    (forthcoming) •


                  "On the Asymptotic Distributions of Some Two-Stage Consistent

    Estimators:    Unionism and Wage Rates Revisited," University of Minnesota,

    1977 •


Lillard, L. and Weiss, Y.     "Analysis of Longitudinal Data:     American Scientists

    1960-70," NBER, 1976.
                                         38


Lillard, L. and Willis, R.      "Dynamic Aspects of Earnings Mobility," Econo-

    metrica (forthcoming).


McFadden, D.     "Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,"

    in P. Zarembka (ed.) Frontiers in Econometrics, North-Holland, 1973.


Maddala, G.S.     "Self-Selectivity Problems in Econometric Models," Univer-

    sity of Florida, 1976.




Mincer, J.     Schooling, Experience and Earnings, New York, NBER, 1974.


National Bureau of Economic Research, "The Comprehensive NBER-TH Tape

    Documentation," I'1arch, 1973.


Radner, R. and Miller, L.S.      "Demand and Supply in U.S. Higher Education,"

    American Economic Review, Vol. 60, May, 1970.


Rosen, S.     "Human Capital:   Relations Between Education and Earnings," in

    M. Intilligator (ed.) Frontiers of Quantitative Economics, Vol. IIlB,

    North-Holland, 1977.


             "Substitution and Division of Labor," Economica (forthcoming).


Roy, A.D.     "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford Economic

    Papers, 1951.


Wise, D.     "Academic Achievement and Job Performance," American Economic

    Review, 1975.


Zabalza, A.     "The Determinants of Teacher Supply," London School of Economics,

    1977 •
                                       39

                       TABLE I:    DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICSa

                                                            More Than High School
                       Hbh School (Group B)                       (Group A)
Variable                          Standard                              Standard
                       Mean          Dev                    Mean            Dev

Father's ED             8.671                 2.966         10.26               3.623
Father's ED2           83.99                 55.53         118.4               78.09
DK ED                    .0999                                .0464
Manager                  .3628                                .4954
Clerk                    .1239                                .1450
Foreman                  .2238                                .1695
Unskilled                .1492                                .0819
Farmer                   .1062                                .0720
DK Job                   .0177                                .0124
Catholic                 .2933                                .2138
Jew                      .0405                                .0617
Old Sibs                1.143                 1.634           .9035             1.383
Young Sibs               .9381                1.486           .8138             1.266
Mother Works:
  Full 5                 .0468                                .0486
  Part 5                 .0392                                .0504
  None 5                 .7168                                .7507
  Full 14                .0822                                .0936
  Part 14                .0708                                .0851
  None 14                .6384                                .6713
H.S. Shop                .2592                                .0908
Read                   20.57                 10.17          24.06              11.63
NR Read                  .0291                                .0128
Mech                   59.24                 18.27          58.88              18.96
NR Mech                  .0253                               O.
Math                   18.13                 11.82          28.94              17.17
NR Math                  .0683                                 .0188
D.ext                  50.04                  9.359         50.68               9.811
NR Dext                 O.                                     .0071
Exp                    29.33                  2.439         24.54               2.907
Exp2                  866.1                 147.1          610.4              147.4
S13-15                                                         .3106
S16                                                            .3993
S20                                                            .0823
Year 48                46.62                  1.584         48.05               1.869
Year 69                69.11                   .3691        69.08                .3437
In y                    8.365                  .4107         8.526               .3871
In y(E)                 9.326                  .4573         9.639               .4904
g                         .0309                .0251           .0535             .0283
A                       -.5651                 .2873         -.3193              .2256
 a
A                       1.138                  .3763         1.605               .5212
 b
No. observations               - 791                                   2820

            a.   Definition of Variables:
Father's ED       Father's years of school. Nonresponse assigned mean.
Father's ED2      Square of Father's ED.
DK ED             Dummy variable: 1 if respondent didn't know father's education.
Manager          Dummy variable: 1 if           father was a businessman, manager or
                   professional.
Clerk            Dummy variable: 1 if          father had white collar occupation
                   other than those in         Manager.
Foreman          Dummy variable: 1 if          father was a foreman, supervisor or
                   skilled crafts~,n.
Unskilled        Dumn~ variable:  1 if          father was semiskilled operative or
                   unskilled laborer.
Farmer           Dummy variable: 1 if          father was a farmer.
DK Job           Dummy variable: 1 if          respondent didn't know father's
                   occupation.
                                          40
                               TABLE I (continued)

              a.   Definition of Variables (continued):

Catholic           Dummy variable:   1 if respondent is Catholic
Jew                Dummy variable:   1 if respondent is Jewish
Old Sibs           Number of older siblings.
Young Sibs         Number of younger siblings.
Mother's Work:
 Full 5            Dummy variable: 1 if mother worked full time when
                     respondent was less than 6 years of age.
    Part 5         Dummy variable: 1 if mother worked part time when
                     respondent was less than 6 years of age.
    None 5         Dummy variable: 1 if mother did not work when respondent
                     was less than 6 hears of age.
    Full 14        Dummy variable: 1 if mother worked full time when
                     respondent was 6-14 years of age.
    Part 14        Dummy variable: ·1 if mother worked part time when
                     respondent was 6-14 years of age.
    None 14        Dummy variable: 1 if mother did not work when respondent
                     was 6-14 years of age.
H.S. Shop          Dummy variable: 1 if respondent majored in vocational
                     courses in high school.
Read               Raw score on college undergraduate level reading
                     comprehension test. Continuous variable, nonrespondentS
                     assigned mean.
NR Read            Dummy variable: 1 if reading score not reported.
Mech               Raw score on pictorial representation of mechanical problem
                     test. Continuous variable, nonrespondents assigned mean.
NR Mech            Dummy variable: 1 if mechanical score not reported.
Math               Raw score on mathematics test (performance in advanced
                     arithmatic, algebra and trignometry). Continuous
                     variable with nonrespondents assigned mean.
NR Math            Dummy variable: 1 if math score unreported.
Dext               Score on test of finger dexterity. Continuous variable,
                     nonrespondents assigned mean.
NR Dext            Dummy variable: 1 if dexterity score not reported.
Exp                Continuous variable:        Age - Schooling - 6.
Exp 2              Square of Exp.
S13-15             Dummy variable: 1 if respondent received 13-15 years
                     of school.
S16                Dummy variable: 1 if respondent received 16 years of school.
S20                Dummy variable: 1 if respondent received 20 or more
                     years of school.
Year 48            Year in which initial postwar earnings are reported.
                     Continuous variable.
Year 69            Year in which earnings at time of NBER survey was reported.
                     Continuous variable.
Ln y               Log of earnings on first job after finishing school, in
                     1967 prices.
Ln y(t)            Log of earnings at time of NBER survey in 1967 prices.
g                  (Ln earn 69 - Ln earn 48) f (Year 69 - Year 48).percentage
                     rate of growth between the two observations.
                   See equation (3.13), based on estimates in Table II, Column 1.
                   See equation (3.18), based on estimates in Table II, Column 1.
                                                            41

                                    TABLE II.          COLLEGE SELECTION RULES:          Probit Analysis



                                Reduced Form (3.12)           Structure (3.22)             Structure (3.25)

                                                       a                             a                           a
                               Coefficient         t         Coefficient         t        Coefficient        t


    Constant                       .0485        .20               .1512      .22               .1030        .17

BACKGROUND
 Father ED                        -.0145      -.41               -.0168     -.54              -.0152       -.49
"Father ED 2                        .0037     2.05                 .0038    2.26                .0037      2.26

    DK EDb                        -.4059     -3.96               -.3924    -2.79              -.4001    -2.91


 Manager                            .1897     2.17                 .1825    2.13                .1871    2.21
 Clerk                              .0556       .54                .0561      .59               .0554      .59
 Foreman                            .0182       .19                .0210      .23               .0200      .22
 Unskilled                        -.0910      -.85               -.0948     -.89              -.0928     -.87
 Farmer                           -.2039     -2.12               -.2256    -2.27              -.2094    -2.14
 DK Jobb                          -.0413      -.19               -.0629     -.29              -.0609     -.28

 Catholic                         -.1144     -1.91               -.0982    -1.51              -.1083    -1.66
 Jew                              -.0293      -.23                 .0143     .12              -.0158     -.14

 Old Sibs                         -.0162      -.93               -.0162     -.93              -.0161       -.93
 Young Sibs                         .0122       .63                .0096      .49               .0112        .57

 Mother Work:
     Full    5                     .1039       .66                .1168      .81               .1104        .76
     Part    5                     .2179      1.42                .2106     1.52               .2156       1.56
     None    5                     .0655       .63                .0677      .65               .0661        .64
     Full    14                    .2898      2.29                .2884     2.30               .2888       2.33
     Part    14                    .2709      2.20                .2768     2.02               .2693       2.03
     None    14                    .1980      1.91                .1990     1.92               .1966       1.92

    H.S. Shop                     -.4411     -6.14               -.4397    -3.74              -.4379    -3.90


ABILITY
 Read                               .0047     1.67
         c
 NR Read                          -.2575     -1.41
 Mech                             -.0070     -4.29
 NR Mechc                        -3.0236     -1.04
 Math                               .0244    12.34
         C
 NR Math                          -.7539     -5.75
 Dext                               .0019       .72
         C
 NR Dext                          2.2797        .47


EARNINGS
 In(y/y )                                                        5.1486     2.25
       b
      ga                                                      138.3850      1.83              7.6632        .11

      gb                                                      -44.2697     -1.28             71.8981       2.34

 1n ya(t)/yb(t)                                                                               5.1501       2.57



Observations                                 3611                          3611                         ·3611
    Limit OBS                                 791                           791                          791
    Nonlimit OBS                             2820                          2820                         2820
-2 1n (likelihood Ratio)                     579.5                         568.8                         576.6
l    degree freeq.om                          28                            23                             23


NOTE:        a = t is asymptotic t-statistic.
             b = DK:   Don't know, dummy variable.
             c = NR:   No   response, dummy variable.
                                                   42

                        TABLE III: STRUCTURAL EARNINGS ESTIMATES:
                EQUATIONS (3.20) AND (3.24), OLS (t-values in parenthesis)




Regressor                           DEPENDENT                      VARIABLE


               (1)         (2)         (3)                 (4)          (5)         (6)


             lny
                a        lnYb         ga                  gb         lny    (t)   lnYb (t)
                                                                        a



Constant    8.7124       2.8901      .1261               .2517       10.3370      7.5328
            (16.51)      (1.37)     (3.90)              (2.11)       (5.52)       (2.08)


Read         .0009      -.0019       .0001               .0003         .0027       .0057
            (1.21)      (-1.17)     (1.11)              (3.20)       (2.80)       (3.28)


NR Read      .0791        .0506     -.0034     I         .0046         .0033      -.0402
            (1.24)       (.58)      (-.76)     I        (-.89)       (.04)        (-.42)


Mech        -.0002      -.0005      -.0001              -.0001       -.0021       -.0017
            (-.48)      (-.54)      (-2.16)             (-1.13)      (-3.59)      (-1. 73)


NR Mach                   .1969                          .0002                     .2196
                         (.69)                          (.01)                     (.68)


Math         .0015      -.0013       .0001
                                               I        -.0000        .0030       -.0019
            (2.02)       (.74)      (1.18)
                                               I        (-.20)       (3.31)       (-1.00)


NR Math     -.1087        .0562      .0015               .0006       -.0877        .0712
             (-1. 94)    (.83)      (.38)               (.15)        (-1.24)      (.96)


Dext         .0008      -.0019      -.0000               .0003        .0002        .0036
            (1.03)      (-1.21)     (-.78)              (2.77)       (.16)        (2.19)


NR Dext      .0751                  -.0004                            .1466
            (.28)                   (-.02)                           (.43)


Exp         -.0523        .4260     -.0028              -.0154       -.0129        .0776
            (-1.49)      (3.10)      (-1.11)             (-1.93)     (-.29)       (.53)

        2
Exp          .0015      -.0067       .0000               .0002       -.0000       -.0012
            (2.22)       (-2.95)    (.21)               (1.82)       (-.01)       (-.49)


Year 48     -.0020      -.0156
            (-.48)       (-1. 72)


Year 69                                                              -.0067        .0039
                                                                     (-.26)       (.09)


S13-15       .1288                  -.0062                            ... 0168
            (5.15)                  (-3.49)                          (.52)


S16          .0760                   .0026                            .1095
            (3.82)                  (1. 79)                          (4.26)


S20          .1318                   .0049                            .2560
            (4.10)                  (2.13)                           (6.15)


A           -.1069                   .0058                            .0206
 a
            (-3.21)                 (2.45)                           (.49)

A                       -.0558                           .0118
 b                                                                                 .2267
                        (-.66)                          (2.39)                    (2.48)
    2
R           .0750        .0439      .1578               .0513        .0740        .0358
                                                                  43

                                      TABLE A1:           COLLEGE SELECTION RULES:    Probit Analysis
                          (Independent Subsamp1e of Individuals with no Report on Initial Earnings)



                                 Reduced Form (3.12)               Structure (3.22)     Structure (3.25)

                                                          a
                                 Coefficient          t                Coefficient        Coefficient


 Constant                           -.4424          -.986                 -.1170              -.1514

,BACKGROUND
 Father E0                          -.0183            .27                  .0131               .0123
           2
 Father ED                            .0020           .61                  .0023               .0023
         b
 OK ED                              -.2645      -1.69                     -.2548              -.2608


 Manager                              .2009      1.50                       .1689               .1768
 Clerk                                .1664        .92                      .1523               .1490
 Foreman                            -.1276       -.83                     -.1359              -.1369
 Unskilled                          -.3118      -1.79                     -.3298                .3260
 Farmer                               .1353       .75                       .1174             -.1332
 OK Job                             -.3515      -1.04                     -.3133              -.3426

 Catholic                           -.0887          -.80                  -.0847              -.1024
 Jew                                -.2169          -.95                  -.1879              -.2159

 Old Sibs                            .0335          1.02                   .0343               .0336
 Young Sibs                          .0191           .56                   .0170               .0176

 Mother Work:
   Full      5                      -.6039      -2.06                     -.6080              -.6080
   Part      5                      -.0470       -.18                     -.0409              -.0351
   None      5                      -.0200          -.11                  -.0345              -.0248
   Full      14                       .1656           .67                   .1747               .1764
   Part      14                     -.1248          -.58                  -.1258              -.1310
   None      14                     -.0581          -.31                  -.0360                .0448

 H.S. Shop                          -.5387      -3.95                     -.5436              -.5395


~
 Read                                .0056           1.07
         c
 NR Read                             .2393            .74
 Mech                               -.0480          -1.64
         c
 NR Mech                             -----           ----
 Math                                 .0251          6.80
 NR Math~                           -.4775          -2.15
 Oext                                 .0050          1.03

                             I       -----
         C
 NR Oext                                             ----

                             !
EARNINGS
                             I                                I
                                                              I
 1n(y/yb)                    !
                                                              I
                                                              I
                                                                          4.9674
                                                                        122.1460             -1.8761
                                                              i
    gb
1n[Ya(t)/Yb(t)]
                                                              I         -34.8393             76.4555

                                                                                              4.8837



Observations                                  952                           952                     952
 Limit OBS                                    321                           321                     321
 Non1imit OBS                                 631                           631                     631
-2 ln (likelihood Ratio)              184.446                            179.419                184.446
 2
X degree freedom

NOTE:        a    =t   is asymptotic t-statistic
             b = OK:     Don't know, dU1lllllY variable.
             c = NR:     No response, dU1llllly variable.
