NBER Working Paper Series

A THEORY OF THE NATURAL UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
AND THE DURATION OF EMPLOYMENT

Robert E. Hall
National Bureau of Economic Research

Working Paper No. 251

National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305

July 1978

This research was supported by the National Science Foundation and is
part of the NBER's program of research on Economic Fluctuations. The
paper has not undergone the review accorded official NBER publications;
in particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the Board of
Directors.
I am grateful to Robert Barro for helpful comments.

NBER Working Paper No. 251
July 1978

A THEORY OF THE NATURAL UNEMPLOYMENT RATE
AND THE DURATION OF EMPLOYMENT
Robert E. Hall
Abstract

In this paper, a theory of the natural or equilibrium rate of
unemployment is built around a theory of the duration of employment.
Evidence is presented that most unemployed workers became unemployed
because their previous jobs came to an end; only a minority are on
temporary layoff or have just entered the labor force.

Thus, high-

unemployment labor markets are generally ones where jobs are brief and
there is a large flow of newly jobless workers.

The model of the dura-

tion of employment posits that employment arrangements are the efficient
outcome of the
length of jobs.

bala~cing

of workers' and employers' interests about the

Full equilibrium in the labor market also requires

that the rate at which unemployed workers find new jobs be efficient.
The factors influencing the resulting natural unemployment rate are
discussed.

Under plausible assumptions, the natural rate is independent

of the supply or demand for labor.

Only the costs of recruiting, the

costs of turnover to employers, the efficiency of matching jobs and
workers, and the cost of unemployment to workers are likely to influence
the natural rate of unemployment strongly.

Since these are probably

stable over time, the paper concludes that fluctuations in the natural
unemployment rate are unlikely to contribute much to fluctuations in
the observed unemployment rate.
Robert E. Hall
National Bureau of Economic Research
204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
Stanford, CA 94305
415/326-7160

Milton Friedman's famous definition of the natural unemployment rate
runs as follows:
The "natural rate of unemployment" ... is the level that
would be ground out by the Walrasian system of general
equilibrium equations, provided there is imbedded within
them the actual structural characteristics of the labor
and commodity markets, including market imperfections,
stochastic variability in demands and supplies, the cost
of gathering information about job vacancies and labor
availabilities, the costs of mobility, and so on
(Friedman, 1968).
Though this definition is hardly more than a list of things to think about
in creating a theory of the natural rate, the basic notion that there is a
natural rate has become reasonably well established, even among economists
who resisted the idea at first and who now accept the principle but give it
another name.

Most recent theoretical work on unemployment has focused on

the search activities of the unemployed or on the unemployment of workers
with permaqent employment contracts who are on temporary layoff.

But most

of the unemployed have truly lost their jobs, and existing theories have
little to say about why they became unemployed in the first place.

By and

large, workers become unemployed because their jobs are not permanent.

The

shorter the duration of employment, the greater is the flow of workers into
the pool of the unemployed.
In this paper, a theory of the natural rate of unemployment is built
around a theory of the duration of employment.

The paper does not concern

itself with disequilibrium or with problems of lags in the adjustment of
wages, and S9 is not aimed at deriving a Phillips curve.

On the contrary,

it is concerned only with the unemployment that exists in a labor market in
'lOb
1
~ r~um.

equ~

0

Some, but not all, of the considerations in Friedman's list

lIn this respect, the paper's objectives are much the same as Lucas and
Prescott's (1974). Their concern is primarily with creating an apparatus
for a complete formal description of the stochastic equilibrium of the labor

-2-

are incorporated in the theory.

The spirit of Friedman's definition is

preserved--unemployment is treated as a phenomenon that can be understood
within a general equilibrium Walrasian model, provided the model is suitably
extended.
In creating a theory of unemployment in equilibrium, one must start
with more than the proposition that unemployment is the difference between
supply and demand in the labor market, though this proposition is always
true.

The paper begins with a basic, general definition of equilibrium:

In

equilibrium, no participants in the market have unexploited opportunities to
make themselves better off.

At the equilibrium unemployment rate, employers

cannot obtain labor at lower cost by offering work to the unemployed at below
the market wage.

Unemployed workers cannot raise their effective real incomes

by taking lower wages in exchange for immediate employment.

The task of the

theory is to explain why any unemployment remains at all when these conditions
are satisfied.

The problem considered here is the next step beyond the one

treated in the recent literature on fixed-price equilibria.

A fixed-price

equilibrium is not an equilibrium at all in the sense the term is used here-opportunities for self-improvement abound in a fixed-price equilibrium, as
long as the possibility of agents offering to transact at prices different
from the fixed prices is recognized.
Before the development of the model of the duration of employment, it
is useful to mention some evidence on the quantitative importance of job
separations as a source of unemployment.

There are two other principal

sources of unemployment apart from separations:

temporary layoffs and

market; in this'respect their model is rather more microeconomic than the
one presented here. They are not specifically concerned with the duration
of employment, but their model embodies the general principle that workers
leave their jobs whenever the expected returns to search elsewhere exceed
the expected returns to remaining on the job.

-3-

entrance to the labor force.

In spite of the attention that temporary lay-

offs have received recently as a result of the work of Martin Feldstein
(1975), they are not a major source of unemployment· in the contemporary
American economy.

In 1974, only 18 percent of all unemployed workers were

reported as "on layoff," and only about 70 percent of them, or 13 percent of
total unemployment, could reasonably expect to be recalled to their old jobs.
Further, it appears that only 16 percent of the unemployed have not worked in
the six months before becoming unemployed and so cannot attribute their
unemployment to a recent job separation.

The remaining 71 percent of the

unemployed consist of people who have become unemployed by irrevocable separation from their earlier jobs.

To understand equilibrium unemployment, the

starting point is to study the reasons for job separations.
unemployed got that way by losing or leaving jobs.

Most of the

What is needed to create

a theory of equilibrium unemployment is a theory of the impermanence of jobs.
In the model developed in this paper, both employers and workers care
about the duration of employment.- Duration can be viewed as a characteristic
of a job along with its wage.

Then an efficient employment contract sets a

duration and a wage at a point where the isocost curve is tangent to the
indifference curve.

Such a point is a desirable compromise between the

employer's desire to retain flexibility over future levels of employment and
the worker's interest in stable employment.
The paper unites this theory of the flow into unemployment with a simple
model of unemployment.

The resulting model of the labor market does indeed

have an equilibrium where the unemployment rate is positive--under the efficient employment contract, jobs have finite lengths and workers are continually moving through the labor market.

-4-

A Model of Unemployment
The efficient duration of employment depends on the cost of recruiting
to the employer and on the cost of finding new jobs to the worker.

Tight

markets where jobs are easy to find make workers more receptive to shorter
jobs and higher separation rates, but impose higher recruiting costs on
employers, so employers favor longer jobs.

Though the analysis of the effi-

cient duration of employment applies for almost any specification of the
operation of the labor market, it seems useful to carryon the discussion
within a particular model where it is possible to be completely clear about
the mechanics of unemployment and its role in the economy.
In the model to be considered here, there is no private or social value
of unemployment in the sense of searching for the best match of worker and
job.

Jobs and workers are assumed perfectly homogenous.

The unemployed

simply form an inventory of workers available for employment.

The model

also recognizes the pervasive asymmetry of the job-filling process--employers
fill jobs much more rapidly than workers find jobs.

In the model, jobs are

filled as soon as they become open, but the unemployed must wait until a job
appears for them, which is a stochastic event that may take several periods
to occur.

The model also assumes that the unemployed accept the first job

offered, and that if they receive several offers, they accept one chosen at
random.
Suppose that J job offers are made by employers to U job seekers each
period.

The probability that a particular worker will receive a particular

offer is l/U.

The probability that a job seeker will receive no offer at

all from among the J is
1 - f

-5-

Here f is the rate of job-finding--the probability each period that an
unemployed worker will find work.

If U is large, the term in square brackets

t,

is very close to e, and the job finding rate,
f

=1

- e

is

-J/U

Since job offers are made at random, some job seekers may receive more than
one offer in one

p~riod~

and employers must generally make more offers than

the number of jobs they hope to fill.

Of the J offers made, Uf are accepted.

The number of offers needed to yield an expectation of one acceptance is
p

= J/Uf.

But J/U is functionally related to f:

J/U

= -log

(I-f), so p is

just a function of f:
p(f)

=-

log(l-f)
f

p(f)

5

4
3
//

/

-'

2

1
f

0.5

1.0

Figure 1
Recruiting expenses will be assumed proportional to p(f)--tighter markets
with f approaching one become increasingly costly to employers because many
offers must be made to hire a single worker.

Note that the benefits of

-6-

slack markets are almost all available at f

= 0.5, where p = 1.39, as against

its theoretical lower limit of 1.00.
Now let s be the separation rate, that is, the fraction of the employed
who become job-seekers each period.

Together with the job-finding rate, f,

it implies a value for the unemployment rate when the warket is in stochastic
equilibrium, defined as equal flows into and out of unemployment.
the matching process operates in the following way:

Suppose

At the beginning of a

period, the workers who have just been separated from their previous jobs
join those who did not find work last period.

The total number of job

seekers at the beginning of this period is U.

Then job offers are made, and

Uf people find jobs.
period.

The remaining U(l-f) are unemployed for the whole

Let E be employment.

Then the equality of flows into and out of

unemployment can be expressed as
U = (l-f)U + sE
or
U/E = s/f
Now the unemployment rate, defined as the fraction of the labor force that
is unemployed throughout the period, is

u =

(l-f)U
E + (l-f)U

~~:-.-=~-:--

The quantity f/(l-f) is the number of jobs found by all job-seekers for each
person who remains unemployed throughout the period.

-7-

The next section of the paper examines the determinants of the separation rate, s, and the subsequent section does the same for the job-finding
rate, f.

Then the two are combined to form a model of the equilibrium or

natural unemployment rate.

A Theory of the Duration of Employment
The duration of a job is a matter of concern to both parties to the
employment contract.

Employers are generally reluctant to agree to very

short jobs because of recruiting and training costs.

They also find very

long jobs costly to offer, because of the implied reduction in the flexibility of their total level of employment.

Employers facing product demands

that drift over time face very high costs to long-term employment commitments,
sincz there is a substantial probability that the efficient level of employment will fall at some time in the future.

In the extreme, small firms

facing a probability of bankruptcy simply cannot offer very long or permanent
jobs--it is beyond their power to promise not to fail.

Employers' views

about the duration of employment can be summarized in an isocost curve that
permits a higher wage at intermediate durations as against either shorter
duration, where turnover costs reduce efficiency, or longer duration, where
inflexibility of employment is costly.

For reasons that will be made

apparent shortly, it is most convenient to plot the isocost curve against
the reciprocal of duration, the separation rate:

-8-

wage

isocost curve

' - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - separation rate
long jobs
short jobs

Figure 2
Workers are also concerned about duration.

Holding a sequence of brief

jobs may be costly because a new job has to be found at the conclusion of
each job, and finding work takes time that is uncompensated or compensated
at a rate below the wage.

For some workers, all job changes are undesirable

and, for the same wage, they would always prefer permanent work.

Other

workers, especially the young, may be willing to buy added flexibility in
their lives by choosing briefer jobs.

Both considerations can be embodied

in an indifference curve, though the slope of the curve is ambiguous.

The

efficient labor contract between employer and worker specifies a wage and
duration (or separation rate) that minimizes cost on the indifference
curve, or, equivalently, maximizes workers' satisfaction along an isocost
curve.

Three cases can be distinguished:

First, the efficient point may

occur where the marginal rate of substitution between cash income and the
separation rate is positive--workers are willing to give up some income to
achieve added flexibility:

-9-

wage

indifference curve

efficiency
wage

isocost curve

' " - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ; - - - - - - - separation rate
efficient
separation
rate

Figure 3
Secon~

the efficient point may occur where the marginal rate of substitution

is negative and workers require higher pay to compensate for shorter jobs
and more time spent unemployed:

wage
indifference curve

\
L

Figure 4

\

isocost curve
separation rate

-10-

Finally, the efficient combination may be a corner solution where jobs are
permanent:
wage

indifference curve

isocost curve
' - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - separation rate

Figure 5
How do the parties to the employment contract enforce an agreement
about duration?

Legal sanctions against quitting a job are weak.

Agree-

ments against layoffs are legally enforceable but are not widespread.
Designers of employment agreements need to provide the flexibility so that
a separation will occur when it is mutually advantageous to both parties
(this is the efficiency condition expressed by the tangency in the diagrams)
but not permit one party to take advantage of the other.

This problem has

been discussed extensively in the rather different context of employment
contracts where employers insure workers against fluctuations in demand.
The present discussion will not attempt much of an answer to the problem,
but rather will pursue the implications of contracting over duration in
cases where both parties follow the rules after the contract is made.

The

simplest rule is just to specify the duration of a job as a fixed number of

-11-

months or years, in which case the only problem is to enforce a prohibition
against quitting, without much assistance from the law.

A more efficient

procedure is to agree on an expected duration and permit quits or layoffs
provided they adhere to the agreed-upon separation probability.

Of course,

an agreement of this kind is virtually unenforceable, since it will never
be clear that any given quit or layoff is a violation.

However, a history

of layoff rates greater than the promised rate will injure the reputation
of the employer, and the same is true for a history of excessive quits on
the part of a worker.

Thus the inability to enforce the agreement in any

one instance does not make it meaningless to agree on expected duration.
It seems worth pursuing a theory of efficient duration ev~n though the
resulting agreements are not individually enforceable.
The analysis so far has been carried out in terms of tangencies of the
isocost and indifference curves, so it determines an expansion path of
alternative efficient combinations of wages and separation rates.

The

position of the workers' indifference curve depends on the cost of finding
new jobs, indexed by the job-finding rate, f.

The shape of the firms'

isocost curve depends on recruiting cost, p(f), which in turn depend on f.
The tangency of the two curves at a given level of worker satisfaction,
say y, can be described by a function of f and y:

s

= ~(f,y)

There is another function of f that gives the wage at the point of tangency,
but it will not be needed in what follows.

-12-

The Efficient Job-Finding Rate
In the previous section, the job-finding rate was held constant at an
arbitrary level and the considerations entering the determination of the
efficient separation rate were explored.

This section does the reverse.

The separation rate is held constant and the efficient job-finding rate is
derived.

Again, efficiency involves a tangency of an isocost curve to an

indifference curve:

wage, w
indifference
curve

isocost
curve

l..--------------->----I--- job-finding
1

rate, f

Figure 6
Both wages and

job-findin~

are goods to the consumer and bads to the pro-

ducer, so the two curves have conventional shapes.

The set of tangencies

traces out an expansion path of alternative efficient job-finding rates
given the separation rate:
f

= 1/J(s,y)

Again, the expansion path is indexed by the level of· satisfaction, y,
achieved by workers.

Each point on it represents the balancing of the

marginal costs to employers of congestion in the labor market associated

-13-

with higher job-finding rates against the marginal benefits to workers of
lower unemployment.
Under some further assumptions about costs and preferences, much more
can be said about the efficient job-finding rate.

Suppose that firms have

well-defined job slots, which need to be filled some of the time and not
others.

The firm's ability to avoid unnecessary staffing is limited by the

separation rate it has promised; in the limit of zero separations, jobs must
always be occupied if they are ever filled.

Let A(S) be the probability

that a job will be filled, as a function of the separation rate.
average wage cost associated with the job is WA(S).

Then the

The hiring rate needed

to keep the job filled is SA(S), which requires a flow of offers of p(f)sA(s).
Suppose each offer costs the firm rw (r is the fraction of a period's wage
that an offer costs).

Then the firm is interested in minimizing the cost

function,
C(w,s,f) = wA(s)(rsp(f) + 1)
Suppose further that workers are interested in maximizing effective income,
defined as the wage rate times the fraction of the time they can expect to
be employed:
y

=

(l-u)w

=

(l-f)s + f w

f

Then the efficient job-finding rate minimizes cost subject to the constraint
of achieving a given effective income, y:
Min WA(S) (rsp(f) + 1)
f

f .

subject to (l-f)s + f W = Y

-14-

or
Min (1 + s I-f)YA(S) (rsp(f) + 1)

Y

f

But this is equivalent to
l-f
Min (1 + s --f--) (rsp(f) + 1)
f

which involves no unknown functions.
function

~(StY)

The minimizing f is the value of the

defined earlier and does not depend on y.

Some representative values of

~

are:

recruiting
cost t r

separation
rate, s

efficient
job-finding
rate t f = ~ (s)

unemployment
rate, u =
s/(s+f/(l-f»

1.0

0.04

0.689

0.018

1.0

0.03

0.688

0.013

1.0

0.02

0.684

0.009

1.0

0.01

0.683

0.005

0.5

0.08

0.785

0.021

0.5

0.04

0.782

0.011

0.5

0.02

0.780

0.006

0.5

0.01

0.779

0.003

For a given value of the recruiting cost t r t the efficient job-finding rate
is almost unchanged across a wide range of separation rates t s.

Conse-

quentlYt almost all of the differences in unemployment rates reflect differences in separation rates t not in job-finding rates.

To put it another

waYt unemployment rates differ because the frequencies of unemployment
differ t not because the durations differ.

-15-

Even without the special separability assumptions that make it possible
to compute

~(s,y)

exactly, it seems reasonable to expect that

not depend very much on either of its arguments.

~(s,y)

will

The efficient job-finding

rate is determined primarily by the balance of search costs against recruiting costs.

Both are roughly proportional to wages, so the balance is not

sensitive to the level of satisfaction achieved by workers.

Similarly, both

the marginal benefit and cost of a high job-finding rate are roughly propor·tional to the separation rate, so it has little effect on the balance as
well.

Equilibrium Unemployment
Equilibrium in the labor market requires first that the number of
people looking for work balance the number of people who want to work, net
of those who are in the process of finding work, and second that the terms
of employment be efficient.

Conditions in the market are measured by the

wage rate, w, the separation rate, s, and the job-finding rate, f.
demand for labor is a function of these three variables:

The

D

L (w,s,f).

Similarly, the number of workers attracted to the market is a function of
S

the same variables, L (w,s,f).

However, a fraction, u, of the workers will

be looking for work at anyone instant, so the appropriate equilibrium
condition is

D
L (w,s,f)

=

s
(l-u)L(w,s,f)

or
D

L (w,s,f)

=

f

s

(l-f)s + f L (w,s,f)

-16-

The level of satisfaction achieved by workers is also a function of the
employment terms:

= g(w,s,f)

y

The analysis presented earlier in the paper characterized the conditions of
efficient employment in terms of the two functions,
s

= cj>(f,y)

and
f = $(s,y)

Given a wage level, w, the utility function g(w,s,f) and the two equations
can be solved to get the efficient separation rate and job-finding rate as
functions of w:
s

= s*(w)

f

= f*(w)

There are good reasons to believe that neither s nor f is very sensitive to
w--under the assumptions of separability introduced in the previous sections,
s* and f* are in fact just constants, independent of w.
Equilibrium in the market can now be expressed in a single equation:
D
L (w,s*(w),f*(w))
or in a diagram:

=

f*(w)
s
(l-f*(w))s*(w) + f*(w) L (w,s*(w),f*(w))

-17wage, w
(l-u(w))Ls (w)
LS(w)

~

w

--------~--~/

/

I
"- / I
7'~~LD(W)
I
1/
I
I
I

" - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - employment
E

L

Figure 7

Equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the demand schedule LD(w) and the
.
s
net supply of labor, (l-u(w))L (w).

The level of employment, E, is the

horizontal coordinate of this point, and the labor force, L, is the point
on the labor supply schedule, Ls (w), at the equilibrium wage.
Under mild assumptions about the smoothness of the various functions,
an equilibrium is guaranteed to exist in the labor market.

Beyond this

rather general statement, not much can be said about the equilibrium without
introducing further assumptions.

The separability conditions discussed in

the previous section turn out to give some much more definite results.

In

the first place, when both costs and utility are proportional to the wage,
the efficient separation rate and job-finding rate are independent of the
level of worker satisfaction.

The efficient separation rate,

obtained from

l-f
Min (1 + s --f--)A(s) (rsp(f) + 1)
s

~(f),

is

-18and depends only on f, the occupancy rate, A(S), and the recruiting rate, r.
The efficient job-finding rate, *(s), is obtained from

l-f
.
Min (1 + s --f--) (rsp(f) + 1)
f

and depends only on s and the recruiting cost, r, as discussed earlier.
The intersection of the two schedules determines the efficient levels of s
and f, and so determines the efficient unemployment rate, quite independent1y of the equilibrium levels of employment and the labor force.

Under

the separability assumptions, the natural unemployment rate is unaffected
by shifts in either the labor supply or labor demand functions.
It is possible (but tedious) to demonstrate the following propositions
about

~(f)

1.

and *(s):

The efficient separation rate, $(f), is an increasing function of
the job-finding rate, f--jobs are briefer if they are easier to
find.

2.

The efficient separation rate is a decreasing function of the
recruiting cost, r.

3.

The efficient separation rate increases if the occupancy rate,

A(S), shifts so as to lower the marginal cost of a higher separation rate.
4.

The efficient job-finding rate, *(s), is an increasing function of
the

sep~ration

rate--if jobs last longer, they should not be as

easy to find.
5.

The efficient job-finding rate is a decreasing function of the
recruiting cost.

-196.

The efficient job-finding rate is unaffected by shifts in the
occupancy rate, A(S).

As shown in the previous section, the efficient job-finding rate, ¢(s), is
very insensitive to s.

It appears that the efficient separation rate,

~(f),

is similarly insensitive to f, though this depends on the curvature of the
occupancy rate function, A(S).

If so, one schedule is nearly horizontal and

the other is nearly vertical:
f

Hf)
/
/
/

f* .

-=..=-- - - - - - t

¢ (s)

I
I
I

I..-------------------s
s*

Figure 8

The efficient combination is at the intersection of the two schedules, f*
and s*, but f* is pretty much determined by ¢(s) and s* by
increase in recruiting costs shifts
both f* and s* decline.

An

to the left and ¢(s) downward, so

Turnover declines, but the effect on the natural

unemployment rate is ambiguous.
~(f)

~(f)

~(f).

A change in the occupancy rate that shifts

to the right has no effect on ¢(s), so almost all the effect is to

increase the separation rate.

The natural unemployment rate increases.

Evidence from cross sections has tended to show that most differences
in unemployment rates are associated with differences in separation rates,

-20~

not in job-finding rates (Hall, 1972).

In terms of the model presented

here, such variations are more likely to reflect differences in the costs
of turnover to employers, as measured by A(S), rather than in recruiting
costs, r.

Recall that r is stated as the number of periods of wages, so it

automatically makes recruiting costs proportionqtely higher for workers with
higher wages.

Concluding Remarks
In the model of this paper, the natural unemployment rate is the outcome of efficient employment arrangements.

When the labor market is in

equilibrium and unemployment is at its natural level, no alternative combination of wages, job duration, and job-finding rates could make workers
better off without also increasing costs to employers.

If the matching

process embodied in the model is the best that can be done to bring workers
and employers together, then the natural rate just described is also the
social optimum.

There are no externalities in the model, and no good case

for government intervention in the labor market.

It appears that the

socially optimal, natural unemployment rate is quite low.

The only influ-

ence limiting the tightness of the labor market is the cost of congestion
in recruiting that tight markets impose on employers.
only as the

job~finding

This is important

rate approaches one.

How strong are the economic forces that push the labor market toward
its equilibrium?

A full answer requires a theory of the market in disequi-

librium,which exceeds the ambitions of this paper.
indicated by the equilibrium analysis, however.

A few comments do seem

Of the three components of

the employment bargain, two--the wage and the separation rate--are under the
direct control of the firm.

It is hard to see how a disequilibrium could

-21-

persist where firms had an unexploited opportunity to reduce costs by changing these two terms.
equilibrium.

But this does not imply a speedy movement to full

Unemployment could be far above the natural rate, and yet the

tradeoff between wages and the duration of employment could be efficient.
This will occur if the job-finding rate is below its efficient level.

Unem-

ployment will be high, but the wage-duration terms must be more favorable
than their equilibrium values in order to attract workers, because they know
how hard it is to find work.

In order to lower wage costs, firms must offer

prospective workers better chances of finding jobs than prevail in the market
at large.

If employers are large and can communicate the existence of job

openings effectively to job-seekers, then they may be able to attract workers
at the fully efficient terms.

Smaller firms who recruit more passively can-

not do this by themselves, but some kind of intermediary could establish a
private labor market where conditions could be regulated to maintain efficiency.

Relative to a slack general market, wages would be lower, and so

would labor costs, but workers' incomes would be as high as in the general
market because work would be easier to find.

Probably the easiest way would

be to prescribe one or both of the terms of employment (wage and duration).
This is not altogether different from the activities of firms offering
temporary clerical help in the United States today.
Simple unilateral activities of individual firms or workers do not move
the labor market quickly to the point of efficient employment terms and to
the natural unemployment rate.

The types of activity that achieve the effi-

cient job-finding rate take time and resources, so there is every reason to
believe that a market could spend long episodes with unemployment above or
below the natural rate.

-22-

The analysis of this paper seems to point in the direction of a natural
unemployment rate that is largely unaffected by general economic forces.
Under plausible assumptions about costs and preferences, the natural rate in
a market is independent of supply and demand or the wage level in the market.
It depends only on certain relative costs that seem likely to remain stable
over time.

Fluctuations in the natural rate itself seem unlikely to be an

important part of cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.

Rather, the analy-

sis suggests that fluctuations in labor market conditions of a sort that are
difficult for individual firms to offset are the most promising explanations
of the facts.

-23References
Martin Feldstein, "The Importance of Temporary Layoffs:

An Empirical

Analysis,"BrookingsPapers on Economic Activity, 1975:3, pp. 725-744.
Milton Friedman, "The Role of Monetary Policy,ll American Economic
Review, vol. 58, pp. 1-15, March 1968.
Robert E. Hall, "Turnover in the Labor Force," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1972:3, pp. 709-756.
Robert E. Lucas, Jr., and Edward C. Prescott, "Equilibrium Search and
Unemployment," Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 7, pp. 188-209, February
1974.

