                NBER Working Paper Series




       THE NATURE AND MEASUREMENT OF UNEMPLOYMENT



                     Robert E. Hall
           National Bureau of Economic Research


                   Working Paper No. 252




        National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
     204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305



                         July 1978




This research was supported by the National Science Foundation
and is part of the NBER's program of research on Economic
Fluctuations. The paper has not undergone the review accorded
official NBER publications; in particular, it has not been
submitted for approval by the Board of Directors.

This research was carried out while I was a Fellow of the
Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. The
tabulations reported here were carried out by Martin Van Denburgh
with support from the National Bureau's Project on Youth
Unemployment. James Medoff provided exceptionally valuable
advice and assistance at every stage of the work.
                                                       NBER Working Paper No. 252
                                                              July 1978



               ThE NATURE AND MEASUREMENT OF UNEMPLOYMENT

                            Robert E. Hall


                              Abstract



         Problems of defining and measuring unemployemnt in the contem-
porary American economy are examined here using data from the official
employment survey. The paper finds that only a minority of the unem-
ployed conform to the conventional picture of a worker who has lost one
job and is looking f or another job. Other important categories are those
who have jobs but are not at work because the jobs have not yet started
or because of layoff, workers who are in normal spells between temporary
jobs, people who are looking into the possibility of work as an alterna-
tive to household duties, school, or retirement, and people who have
come back into the labor force. None of these categories is dominant.
One of the most significant findings is the large number of the unem-
ployed (close to a million in 1977) who are looking for temporary work.
Another important finding is that only a minority of the unemployed are
looking for work as their major activity during the week of the survey.
The majority of those classified officially as unemployed are identified
by the household as keeping house, going to school, or retired.


                                             Robert E. Hall
                                             National Bureau of Economic Research
                                             204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
                                             Stanford, CA 94305

                                             415/326—7160
    The unemployment rate is one of the most important economic statistics

published by the federal government. A higher unemployment rate is univer-

sally recognized as a leading symptom of malfunction of the economy, though

there is much disagreement about the cause of the malfunction. This paper

examines the problems of defining and measuring unemployment in the contem-

porary American economy. The raw material for the paper comes from the

monthly survey of households conducted by the Census Bureau, the Current

Population Survey. The central problem of measuring unemployment is to

convert the answers to a long series of questions into a judgment whether a

person is unemployed, employed, or out of the labor force. Not only is this

problem more complicated than is generally recognized, but the types of

activities that are counted as unemployment are much more varied than even

sophisticated commentators realize. Only a minority of the unemployed

conform to the conventional picture of a worker who has lost one job and is

looking for another job. Other important categories are workers who have

jobs but are not at work either because the jobs have not started yet or

because they are on layoff, workers who are in normal spells between jobs in

sequences of temporary jobs, people who are looking into the possibility of

work as an alternative to household duties or retirement, and people who

have come back into the labor force either for the first time or after a

period out of the labor force. None of these categories is dominant.

     The data examined in this paper yield two surprising findings. First,

an important fraction of the unemployed——close to a million people in 1977——

are looking for temporary work. Probably many others have become unemployed

because earlier temporary jobs have ended, but the data are not very inform-

ative on this point. The job that ends by mutual prior agreement, with
                                      2




neither a layoff nor a quit, Is apparently an important factor in the overall

flow into unemployment.

    The second surprise is that only a minority of the unemployed are

identified as looking for work when the household is asked what they were

doing most of the survey week. In May 1974, 1.7 million people were identi-

fied as looking for work, while the official unemployment count was 4.4

million. Over half of the people officially counted as unemployed were

identified by the household as keeping house, going to school, or retired.



Consideration in Defining Unemployment

     A survey can sort the population into three general categorles——(l)

those who are working, (2) those who are not working but are interested in

working, and (3) those who are not interested in working. There is little

disagreement that people in categories 1 and 3 should not be counted as

unemployed, though there Is a separate question whether some in category 1

might be underemployed. The major problem in defining unemployment is to

decide who in category 2 is unemployed and who is employed or out of the

labor force. The following considerations are of significant numerical

importance in making this decision:

     1. Many of those in category 2 actually have jobs but are not at work.

They may be ill, on vacation, on strike, or unable to work because of bad

weather. they may have been laid off with a definite promise of recall, or

with a likelihood of recall at an undetermined date in the future. They may

have just taken a job but not yet have started work.

     2. Some people may have only a weak interest in working. In particular,

they may not be doing anything to find work. Of course, some may have looked
                                    3




intensively in the past and have now given up, in spite of a genuine interest

in working.

     3. Some people are interested in working and are looking actively, but

are not yet available for work. High school and college students looking in

the spring for suer jobs are the obvious example, but many others look for

work in anticipation of recovery from an illness or in other similar circum-

stances.

     4. In some lines of work, jobs are temporary and workers spend time

between jobs as a matter of course. Construction work and substitute teach-

ing are leading examples, but temporary jobs are an important feature of

many other labor markets as well.

     It does not seem possible to resolve the definitional Issues surrounding

unemployment in an explicit analytical fashion. It is hard to go much beyond

the general principle that the unemployment rate ought to measure the success

of the labor market in providing work for everyone who is interested in

working and has a realistic idea of what kind of work he is qualified to

perform and how much it pays. This principle suggests that workers who have

jobs but are not at work because of illness, vacation, strikes, or weather

should not be counted as unemployed. It might also suggest that those who

have jobs but have not yet started work might not be counted, though this

Is more controversial (and at variance with official U.S. procedures). It

further suggests the exclusion of those who are not yet available for work

at the time they are looking.

     The general principle is not of much help in resolving the more contro-

versial issue of the treatment of people who consider themselves unemployed

but are not actively looking for work. No feasible questionnaire could

determine if a person's job aspirations were realistic. The operational
                                   4




choices are either to accept the household's perception of unemployment——and

thus to count as unemployed the person who refuses to hold any job but presi-

dent of General Motors——or to rely on overt behavior, namely specific efforts

to find work. Interestingly, it appears that the efforts in the survey

to base the definition on overt behavior causes more people to be counted

as unemployed than would be if the household's judgment were accepted.




The Current Population Survey
                                              obtains data on nearly 100,000
     The Current Population Survey, or CPS,

'adults and teenagers each month. Many kinds of questions are asked, but

this paper restricts itself to discussing the sequence of questions about

current labor market activities that is asked every month for every individ-

ual aged 16 or above. Though the questions are asked for every individual,

 it is important to understand that the individuals do not usually answer the

 questions directly. Rather, the interview is conducted with a single adult
                                                   who answers for every member
 member of the household, called the respondent,

 of the household.

      The sequence of questions focuses on a single week, called the survey

 week, which is the calendar week just preceding the interview (interviews

 are conducted on Monday through Friday of the week containing the 12th of
                                                       What was X doing most
 the month). The sequence begins with the question,
                                                   school, or something else?"
 of last week——working, keeping house, going to
                                                     of X). For those who were
  (the interviewer uses the person's name in place

                                            "Did X do any work at all last
 not at work, the question is then asked,
                                       house?" Those for whom the answer is
 week, not counting work around the

  "yes" are then treated as if work had been their principal activity. Even
                                    5




if a person was reported as looking for work most of last week, no further

questions about unemployment are asked.

    The next major question in the sequence, asked for everybody who did not

work in the survey week, is "Did X have a job or business from which he was

temporarily absent or on layoff last week?" This question helps to separate

job—hclders from the jobless——in any given week, many job—holders are not at

work, and some of them probably ought to be counted as unemployed. For non—

working job—holders, the respondent is asked, "Why was X absent from work

last week?" Possible answers are "own illness," "on vacation," "bad

weather," "labor dispute," "new job to begin within 30 days," "temporary

layoff (under 30 days)," "indefinite layoff (30 days or more or no definite

recall date)," and "other."

    For those who are not job—holders, the next major question is "Has X

been looking for work during the past four weeks?" For those for whom the

answer is "yes," a sequence of questions is then asked to get further inf or—

mation about job—seeking. First is "What has X been doing in the last four

weeks to find work?" The interviewer does not suggest alternative answers,

but the survey form records "checked with public employment agency,"

"checked with private employment agency," "checked with employer directly,"

"checked with friends or relatives," "placed or answered a4s," "nothing,"

and "other (specify in notes, e.g., MDTA, union or professional register,

etc.)." This question can be used to exclude from unemployment people who

are considered by the household to be unemployed but who are not actually

looking for work. The instructions to the interviewers in the Interviewer's

Reference Manual (2) make it clear that the response "nothing" is to be used

only in the case where a person has literally not done anything to look for

work: "This category is provided to handle those rare cases where the
                                        6



respondent answered 'Looking' to item 19 [the question about activity last

week] or 'Yes' to item 22 [the question about looking for work in the past

four weeks], but did nothing to find work" (p. D6—385, revised Feburary 1976).

       Another critical question asked for job—seekers is "Is there any reason

why X could not take a job last week?" Possible affirmative answers are

"already has a job," "temporary illness," "going to school," and "other."

This question can be used to exclude people who are looking for jobs in

anticipation of future availability for work, notably students.

       For job—seekers, the respondent is also asked, "Why did X start looking

for work? Was it because X lost or quit a job at that time (pause) or was

there some other reason?" Possible reasons are "lost job" (this applies to

jobs that simply came to an end as well as layoffs and discharges), "quit

job," "left school," "wanted temporary work," and "other." This important

question is unfortunately somewhat ambiguous. For workers who have lost or

left one long—term job and are looking for another, it is safe to assume

that   the response will be recorded as "lost job" or "quit job." In   the

Interviewer's   Reference   Manual, interviewers are instructed to mark "left

school"   only for people who do not expect to return to school, not for those
who are looking for work during a vacation. Interviewers are told to mini-

mize the "other" category by probing to see if people fit in any of the

other categories. The Manual gives some examples of valid uses of the

"other" category: "well enough to work again," "discharged from Armed

Forces," and "children grown——free to work now." This leaves the "wanted

temporary work" response, which is a major fraction of all responses.

"Wanted temporary work" is difficult to interpret. The response is not

logically mutually exclusive of the others——a person could become unemployed

by quitting an earlier job and then decide to look for temporary work. The
                                     7




survey requires a single response, however, and is clearly set up to favor

the "lost job" or "quit job" categories. The substantial number of workers,

especially young people, who are recorded as wanting temporary work probably

consist of two groups——those who are looking for work during school vacations

and those who hold one temporary job after another. Some of the latter may

be classified instead as job losers, however,



The Official Definition of Unemployment

     Since the modification of the CPS in 1967 in accordance with the report

of the Gordon Co=ittee (1), the definition of unemployment in the U.S. has

embodied the following resolution of the definitional problems listed

earlier:

     1. People with jobs but not at work because of illness, vacation, bad

weather, or labor disputes are counted as employed. Those with jobs but not

at work because they are on layoff, and those with new jobs that begin within

30 days are counted as unemployed.

     2. In principle, only those people who are actively looking for work

are counted as unemployed. Specifically, if the respondent cannot think of

anything that the individual did to look for work in the four weeks before

the survey, the individual is not counted as unemployed. However, the

definition of activity is sufficiently broad that this test is very weak,

and almost everyone who has done anything in the four weeks is counted as

unemployed. For example, If the interviewer marks "checked with friends or

relatives" or "other," the individual automatically satisfies the test.

     3. The official definition compromises on the issue of whether to

count as unemployed people who are looking but are not available for work.

Those for whom the respondent answers "no" to the question, "Is there any
                                    8



reason why X could not take a job last week?" are counted as unemployed.

Among those for whom the answer is "yes," if the reason is "already has a

job" or "temporary illness," they are counted as unemployed even though they

were not available. If the reason is "going to school" or "other," they are

not counted as unemployed. Note that this does not exclude students who are

looking for work unless the respondent thinks they are not currently avail-

able for work.

     4. The official definition of unemployment makes no attempt to exclude

intervals between temporary jobs. For example, substitute teachers are

counted as unemployed whenever they are not actually in the classroom for

the survey week.




Unemployment in 1977

     Table 1 presents a breakdown of unemployment in 1977 according to the

official definition. These data are annual averages of monthly figures.

Of the total of 6.9 million unemployed, 3.9 million previously held jobs

from which they were laid off or quit. The remaining 2.9 million became

unemployed after being out of the labor force. The bulk of those who previ-

ously were at work, 2.2 million unemployed workers, have simply lost their

jobs. Unlike the 0.8 million who are on layoff, they have no expectation

of returning to their earlier jobs, and unlike the 0.9 million who quit,

they did not become unemployed through unilateral acts of their own. How-

ever, people who held jobs which simply ended because the duration was

agreed In advance are included in the job—losers——not every job loser has

unexpectedly lost a job he thought was permanent.

    One of the most striking findings of Table 1 is the importance of

temporary work as a source of unemployment among those who were previously
                                      9




out of the labor force. Almost a million workers——13 percent of all the

unemployed——are identified as looking for temporary work. Recall that this

category applies only to people who have not previously been at work. The

overall importance of temporary jobs as a source of unemployment is under-

stated because large numbers of job—losers are undoubtedly between temporary

jobs as well.


                       Table 1. Unemployment in 1977

                                                           percent
                                            number           of
                                          (thousands)       total

            On layoff                         853             12

                temporary                     234              3

                indefinite                    620              9

            Job—losers                       2249             33

            Job—leavers                      889              13

            Wanted temporary work             924             13

            Left school                      469               7

            Other                            1470             21

            Total                           6855             100

                    Source: Unpublished BLS tabulations.


Another surprise is the relative unimportance of the flow of young people

out of high school and college and into the pool of the unemployed. Only

seven percent of total unemployment in 1977 was associated with this flow.

     There are dramatic differences in the proportion of young people among

the various categories of unemployment:
                                  10




                                            fraction aged
             category                        under 25 (%)

             laid   off                           20

             lost job                             33

             left job                             47

             looking for temporary work           74

             left school                          88

             other                                48


Workers on layoff tend to be older and more experienced. They have developed

seniority rights which give them a claim to return to their jobs after lay-

off, and the jobs are sufficiently attractive so that they generally wish to

return to them. The job losers who do not expect to return to their previous

jobs are somewhat younger, but two—thirds of them are 25 or older.   Job—

leavers are much younger on the average——almost half are under 25. This

reflects the smaller job—specific human capital and other sources of job

attachment among younger and less experienced workers. The group of people

who come into the labor force looking for temporary work is younger still;

only a quarter are 25 or over. Many of them are in school and are looking

for part—time work. The school leavers are young almost by definition, so it

is no surprise that 88 percent are under 25. Finally, the residual group of

entrants labeled "other" is almost half under 25. Though the stereotype of

this group is the woman who starts looking for work after her children are

grown, in fact the group contains many younger people as well.

     The unemployed are almost evenly split between men and women, though

men predominate in the layoff and job loss categories and women in job

leavers, temporary work, and "other":
                                        11




(                                         fraction    who   fraction who
          category                           are men (%)    are women (%)

          all    unemployed                      52               48

          laid off                               63               37

          lost job                               64               36

          left job                               45               55

          looking for temporary work             43               57

          left school                            52               48

          other                                  39               61


    Men tend to have the kinds of jobs that are interrupted by layoffs or are

    terminated by employer actions, while women are a little more likely to

    become unemployed by quitting, or to become unemployed after being out of

    the labor force.

         The educational attainment of the unemployed differs in important ways

    among the various categories (these data refer to those aged 20 and above):


                                         fraction who         fraction who
                                        did not go to         had at least
       category                        high school (%)      some college (%)

       laid    off                             16                  15

       lost job                                14                  24

       left job                                 8                  32

       looking for temporary work              13                  35

       other                                   11                  27


    Workers subject to layoffs generally work with their hands and are most

    likely to have only grade school education and least likely to have gone to

    college. Extensive job—specific skills and the value of seniority bind them

    to their jobs. It is mutually beneficial to worker and employer that they
                                   12




return to their old jobs after layoff.    Job losers have somewhat more formal

education and job leavers have much more.    These workers hold a larger frac-

tion of their human capital in a form which is transferable from one employer

to another and so incur a lower cost to an irrevocable separation from a job.
                                                  fraction of workers with some
Curiously enough, the category with the largest

college are those looking for temporary work, though, of course, many of them

are college students looking for work while attending college.
                                                worked at some time in the past
     Most of the unemployed——86 percent——have

and so can be assigned an occupation. The various categories of unemployment

differ sharply In their occupational compositions:


        category                         major occupations (%)

        laid   off                       operatives: 38
                                         craft workers: 19
                                         laborers: 14
                                         clerical workers: 10

                                         operatives   23
        lost job
                                         clerical workers: 15
                                         craft workers: 15
                                         service workers: 15

        left job
                                         service workers: 22
                                         clerical workers: 20
                                         operatives: 20
                                         craft workers: 9

        looking for temporary work       service workers: 28
                                         clerical workers: 22
                                         operatives: 14
                                         laborers: 10

         other                            service workers: 25
                                          clerical workers: 21
                                          operatives: 18
                                          professional & technical: 8


  Layoff unemployment Is dominated by the operatives who are employed in the

  highly unionized and volatile durables industries. Collective bargaining
                                          13



    agreements protect the right of a worker who is laid off to return to his

    job in this sector. Operatives also figure strongly in unemployment due to

    job loss, but other large occupations also contribute. Job leavers are more

    likely to be service or clerical workers, and the same holds even more

    strongly for temporary work and "other" (left school is omitted here because

    the occupation of previous employment has little bearing on the occupation

    being sought after leaving school).

         Most of the unemployed——79 percent——are looking for full—time work.

    The minority who are looking for part—time work, notably students and

    parents of young children, are concentrated disproportionately in the cate-

    gories of temporary work and "other." Of those looking for temporary work,

    65 percent are interested only in part—time jobs.

         All of this adds up to the following stylized portrait of unemployment

    in the contemporary American economy:


                                                             fraction of total
    typical member of group                                  unemployment (%)

    50 year old man with a grade school education, on                12
    layoff from a job on an assembly line

    35 year old man with a high school education, who                33
    has lost a job as a mechanic and is looking for
    another job

    25 year old woman with two years of college, who                 13
    quit a job as a typist and is looking for a new job

    17 year old who is looking for a temporary job in                13
    the afternoon during the school year

    recent college graduate who is looking for full—                  7
    time work
•


    30 year old woman who Is looking for a job as a                  21
    waitress and has not worked in the past 9 months
                                   14



Behavior of the Components of Unemployment Over Time

     The various components of unemployment differ enormously in their

cyclical patterns. As Table 2 shows, the components that draw most heavily

from the cyclically sensitive manufacturing sector respond most strongly to

recessions. Of the increase in the overall unemployment rate of 1.4 per-

centage points from 1969 to 1970, a mild recession, 0.4 were accounted for

by a doubling of the contribution from layoffs, and 0.5 by a large increase

from job loss. The contribution from job leavers, those looking for tempo-

rary work, and school leavers increased only slightly. The "other" category

increased by 0.5 percentage point, though this may not be typical. The much

more severe recession in 1975 was even more concentrated among the layoff

and job loss categories. Of the total increase of 2.9 percentage points of

unemployment, 1.0 came from increased layoffs and 1.3 from increased job

losses. The remaining 0.6 percentage point was spread fairly evenly among

the other categories. It is especially noteworthy that the contribution of

those leaving school increased only slightly even in a very deep recession.

The market continued to provide jobs for new graduates even though millions

of established workers were on layoff or had lost their jobs.

     Though Table 2 covers only the single decade since the Inception of

the revised unemployment survey, certain important trends are apparent.

First, layoffs are declining as a source of unemployment. In 1973, layoffs

accounted for 0.5 percentage point of unemployment, the same as in 1967, but

total unemployment in 1973 was 4.9 percent, well above the 1967 total of 3.8

percent. By 1977, layoff unemployment was down to its 1971 level of 0.9

percent, while the total unemployment rate in 1977 was well above its 1971

level. Layoffs are concentrated in manufacturing, which is a declining

sector relative to the rest of the economy. Moreover, the markets for the
                                       15




kinds of workers who are eligible for layoffs——blue collar, older, less

educated——have been notably tight relative to the general labor market in

the 1970s.


         Table 2. Components of the Unemployment Rate, 1967—77

                     Percent of labor force unemployed because:
                                                                    total
              laid      lost    left        temp.   left           unemp.
     Year     off        job     lob        work    school other    rate

     1967     0.5        1.1    0.6          0.6     0.3    0.9     3.8
     1968     0.4        0.9    0.6          0.7     0.2    0.8     3.6
     1969     0.4        0.8    0.5          0.7     0.2    0.8     3.5
     1970     0.8        1.4    0.7          0.8     0.3    1.4     4.9
     1971     0.9        1.9    0.7          0.9     0.4    1.9     5.9
     1972     0.7        1.8    0.7          0.9     0.4    1.2     5.6
     1973     0.5        1.4    0.8          0.8     0.4    1.1     4.9
     1974     0.8        1.6    0.8         0.9      0.5    1.1     5.6
     1975     1.8        2.9    0.9          1.1     0.5    1.3     8.5
     1976     1.1        2.7    0.9          1.0     0.5    1.5     7.7
     1977     0.9        2.3    0.9          0.9     0.5    1.5     7.0

                     Source: Unpublished BLS tabulations.


     The "other" category of entrants to the labor force who are not looking

for temporary work and have not just left school also shows a downward trend

over the decade——it actually contributed less to unemployment in the deep

recession year, 1975 (1.3 percentage points) than in the previous mild

recession year, 1970 (1.4 percentage points). Unemployment in this category

has declined relative to the total unemployment rate in spite of the strong

influx of women into the labor force during this period. Apparently many of

them are looking for work in the sectors where job opportunities have

remained favorable. The category of people looking for temporary work has

likewise not been a contributor to the general strong rise in unemployment
                                     16




over the period. In 1977, 0.9 percentage point of unemployment were classi—     (


fied   in the temporary work category, the same as in 1971.

       Most of the serious worsening of unemployment over the decade has

appeared in the category of job losers, though job leavers have made a

contribution as well. Simple departure from jobs, because employers decided

that workers were no longer needed, because jobs came to an end by earlier

mutual agreement (a phenomenon that the CPS regrettably does not measure),

or because workers decided jobs were no longer suitable, have become more

frequent over the period, and new jobs have become harder to find. Though

the matter cannot be pursued here, it is worth mentioning that most of the

increase in unemployment of this kind has occurred among young, better—

educated workers who are looking for jobs as professional, technical, or

clerical workers. The contribution to unemployment from operatives,

laborers, and service workers, and from older and less—educated workers in

general, has declined markedly over the decade.



Potential Modifications of the Definition of Unemployment

       In the list of the major issues in the definition of unemployment at

the outset of this paper, the first was the treatment of workers who have

jobs but are not at work. The official definition counts as unemployed

those who are on layoff or are about to start work, but excludes those who

are ill, on vacation, on strike, or unable to work because of bad weather.

Possible alternatives are:

       1. Make unemployment synonymous with joblessness by excluding everyone

who holds a job, including those on layoff.

       2. Exclude those who are about to start work.
                                    17




     3. Include not only everyone counted by the CPS but also those who are

unable to work because of bad weather.        -




Recently the Bureau of Labor Statistics has begun to publish the first
alternative, under the name of "job seekers." The job—seeking rate is

essentially the total unemployment rate less the contribution of layoffs

(see the first column in Table 2). It is about 0.8 percentage point lower

than the official unemployment rate on the average and has significantly

smaller cyclical fluctuations. For example, the job—seeking rate rose from

4.8 percent to 6.7 percent from 1974' to 1975, while the unemployment rate

rose from 5.6 to 8.5 percent.

     The exclusion of people who are about to start work would have a much

smaller effect. In 1977, an average of 125,000 workers, or 0.14 percent of

the labor force, were counted as unemployed because they were about to start

work. Though exclusion of this group would make a good deal of sense, it

would have little practical effect. Many of the people in this category are

students who have found summer jobs but have not started work because they

are still in school. Since students who are still in school and are looking

for summer work are now excluded from the unemployed, it would only be

consistent to exclude those who have already found work.

     The inclusion of workers with jobs but not at work because of bad

weather would have little effect as well. In May 1974, only 54,000 workers

fell in this category.' Although the category swells in winter months, its

average over the year is probably not enough to add even one tenth of a

percentage point to the unemployment rate.




     1This and other statistics for May 1974 and May 1975 come from a tabula—
tion of the public use tapes from the CPS, carried out by Martin Van Denburgh.
                                  18



    The second major issue is the Identification of people who are truly

unemployed but who are unable to find work. The CPS accepts any affirmative

answer to the question about job—seeking activity as sufficient to classify

a person as unemployed. By far the most coion answer is also probably the

least suspicious as an indicator of serious effort to find work: "checked

with employer directly," which was listed by 4.2 million of the 5.9 million

job seekers on the average in 1977. The two least convincing answers,

"checked with friends and relatives" and "other" were listed by 0.8 million

and 0.4 million, respectively. Many of these people also were reported as

using some of the other job—seeking methods as well, so it is likely that a

total exclusion of the doubtful replies would lower the unemployment rate by

somewhat less than one percentage point. Clearly, 'the CPS procedure for

identifying genuine job—seeking activities should be improved. It would be

better to ask about physical activities such as trips and telephone calls

rather than the vague "checked with" question.

     Very few workers who are identified as looking for work by the house-

hold are excluded from the official measure of unemployment because of a

lack of job—seeking activity. Their total number in May 1974 was 178,000.

Extending the definition of unemployment to include this group would raise

the unemployment rate by about 0.2 percentage point. Recall that the

instructions to the CPS interviewers are to minimize this category.

     The third issue is the treatment of people who are looking for work but

are not actually available for work. This category reaches its seasonal

peak in May, when close to a million high school and college students are

looking for work to begin in June. The exclusion of this group from unem-

ployment was one of the recommendations of the Gordon Committee. Adding

them back to the unemployment rate would raise it by around one tenth of a
                                      19



percentage point. Another potential reason for unavailability is temporary

illness. Workers in this category are included among the unemployed in the

official definition but their number is trivial: 44,000 in May 1974. The

definition also counts people who are said to be unavailable because they

already have jobs (which is virtually contradictory in view of the design

of the questionnaire), but they are even scarcer: 15,000 in May 1974. On

the other hand, people are excluded from unemployment if they are unavailable

for "other" reasons——there were 107,000 in this category in May 1974.

        The final issue is the treatment of people whose work is explicitly

temporary and who are between jobs. The importance of "wanted temporary

work" as one of the reasons for unemployment suggests that the number of

such workers who are counted as unemployed is quite large, but the deficien-

cies in the CPS procedures mentioned in earlier sections obscures the precise

magnitude of this kind of unemployment. It would certainly be desirable to

modify the CPS questions so as to get a clearer measure of the role of tempo-

rary work in unemployment. It is unclear at this stage how or whether the

definition of unemployment ought to be changed to take account of temporary

work.




The Major Activity of an Unemployed Worker

        The first question in the CPS questionnaire, "What was X doing most of

last week?", can be used to classify the population by major activity in the

survey week. In the case of unemployment, this classification provides a

good deal of independent information about the nature of unemployment because

almost no use is made of the answer to the first question in the official

method for counting the unemployed (the answer is used only to resolve

inconsistencies in answers to other questions). The designers of the CPS
                                   20




did not wish to rely on the household's perception of unemployment, but

instead asked the more detailed sequence of questions about job—seeking

activities discussed earlier in this paper.

     The classification by major activity can be used in two ways. First,

it will show how important the more detailed questions about unemployment are

in reclassifying workers who are considered unemployed by the household into

other categories. In particular, the tests for specific job—seeking activi-

ties and availability for work should cause some people who are considered

unemployed to be counted as out of the labor force in the official data. In

fact, though, the overwhelming majority of those whose major activity in the

survey week is looking for work are counted as unemployed:


        Percent distribution of individuals whose major activity
            in the survey week was looking for work, May 1974

                                                                   4 percent
     Working

     Employed but not at work                                      1 percent

                                                                   88 percent
     Unemployed

     Not in the labor force due to no job—seeking activity          4 percent

     Not in the labor force because of unavailability               3 percent



Again, neither the activity nor availability tests have large effects on the

 count of the unemployed.

      The second use of the major activity is to see how households view the

 status of those workers who are actually classified as unemployed in the

 official tabulation. This gives rise to a rather surprising finding:     Less

 than half of those officially counted as unemployed have as their major

 activity "looking for work." Following is the percent distribution among

 major activities of the individuals officially classified as unemployed in

 May 1974:
                                  21




           Working                                0 percent

           With a job but not at work             7 percent

           Looking for work                      35 percent

           Keeping house                         24 percent

           Going to school                       20 percent

           Unable to work                         0 percent

           Retired or other                      14 percent


Presumably the great majority of the seven percent who have jobs but are not

at work are on layoff and would also be considered unemployed by the house-

hold, even though job—seeking is not their major activity.

     The key unemployment question, "Has X been looking for work during the

past four weeks?" brings in a large number of people for whom some other

activity absorbed more of their time than did looking for work. Many are

keeping house, going to school, or are more or less retired. In part this

shows that the unemployed try to make good use of their time until a job

comes along. In part it also shows that unemployment is difficult to define

and measure among groups facing marginal decisions between work on the one

hand and household duties, education, or retirement on the other. Current

procedures inevitably tend to classify many of these people as unemployed,

not because they are out of work in the usual sense, but because they did

look into some possibility of work in the four weeks before the survey. The

sheer number of people who are added to the unemployment count beyond those

for whom job seeking is their major activity is impressive:
                                   22




                                                   Unemployment in thousands
                                                   May 1974         May 1975

Adults

  Official unemployment                              3106             6834

  Number of people whose major activity
    is looking for work                              1387             2814

Teenagers

  Official unemployment                              1284             1727

 Number of people whose major activity
   is looking for work                                344              507


In May 1975, when the official unemployment rate was 9.0 percent, only 4.0

percent of the labor force were looking for work as their major activity.



Conclusions and Recommendations

     The procedure in use in the United States can be summarized without

serious Injustice as follows: people are counted as unemployed if they are

not working and if they are on layoff or they have done anything in the four

weeks before the survey to look for work. This is a broad definition, in

that almost everybody whose major activity is looking for work, according to

the household, Is counted as unemployed, and millions of others besides.

The application of different criteria for unemployment to the data from the

existing CPS would not markedly change the unemployment count unless the

basic procedure Itself were changed, for example, by dropping those on lay-

off or requiring that job—seeking be the major activity in the survey week.

Both of these changes would be extreme.

     This study of the data has come to two important conclusions about

weaknesses In the CPS questionnaire. First, the role of temporary employ-

ment cannot be clarified because of the defective question about the reason
                                   23



for unemployment. The question should be modified so that the alternatives

are "lost job," "left job," "temporary job came to an end," and "entered

labor force." Then a second question should ask if the job currently being

sought is temporary. These changes would significantly improve knowledge

of the sources of unemployment. It would not by itself have any effect on

reported unemployment.

     The second and more difficult problem is the measurement of job—seeking

activity. The procedure currently in use is quite unsatisfactory because it

permits almost meaningless activities like "checked with friends and rela-

tives" and "other" to count a person as unemployed. The responses on the

questionnaire ought to be replaced by concrete activities such as "made

telephone calls" and "made a trip." 'rhe four—week period over which activi-

ties are measured also may be too long. Reducing it to, say, one week would

help solve the problem of counting as unemployed people who are no longer

intending to work, but would be inappropriate in markets where job—seekers

can register with unions or agencies and let employers come to them. Perhaps

the four—week period could be retained for these activities and a one—week

period be applied to telephone calls and visits. In any case, the instruc-

tions to the interviewers about the activity question should be changed to

alert them to cases where people are not unemployed at the time of the survey

even though they did a little job seeking in the recent past. Any changes

in the procedures for measuring job—seeking activities would have important

effects on the reported level of the unemployment rate and would raise

problems of historical comparability.
                                  24




                              References


(1) President's Committee to Appraise Employment and Unemployment Statis—
     tics, Measuring Employment and Unemployment, 1962.

(2) U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Current Population
     Survey Interviewers Reference Manual, revised periodically.
