                         NBER VORXINC PAPER SERIES




                    CR! WREN'S HEALTH AND THE FAIl! LY

                               Linda N. Edwards
                 Queens College and Graduate School of the
                 City University of New York and National
                         Bureau   of Economic   Research
                               Michael Grossman
                 Graduate School of the City      University
          I
                    of   New York and National Bureau
                          of Economic Research
                     Working Paper No._256
              —-------.--------.-
                National Bureau of Economic Research. Inc.
                 261 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016




                              July 1978




                  Preliminary;     Not for Quotation
     NBER working papers are distributed informally
                                                    and in limited
number for coxnents only. They should not be quoted without written
permission.

    The research reported here is part of the NBER'g
                                                     research pro-
gram in the economics of health. This reDort has not undergone the
review accorded official NBER publications, in particular, it has
not yet been submitted for approval by the Board of Directors.
    Research for this paper was supported PHS Grant No. 1 IW1
HS 02917 from the National Center for HealthbyServices Research to
the NBER and by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
to the NBER.
                                                           NBER Working Paper No. 256
                                                           July 1978

                              CHI WREN' S HEALTH AND THE FAMILY
                          Linda N. Edwards and Michael Grossman

                                           ABSTRACT

       Th. objective of this paper is to •ine the relationship between a number
of fily characteristics and' the health of white children aged 6 to 11 y.ars
residing in those families. The partial effects of family income on health are
1l and seldom statistically significant. Indeed, some health probimas—high
blood pressure, allergies, and tension——are more likely to occur among children
from high income families •    The   general findii of small partial income effects
is supported by analysis of gross health differences between children from lower
and higher income families. In those cases where significant gross health differ-
ence. do exist between children from these two income classes, decomposition of
these gross differences shows thmn to be attributable in large part to factors
other than income itself. The finding that differences in health related solely
to income are safler than oonly believed implies that policies to improve
the well-being of children via income transfers, such as those advocated by the
recent Carnegie Council on Children, would have, at best, very small effects on
health. Indeed, the most important conclusion of our study is that the present
tendency to base government child health programs on simplistic notions that in-
00.S is the primary source of differences in children's health will not lead
towards fruitful or successful public policy regarding children's health.
      Among the other family characteristics studied, our most interesting re-
suits are for parents' schooling, mother's labor force status, and family size.
Parents' schooling is an important determinant of children's health. In most
instances children of well educated parents are in better health than those of
less well educated parents. In fact, for four of the five health measures that
have a significant gross correlation with income, much of this observed income
difference is accounted for by associated differences in parents' schooling.
Tbs mother's labor force status and family size have small health effects and
are strongly related only to the health variables representing the child's
nutritional status (height, weight, and the periodontal index). Children
whose mothers are in the labor force or who come from larger families are
likely to score more poorly with respect to these nutritional measures • These
results are important in the light of the striking upward trend in the labor
force participation rate of married women with children and the striking down-
ward trend in family size in the United States.
      Finally, the frequency with which the child received dental care has large
and significant impacts for most of the health measures • This finding is impor-
tant because the dental care variable serves as a proxy of the price and avail-
ability of preventive medical care. If it can be replicated with more direct
measures of preventive care, then policies directed at either improving the
availability of medical care or altering public attitudes towards preventive
care could have large health payoffs for children.

                                                National Bureau of Economic Research
                                                261 Madison Avenue
                                                New York, New York 10016
                                                (212) 682—3190
                         CHILDREN' $ HEALTH AND THE FAMILY

                      Linda N. Edwards and Michael Grossman*


                                I•   Introduction
      children's health care has been and continues to be provided primarily
within the family. This is in marked contrast to the provision of children'.
education which for the past 100 years has been considered a legitimat. con-
cern of government (see Landes and Solmon (1)).     While no one believes that
the government can replace the family in providing education for children,
state governments do determine how many years children must attend school,
how many days per year they must attend, and, to a large extent, the content
of that schøoling. Further, recent rulings of the Supreme Court stipulate
that all children are entitled to schooling of equal quality. Only recently
has attention turned to the role of the preschool years, and consequently,
the family, in determining the intellectual developnent of children.
      In the case of children's health, it has been widely recognized that
it is the family rather than the public or medical care sectors that plays
the fundamental role. For e'campl., a recent Carnegie Council on Children
report says "Doctors do not provide the bulk of health care f or children;
families do" (Keniston (3), p. 179).    With the exception of immunization,
which clearly has important externalities, there has been no form of compul-
sory health care for children,2 and with the advent of relatively simple
and effective treatments for important childhood diseases of the past
(influenza, pneueonia, and tuberculosis), one might even imagine that the
doctor's role i. declining. Indeed, the expanding interest of pediatricians
into the area of the "new morbidity"—"learning difficulties and school
problems, behavioral disturbances, allergies, speech difficulties, visual
                                   —2—



problis, and the problems of adolescents in coping and adjusting"--is a re-
sponse to the decline in importance of the traditional health problems of
children. 3
      While the overall Importance of the family in providing health care for
children is widely acknowledged, information about the nature of the asso-
ciation betwen various family characteristics and the health status of
children is relatively scarce.   Much of the literature conóentrates on two
infant health measures--infant mortality and birth weight—-and docusenta that
infants from both black families and low income filies experience a higher
incidence of mortality and low birth weight (Keniston (3), p. 1561. When
the health of children who survive the first year of life is the subject of
study, much less is known and again, existing studies focus primarily on
health differences associated with income and race .   For   example, there is
evidence that both black families and low income families evaluate their
children's health as poorer than do white or high income families. Simi-
larly, children from black or low income families are reported to exhibit a
higher incidence of "significant abnormalities" on a physical exam.5 The
extent to which these docusented differences are the result of income and/or
race alone, as opposed to correlated factors like parental education, family
size, mother's work status, and place of residence, has hardly been studied.
In order to formulate sensible and effective programs to improve the health
of children, we need a much better understanding of how these and other
family characteristics work in producing healthy children. Our study is a
step in this direction.
      More specifically, the objective of this paper is to examine the re-
lationship between a nusber of family characteristics and the health of
children aged 6 to 11 years residing in those families. This aultivariate
analysis is carried out within the framework of an economic aiod.l of the fam-
ily. Such a framework explicitly recognizes not only the family's function
as health care provider, but also that it is faced with resource constraints
and that some of   it.   objectives for its children may conflict with maxi-
mizing their health level.
      The data set used, Cycle II of the Health Examination Survey, is an ex-
ceptional source of information about a national sample of 7,119 noninstitu-
tionalized children aged 6 to 11 years in the 1963-65 period.6 T1 data
comprise   complete medical and   developmental histories   of sach   child provided
by the parent, information on family socioeconomic     characteristics, birth
certificate information, and a school report with data on school performance
and classroom behavior provided by teachers or other school officials. Most
important, there are objective measures of health from detailed physical
eirT.lnations. The physical examinations (as wall as associated psychological
and achievement tests) were a%inistered by the Public Health Service. There
is little direct information about the medical care received by these chil-
dren, but some attempt will be made to control for variations in the avail-
ability of local medical care.
      The amount of health information for the children in the Cycle II sample
is prodigious. To illustrate the exact nature of this information and to
provide a description of the overall health of the children in the sample,
selected ssry data are presented in Table I • Panel A indicates that
almost 95 percent of parents rate their child's health as good or very good.
At the same time, however, 19 percent of these parents consider their child's
present health to be a problem. The Public Health Service physicians affirm
the latter assessment in the sense that they find that 11 • 2 percent of the
children had at least one "significant abnormality" (see Panel B). An
                                                 TABLE I
              of Selected Health Information      from Cycle     II of the Health Examination              a
   S*munary                                                                                        Survey
                  Panel    A.    Parent's Assessment of Children's Current Health



                           Percent of Children   Whose   Parent Rates                   Percent of Children
                                       Present Health   as:                              Whose Parent Con-
                                                                                          siders Present
                   Very Good             Good            Pair              Poor          Health a Problam


Both sexes              51.8              42.9             4.9              .4                  19.0
Boys                    51.6              43.2             4.8              .4                  19.0
Girls                   51.8              42.7             5.1              .4                  19.0




                        !an51 B.   !ysician's    Findings on     Survey   Examination


                                             Distribution of    Those with Significant Abnormality
                Percent of Children                      by Type of Abnormality (Percent)
                 with Finding of
                —                                                         Neuro—                       Other
                Otitis Significant         Cardio—        Injury      muscular          Other          Major
                Media      Abnormality     vascular      Residual         Joint      Congenital    Diseases

Both sexes        1.6           11.2          22.9            13.7         31.8          23.6           28,6

Boys              1.8           12.2          21.8            13.5         32.9          226            28.9
Girls             1.4           10.2          24.4            14.1         30.4          24.7           28.1



                                                                                   (continued on next page)
                                      —5-


                               TABLE I (concluded)

               Panel   C. Medical History as   Reported    by Parent

Medical History
        Item                                Both Sexes         Boys      Girls

         (percent of children with     history   of   indicated condition)

Accidents
  Broken bones                                   7.8            8.5           7.0
  Knocked unconscious                            3.4            4.0           2.8
  Scars from burns                               4.5            4.4           4.7
  Other accidents                                4.2            4.7           3.7

Allergies and Related Conditions
  Asthea                                         5.3            6.5           4.0
  Hay fever                                      4.6            5.5           3.6
  Other allergies                              11.4            12.2          10.7

Kidney condition                                 3.9            2.6           5.1
Heart   condition                                3.7            4.2           3.1

Sensory—Neurological Conditions
  Convulsions or fits                            3.3            3.5           3.1
  Eye trouble                                  14.0            12.7          15.3
  Trouble hearing                               4.3             4.8           3.7
  Earaches                                     26.8            24.8          28.8
  Running ears                                 11.9            12.2          11.6
  Problem talking                               8.4            10.0           6.8
  Trouble walking                               2.3             2.5           2.1
  Arm or leg limitation                          1.3            1.3           1.2

Operations                                     30.8            35.3       26.1

Hospitalized more than 1 d                     26.8            30.0       23.6
Exercise   Restricted
  Ever                                           5.4            5.6           5.2
  Now                                            1.5            1.4          1.6

Taking medicine regularly                        4.1            4.0          4.2




               NCHS (11)
               Panel A —   Table 1
               Panel B -   Tables 1 and 3
               Panel C —   Table 4
                                      —6—



indication of the types of probls that may be bothering parents is given
by    the incidence of various itams in the medical history (Panel C). The
total picture, then, is of a cohort whose overall health is good but who
are nevertheless disturbed by particular health problns.
         The paper proceeds as follows. Section Il briefly describes the eco-
nomic model of the family used to generate the relationships to be esti-
mated. Section III discusses the nature of the estimated relationships
and defines the variable measures •     The   estimates are presented and dis-
cussed in Section IV. The final sections highlight and interpret the sta-
tistical findings of the study.

             II. The Economist's View of Children and Children's Health
        An important focal point of recent economic models of fertility [Becker
and Lewis (14); Willis (15); Ben Porath and Welch (16)] is that children         are

not   homogeneous. In particular, these models distinguish between two aspects
of children that enter the parents' consumption (or investment) portfolio—-
the number of children and the "quality" of each child. By quality of the
child is meant those characteristics of the child which generate utility
(or disutility) for the parents: his health, sex, wealth,       social adjustment,

intellectual development, sense of humor, etc. Therefore,       when parents

choose their   optimal family   composition, they choose not only how many chil-

dren   they will have, but also what portion of the family's resources will be

devoted to each child. 7 This choice is made in the usual way:       parents

choose   the number and quality of children, as    well as of other consumption

goods,   so as to maximize their utility subject to the constraints imposed
by their wealth (their potential earned income and their nonearned income)
and the various prices they face. In the case of children, there is a
further constraint in the form of children's genetic endowments which in
                                                                                       I
                                                   —7—


part    determine    quality. Genetic endowments act as a constraint be-
                    their

cause they are, for the most part, outside of the family's control.8
         The prices of children and           of   the various components   of   their quality
are determined by recognizing that children are produced within the home
using goods     bought   in the market and the time of family members. The cost
of    producing a   child   of a   given quality depends on the prices of the pur-
chased inputs—-parents' time, medical care, food, toys, lodging, etc.——and
on    the efficiency with which these inputs are used. The marginal cost of

a child, then, depends on the quality chosen and on the cost of one unit of

that amount of quality. Similarly, the cost of an increment in quality de-

pends on how many children will receive this increment (i.e. family size)

and on   the cost of     an incremental unit of          quality.9 To take the case of
the aspect of child quality focused on in this paper, children's health,

the    cost (price) of increasing the average health level of all children
in the family depends on the number of children in the family and on the
costs of medical care, nutrition, the parents' or other caretakers' time,
and any other purchased inputs used to improve children's health. In addi-

tion, to the extent that there are systematic differences in the ability of

families to produce children's health with given inputs, these differences

in efficiency are also relevant. For example, more                educated   parents are
more   likely to be able     to    follow doctors instructions, to      have general in-

formation about nutrition,         and   to   be willing and able to acquire medical
information     from published materials. Consequently, one            would expect more
educated parents to be more efficient at producing healthy children.
        Given   these considerations, the following factors are expected               to   in-

fluence children's health levels: the child's exogenous (genetic) health

endowment, family wealth, parents' wage rates, family size, parents'
                                       —8—


educational   attainment and other measures of their efficiency in household
production, costs   and availability   of medical care and   of   other market
health inputs (vitamins, sanitation, etc.), the prices of inputs used to
produce other aspects of child quality, and the prices of other forms of
parents' consumption. The relationship between the child's ultimate
health and   these factors may be termed a demand function for the output

health)° In this demand function a positive association between chil-

dren's health and family wealth is predicted (assuming that child health

is a normal good). Similarly, a positive association is expected between

both parents' education and children's endowed health status and children's

ultimate health status.1' Negative associations would be anticipated be-

tween all of the prices of health inputs and children's health, and between

family size and children's health. Parents' wage rates may have negative

or positive effects on children's health levels, depending on whether the

household production of children's health is more or less time intensive

than   the production of other aspects   of child quality and/or other types of

parents' consumption conmodities. Finally, to the extent that there is

substitutability between the various aspects of child quality, the prices

of inputs into the non—health aspects of child quality (say, music lessons)

might be positively associated with children's health.12

       These predictions concerning the effects of various family character-

istics and market prices do not necessarily apply when some realistic twists

are incorporated into the model. An      important instance is the introduction
of   joint production between various aspects of child quality and/or between

child quality and other consumption commodities. Such joint production can

make both wealth effects and input price effects ambiguous. To take a

simple example, both athletic develor*nent and health may be       regarded as
                                          —9—



aspects of children's quality. If athletic development has a high income
elasticity and also has      some   negative health effects, a negative relation-
ship between income or wealth and certain health measures may be observed.
Indeed, the incidence of broken bones is greater in high income families
than it is in l income families [NCHS (11), Table 141. Alternatively,
suppose that parents' time in child care yields direct utility rather than
generating utility only through its effect on children's quality. In this
case, parents may appear to choose inefficient modes of producing child
quality,   modes that use "too      much" time relative to its cost.
       The basic model outlined above is also modified when one takes ac-
count of the fact that the human capital dimensions of child quality are
by necessity embodied in the child. Because of this embodiment, for some
types of human     capital   there are natural minimum and         states that
                                                             maximum

cannot be reduced or     exceeded.     In the case of children's health, in-
creased expenditures     on health inputs or increased production efficiency

cannot   continually increase the child's health. For this reason,        one

would not predict constant absolute effects of the various determinants
of   children's health but rather that these      effects   attenuate in the region

of minimum and maximum health levels.

        Recent   models of intergenerational transfers utilize this embodiment
insight in a somewhat different way. In these models investments in chil-
dren' s human capital are assumed to be subject to decreasing returns in
terms of the future earnings of the child. This assumption, along with
the assumption that parents measure a child's quality by his expected
lifetime   wealth,  generates additional predictions concerning the effects
of   the set of variables discussed earlier on various components of chil-
dren's   quality)3     In particular, this type of model yields a distinction
                                        — 10   —




 between two types   of   families: those for whom the optimal quantity-quality

 calculation involves making a financial transfer to their children and those

 for   whom such a financial transfer is not   optimal. These two types of
families   differ systematically with respect to the effects of the various
explanatory variables on the human capital         dimensions of child quality.
The strongest prediction is that the wealth effect on the child's human
capital (health, in our case) will be zero in families which plan to make
financial transfers to the children, but positive in families who do not
plan such a transfer [see Edwards and Grossman (17)].

        What is striking about this review of the economic models is that al-

though they differ in many respects, they all designate the same set of fac-

tors as determinants of children's health—-parents' wealth, wage rates, and

education, family size, other input prices, etc. In addition, they provide

ready structures within which to interpret empirical findings. Thus, the

greater incidence of broken bones among children from high income families

is seen not as an anomalous finding but rather as a result of conflicting

family objectives concerning various aspects of child quality. Or, a find-

ing that for high income families increases in wealth are not associated

with increased children's health is not viewed as evidence that wealthy

parents do not care about their children but rather as a result of the fact

that wealthy parents have already made the optimal health investment for

their children.    In the sections   to follow, both the choice of variables to

be   investigated and the interpretation of the results of that investigation
are guided by the general framework outlined here.



                                                                                  I,
                                               — 11 —




                   IX!.    Variables   and Relationships     to be Estimated

A. Measurement of Child Health

       The issue   of     defining and   measuring   children's health is very much an

unresolved one, even among professionals in the area of public health.'4

The   economist's approach is to       define health as a form     of human capital   which

determines   the amount of time available for consumption and for work in the
                            15
home and labor   market.          (Individuals may      also derive disutility, or even
utility,    from the state of being ill.) With           this type of definition, an
appropriate   measure of health status         over some time period would be the pro-
portion of potential time that is actually available for the usual consump-
tion, maintenance, and work activities. Similarly, the complementary measure
of ill health would be the proportion of potential available time lost due
to inability to function or to imperfect functioning. While such disability
may seem to be relatively easy to measure when dealing with adults who are
members of the labor force (a good approximation is days lost from work be-
cause of illness), it is         not easy to   measure for other adults. Moreover,
even a measure of days lost from work might not capture losses in consump-
tion time. Therefore, in economists' studies of adults' health, both the
incidence   of particular physical conditions and           the individual's own assess-
ment   of his health status have       been   used as   supplementary health measures
(Groseman (25)).
       We use   the   same type of   restricted, morbidity—oriented, definition of
children's   health—-focusing on the child's physical health rather than his

overall well being—and        similar    types of measures--disability, physical

conditions, and    parental assessment of health status •          The   use, however, of
disability   measures (time lost from usual activities) and of            the incidence

of certain physical conditions is somewhat less appropriate for children
                                       — 12    —




than for adults • 16   This is because there is a natural sequence of childhood
diseases and    acute conditions which prevent     children from carrying out their
normal    activities, but which do not reflect the child's health       capital or
the   child's future prospects for life preservation and normal        functioning.
A useful distinction to make here is between "permanent" health, which is

what we mean by health capital, and "transitory" health, those short-run

deviations from one's normal state of health caused by the acute conditions

of childhood.17 It is the child's "permanent" health status that we wish

to study, and we attempt to use those health measures which will be good

predictors of that "permanent" health status.18

         In some situations a single overall index of "permanent" health might

be desired——to describe parsimoniously the health status of a population,

or to allocate public funds.     Health,   however, clearly is a multidimensional

concept. Analysis of a set of components rather than a single index allows

us to detect differences in the effects of family background variables on

the various dimensions of health. Such analysis also avoids an essentially

arbitrary weighting of the various dimensions of health implied by a health
         19
index.

         The actual choice of components of children's health status to be ex-

amined is controlled by the Cycle II data set and guided by the child health
                                                                                    21
literature, 20 as   well as by discussions with public health pediatricians.

The measures are listed and described below.

         1. The parent's assessment of the child's overall current health,

represented by PFGHEALTH. PFGREALTH        is a dichotomous variable   indicatinq

whether the parent views the child's health as poor, fair, or good (as

opposed   to very good).
                                             — 13   —




          2.    Current height and weight, represented by IHEIGHT            and IWEIGHT.

These     are   standard   indicators of children's nutritional status [for ex-
ample, National Center for Health           Statistics    (33) and (34); Seoane     and

Lathain(35)], and good nutrition is an obvious and natural vehicle for
maintaining children's health. Height is a better sumeary measure of
the lifetime nutritional status of the child, while weight conveys infor-
mation primarily about his or her current nutritional status. Since it
is well known that physical growth rates differ by age and sex, our
height    variable is      computed as   the difference between the child's actual

height    and   the mean height for his or her age-sex group divided by the

standard deviation         of height for that age-sex group.         Our weight   measure
is   computed in a similar manner.22

          3. The child's hearing acuity, represented by IHEAR. IHEAR is a

dichotomous variable indicating whether the              child has   abnormal hearing. A

child    is defined to have abnormal hearing if the           average threshold deci-

bel reading in his best ear over           the   range   of 500, 1,000, and     2,000

cycles    per second (c.p.s.) is greater than 15. 500, 1,000, and 2,000

c.p.a. are the frequencies that occur most              frequently   in normal speech.

A threshold of 15 or        more decibels above audiometric zero at these fre-
quencies is classified as corresponding to "significant                  difficulty with
faint   speech" by the Committee on Conservation of Hearing of the American

Acadamy    of Ophthalmology and     Otolaryngology [NCHS       (36) 1.
        4. The child's visual acuity, represented by the dichotomous vari-
able ABVIS. ABVIS indicates if the child has abnormal distance vision.
All children were examined without their eyeglasses; their uncorrected
binocular distance vision is defined as abnormal             if   it is worse than
20/30 (NCHS (37)]23
                                            — 14 —




        5.    The child's blood pressure, represented by HDBP. HDBP is a dummy
variable     which indicates if the child's diastolic blood pressure exceeds
the 95th percentile for his or her age and sex.
        6.    Whether or not the child has hayfever or other         allergies, repre-
sented by the dummy     variable   ALLEG.

        7. An assessment of the child's level of tension, represented by the

dummy   variable   TENS. TENS characterizes children who are rated by their

parents      as "high strung" or "moderately tense." Both the tension and
allergy variables may be regarded as measures of the "new morbidity."

        8. The presence of one or more "significant acquired abnormalities"                on
physical     examination of the child, represented by the dummy variable ACABN.

These abnormalities include heart disease; neurological, muscular, or joint

conditions; and other major diseases.24

        9. The child's periodontal index, represented by APERI. APERI             is   a

good overall indicator of oral health as well as a positive correlate of

nutrition (Russell (38)]. Due to the significant age and sex trends in

this variable, it is standardized by age and sex in the same manner as

height and weight. Higher values of APERI            denote   poorer values of oral

health.25

       10.    Excessive absence from   school   for health reasons during the past
six   months, represented by the dichotomous variable SCHABS. This variable
                                                                     26
is taken from information provided by the child's school.

        Precise definitions of the above health measures

appear in Table 11, along with their sample means and a notation concerning

the source of each variable (medical history, physician's exam, birth



                                                                                                I
certificate, or school form).
                                    — 15 —



                                  TABLE   It
                      Definitions of Health Measures


Variable    Mean in
  Name      Samplea                       Definition

PFGHEALTH     .451     Dummy   variable that equals one if parental         1
                       assessment of child's health is poor, fair,
                       or good and zero if assessment is very good

IHEIGHT      .O7l      Height, standardized by the mean and stand—         3
                       ard deviation of one-year age-sex cohorts

IWEIGHT                                                mean and stand-
                       Weight, standardized by the                         3
                       ard deviation of one-year age-sex cohorts
IMEAR        • 006     Dummy variable that equals one if hearing           3
                       is abnormal
ABVIS        • 116     Dummy variable that equals one if uncorrected       3
                       binocular distance vision is abnormal

HDBP         .054      Dummy variable that equals one if the child's       3
                       diastolic blood pressure is above the 95th
                       percentile for his age and sex

ALLEG        .156      Dummy variable that equals one if the    child      1
                       has had hayfever or any other kind of
                       allergy
TENS         • 476     Dummy variable   that equals one if the parent      1
                       rates   the child as high strung or moderately
                       tense
ACABN        • 037     Dummy variable that equals one if the physi—        3
                       cian finds a significant" acquired abnormal-
                       ity in examining the child (other than an
                       abnormality resulting from an accident or
                       injury)
APERI       _.034c    Periodontal index, standardized by the mean          3
                       and standard deviation of one—year age—sex
                      cohorts

scis          045d    Dummy variable that equals one if child has          4
                      been excessively absent from school for
                      health reasons during the past six months


                                                       (footnotes on next page)
                                          — 16   —




                                    Footnotes to TABLE    II
         aThese means   are   computed for the "basic"   sample    of 4,196 white chil-

dren described in Section IV.


         bThe sources   are 1 — medical   history form coupleted by parent, 2 —     birth
certificate, 3 —    physical    examination, 4 —     school   form completed by teacher

or other school official.


             mean   of this variable is not zero because standardization was        done

using    the entire Cycle II sample rather than the subsample reported on in this
paper.

         dThe mean of this variable is computed for a subsample of 3,812 for whom
the school report is     not missing.




                                                                                            I
                                      — 17   —




B.   Meaauramnt of !xplanatory Variables
      The theoretical variables needed for investigating children's health
were listed earlier: family wealth, parent.' wage rates,• parents' educa-
tional attainment (or other measures of their efficiency in household
production), the child health endowment, the costs and availability of
medical care and other market health inputs, the prices of other inputs
used to produce child quality, the prices of other forms of parents' con-
ausption, and family size.
      Not surprisingly, the actual measures available in the Cycle 11 survey
correspond only roughly to the above theoretical variables. We discuss
these measures and indicate how they relate to the theoretical variables
below. A complete list of the measures, their precise definitions, and
their sample means and standard deviations appear in Table Ill.
      Family wealth and the father's wage rate are both represented by the
family income measure. Two income variables are used (FINC, 'INC) in
order to allow for the possibility that the relationship between family
wealth and children's health differs for high and low income families.27
      The mother's wage rate is not directly available in the survey. We
attampt to control for variations in her wage rat. with three variables:
her educational attainment (MEDUCAT) and two measures of her current work
status (MWOIdPT, NWORXPT) •   Mor. educated women are more likely to have
higher opportunity costs, as are women who are currently in the labor force.
      As efficiency (or taste) measures we use mother's and father's educa-
tional attainment (NEDUCAT, PEDUCAT) and a dusmy variable identifying
                                   — 18   —




                                TABLE   III
                            Explanatory   Variables

                   Sample
Variable   Sample Standard
  Name     Meana Deviationa                      Definitionb

FINC       7.502   4.405       Continuous family income computed by assign-
                               ing midpoints to the followinq closed income
                               intervals, $250 to the lowest interval, and
                               $20,000 to the highest interval. The closed
                               income classes are:

                                                  $500   —    $999
                                                $1,000   — $1,999
                                                $2,000   — $2,999
                                                $3,000   — $3,999
                                                $4,000   — $4,999
                                                $5,000   — $6,999
                                                $7,000   — $9,999
                                               $10,000   — $14,999


HFINC      5.038    6.138      Same as FINC for income of $7,000 and over;
                               equals zero for incomes below $7,000

MDRXPT      .132     .339      Dummy variables that equal one if the mother
MWORXFT     .158     .365      works part—time or full—time, respectively


MEDUCAT 11.095      2.808      Years of formal schooling ccmpleted by mother

FEDUCATC 11.220     3.461      Years of formal schooling completed by father

PLANG       .105     .307      Dummy variable that equals one when a foreign
                               language is spoken in the home

LXGHT1      .013     .112      Dummy variable that equals one if child's
                               birth weight was under 2,000 grams (under
                               4.4 pounds)

LIG}1T2     .043     .202      Dummy variable that equals one if child's
                               birth weight was equal to or greater than
                               2,000 grains but under 2,500 grams (under
                               5.5 pounds)


CABN        .050     .219      Dummy variable that equals one if the physi-
                               cian finds a "significant" congenital abner—
                               mality in examining the child
                                                                               I
                                                — 19   —




                                   TABLE    III (concluded)

                       Sample
Variable   Sample     Standard
  Name     Meana      Deviationa                             Definitionb

MALE        .513         .500              DzIuy variable    that equals one if child is
                                       male

LMAG        •   073      •   261           Dizmny variable    that equals one if the mother
                                       was less         than 20 years old at birth of child

HMAG        • 105        .307              Dummy variable that equals one if the mother
                                           was more than 35 years old at birth      of child
FIRST       .288         .453              Dummy variable that equals one     if   child is
                                           the first born in the family

TWIN        .023         .149              Dummy variable that equals one if child is a
                                           twin

NEAST       .236         .425              Dummy variables that equal one if child lives
MW'EST      .322         .467              in Northeast, Midwest, or South, respectively;
SOUTH       .181         .385              omitted class is residence in West

uRBl        .199         .400              Dummy variables that equal one if child lives
URB2        .120         .325              in an urban area with a population of 3 inil—
URB3        .181         .385              lion or more (URB1); in an area with a popu—
NURB        .148         .355              lation between 1 million and 3 million
                                           (URB2); in an urban area with a population
                                           less than 1 million (URB3); or in a non—rural
                                           and non-urbanized area (NURB), omitted class
                                           is   residence in a rural area
DENT12      .169         .375              Dummy variable that equals one if child has
                                           been to a dentist sometime in his life but
                                           not within the last twelve months

DENTIST3    .179         .383              Dummy variable that equals one if child has
                                           never been to a dentist

LESS2O     3.635        1.676              Number   of persons in the household 20 years
                                           of age or less
NOFATH      .071         .257              Di.mmy variable that equals one if child lives
                                           with mother only
                                       — 20   —




                           !ootnote.   to TABLE    III

             means and standard deviations are computed for the Nbasichs sam-
ple of 4,196 children described in Section IV.

      bAll of these variables except LIGIIT1•     LIGH'r2, and CABN are taken from
the medical history form. LIGHT1 and LIGHT2 acme from the child's birth
certificate, and CABN, from the physical examination.

      CFor children who were not currently living with their father, father's
education was coded at the mean of the sample for which father's education was
reported.




                                                                                     I
                                            — 21   —




mothers      who were under 20 years-old at the time of the child's birth (LMAG).
Young mothers are notoriously less efficient at contracepting and may be
similarly      less efficient in producing healthy children. A supplementary
efficiency (or taste) measure is a variable indicating whether a foreign
language is spoken in the home (FLANG). Foreign born families are likely to
exhibit differences in tastes and/or household production efficiency.
        The child's endowed health status is represented by a set of variables
relating to his early health. They are dummy variables identifying children
of low birth weight (LIGHT1, LIGRT2), children with congenital abnormalities
(CABN), the child's sex (MALE), and children whose mothers were over 35 years-
old at the time of the child's birth (HMAG). Low birth weight is a typical
indicator of a less healthy birth outcome • 28 The rationale for including a
variable identifying older mothers is that older mothers are more likely to
bear children with health defects. The child's sex is included because of
the well documented higher incidence rates of certain health probl among
males at young ages [for example, NCHS (11)1.
        In addition to these health endowment measures, we also control for
several characteristics of the child which are not necessarily health re—
lated but may cause him to receive better or worse treatwent within the
family   simply by virtue of his luck      in possessing these   characteristics.

They   are his birth-order (FIRST), whether or not he is a twin (TWIN),        as

well as his sex (MALE). First born children (or non-twins) will have
greater access to individual parental attention because they arrived in
the family first (or they arrived alone). Similarly, male children may
receive larger investments than female children if males are preferred
(see   Ben   Porath   and   Welch (16)).
                                               — 22   —




        Direct information about the prices of inputs in the health production
function and in the other household production functions is not available
in   the Cycle II   data. Moreover since the precise locality of each observa-
tion   cannot be identified at the present time,29        it is not possible to esti-
mate these prices with local market data. Therefore to partially control

for these prices, we use         a   set of three region and   four   size of place of

residence     variables. (These variables will also control for other regional
differences that are not otherwise accounted for.) In addition, information
about   the last time     the   child visited a dentist (DENT12 and DENTIST3)       is
used to provide a somewhat nre specific index of the price and availability

of medical care. The latter variables not only            proxy the     price and avail-

ability   of medical care in the area but also the         family's preferences and

attitudes concerning preventive care.3°

        Finally,    family size is represented by the nsnber of people in the

family who are under 20 years of age at the time of the Cycle II interview

(LESS2O).      LESS2O may therefore overstate or understate actual completed

family size.

         In   surveying these variables, it      is imeediately obvious that some of

tham    are   not the   exogenous measures called for by the theory but rather
are proxies that are       in   part endogenously determined. That is, some of
these variables not only represent exogenous prices             or endowments   but are
themselves outcomes of          the family's decision making. For example, mother's

labor    force status represents her wage rate as well as the amount of            time

she    chooses to spend with her children. Similarly, some of the health

endowment measures—birth weight, mother's age at the time of the child's

birth, and whether or not congenital abnormalities are present—reflect

not only genetic endowments but also family choices regarding prenatal
                                       — 23   —




care     and the timing of childbearing, both of which condition the birth out-
come •    The same   observation can be made about the measures used to proxy
the price and availability of medical care (DENT12 and DENTIST3). They
represent both exogenous prices and endogenous health inputs.
         One other explanatory variable is endogenous—family size—but for a
different reason. Family size is endogenous not because it is an imperfect
proxy for a truly exogenous variable, but because in the theoretical model
both family    size and children's health are simultaneously   determined.3'
         The endogeneity of family size as well as   the other variables men-
tioned above poses     the usual problem of bias in their   coefficient   estimates

unless    appropriate simultaneous estimation techniques are used. Such tech-
niques cannot be used in this case, however, because appropriate data are
not   available, and   even if they were, the coefficients are not always
identifiable.32 As an alternative procedure, we estimate the children's
health equations two ways, both with and without the set of endogenous vari-
ables included. When they are excluded, the coefficients of the various
exogenous    family characteristics will reflect their gross   impacts. Estimates
with   the endogenous input, endowment, and family   size variables included will

reveal    to what extent the exogenous family characteristics operate through
these endogenous measures.
         To recapitulate, the equations we estimate have the health variables
listed in Table 11 as dependent variables and the variables listed in Table
III as explanatory variables. These equations are not pure reduced-form
demand equations for children's health for two reasons • First, the inclu-
sion of family size, an endogenous variable from the structural demand
equation, makes the estimating equation a hybrid of a reduced form and
structural demand equation. Second, measures of some of the relevant
                                          — 24   —




theoretical variables are unavailable and the proxy measures used also repre-
sent endogenous input quantities. The final estimating equation reported on
here, then, is a mixture of a structural demand equation, a reduced form
demand equation, and a production function. Interpretation of our results
will allow for the hybrid nature of these equations.

                               IV. npirical Results
      The equations described in the previous section are estimated using data
for white children who live with either both         of   their parents   or   with their

mothers only. There were 5,768 such children in the Cycle II sample. The

exclusion of children for whom    there   were missing data brings the final

sample to 4,l96. Data for both types of family composition are pooled

for analysis because preliminary estimates indicated that there were no

significant differences in the sets of slope coefficients for all dependent

variables   except SCHABS. A dunmty variable identifying children who live
with their mothers only (NOFATH) is included to allow for differences in
children's health that may   be uniquely associated with the absence of a

father. We do not use   data   for black children in estimating the equations

because preliminary analysis revealed significant race differences in slope

coefficients for about half of our health measures. In addition, since the

black sample is too small to allow for reliable coefficient estimates,

separate estimates for black children are        not presented.




                                                                                            I
                                        — 25   —




      The   method of estimation is ordinary least squares. Although this is
not the optimal econometric procedure to use when the dependent variable is
                       35
dichotomous, use of LOG!? or another appropriate nonlinear estimation
procedure is not feasible given the sample size and number of variables in
our empirical work. To determine whether this aisspecification is likely
to greatly affect our results, we experimented with alternative estimation
procedures on a subsample of one-third of our basic sple. Using a de-
pendent variables with a low incidence and one with an incidence near •5,
we obtained both OLS and LOG!? estimates of our equations for this sub-
sample. In both cases the differences between alternate estimators are
small: OLS coefficients and the analogous marginal effects in LOG!? are of
similar magnitudes and signs, and the patterns of statistical significance
do not alter. Indeed, the differences between these OLS and LOG!? esti-
mates for the one—third subsample are much less than are the differences
between OLS estimates for the full sample and for the one-third subsample.
On the basis of these experiments we believe that OLS estimation applied to
the full. 5aspi. provides the more accurate picture of the relationship be-
tween measures of health and the various explanatory variables •   Of   course,
the usual statistical tests on a single coefficient or on sets of coeffi-
cients can only be interpreted as suggestive when the dependent variable is
dichotomous because the assumptions underlying these tests are not satisfied.
      We organize our discussion of the results around groups of explanatory
variables • Therefore, rather than presenting estimates of the equations in
a single massive table, we have chosen to partition the results into several
tables, each showing the coefficients of a subset of explanatory variables.
                                       — 26    -


It   should be emphasized, however, that the coefficients in each of these
tables are taken from multiple regression estimates that contain either the
complete set of explanatory variables in Table III or that subset we have
classified as exogenous.

A. Overview

         The obvious first question to ask is are these health measures amenable
to statistical explanation with the set of variables considered here? To
answer this question we present adjusted R2 's and "F" statistics for the
health equations both with and without the set of endogenous explanatory
variables (Table IV) • In all cases except for hearing acuity and excessive
school absence the equations are statistically significant at the 1 percent
level of significance in one or both formulations. Further, only for the
hearing variable are none of the individual explanatory variables ever
statistically significant. Thus, we can conclude that for scst of the
health measures we study, observed variations in our sample are not caused
solely by chance but rather are systematically related to the set of family,
endowment, and region and city size characteristics considered here.

B. Exogenous Family Characteristics
       Since the prime focus of this paper is the relationship between fam-
ily characteristics and children's health, we begin by looking at the
measures of exogenous family characteristics——income, parents' education,
whether or not a father lives with    the   family, and whether or not a for-
eign language   is spoken in the home. The coefficients of these variables

appear   in Table V (the   results for IHEAR   are not   shown   in this and

                                                                                   I
                                     —27—




                              TABLE IV
              Adjusted R Squares and P Statistic.

                       Equation 1a               Equation
Dependent      Adjusted          P           Adjusted         P
Variable        R Squared    Statistic       R Squared   Statistic

PPGHEALTH         .073         (21.71*)        .083         (15.61*)
IIAR             —.001           (0.73)       —.002           (0.65)

ABVIS             .005          (2.26*)        .006         (1.99*)

IBP               .006          (2.79*)        .007         (2.25*)
ALL               .032          (9.69*)        .037         (7.15*)
TENS              .020          (6.32*)        .020         (4,35*)
ACABN             .002           (1.62)        .006          (1.89*)
SCHABS            .001           (1.34)        .002           (1.22)

IHEIGHT           .040         (12.63*)        .071         (13.75*)

IWEIGHT           .030          (9.60*)        .060         (11.72*)

APERI             .104         (33.50*)        .109         (2l.55)



   *
    Statistically significant at the 1. percent level of signifi-
cance.

   aExplanatory variables are PINC, HFINC, FEDUCAT, MEDUCAT,
FLMG, NOFATH, MALE (when relevant), FIRST, IVIN, NEAST, MWEST,
SOUTH, URB1, URB2, URB3 and NURB.

   bpianatory variables include those in equation 1 plus
LESS 20, LIGHT1, LIGHT2, CABN, MWORXPT, MWORr, LMAG, EMAG,

DENT12 and DENTIST3.
                                                        TABLE V
                        Coefficients of   Exogenous Family and Child              Characteristics*
                                      (NpN statistics       in parentheses)



                PFGKEALTB             ABVIS                       HDBP                    ALLEG                    TENS
Explanatory    Eq.        Eq.       Eq.       Eq.           Eq.          Eq.           Eq.        Eq.       Eq.            Eq.
 Variable       (1)       (2)       (1)        (2)          (1)           (2)           (1)       (2)        (1)            (2)



 FINC         —.0121     —.0115   —.0028    —.0035          .0026        .0023          .0022     .0008      .0011          .0013
               (5.75)    (5.17)    (0.70)     (1.06)       (1.17)        (0.92)        (0.34)   (0.04)      (0.04)         (0.06)

 HFINC        —.0005    —.00004     .0033      .0035       —.0015    —.0016             .0003     .0005    —.0021         —.0024
               (0.02)    (0.00)    (2.06)     (2.26)       (0.85)        (0.99)        (0.01)   (0.04)      (0.35)        (0.47)

 FEDUCAT      —.0139     —.0118     .0038      .0037       —.0031    —.0031             .0059     .0053    —.0032         —.0035
              (19.68)   (14.14)    (3.32)     (3.12)       (4.50)        (4.49)        (6.44)   (5.14)      (0.96)         (1.14)
 ?DUCAT       —.0110     —.0080    —.0036     —.0046       —.0022    —.0029             .0100     .0072      .0061          .0068
                                                                                                                                    I.,,
               (9.21)    (4.65)    (2.21)     (3.40)       (1.70)        (2.73)       (13.87)   (6.66)      (2.71)         (3.07)

 FLANG        —.0048     —.0121    —.0127     —.0121       —.0136    —.0139           —.0179    —.0150     —.0734         —.0739
               (0.04)    (0.22)    (0.55)     (0.49)       (1.27)        (1.31)        (0.88)   (0.61)      (7.66)         (7.72)

 NOFATH       —.0019     —.0179    —.0231     —.0277       —.0238    —.0253           —.0124    —.0167     —.0291         —.0208
              (0.004)    (0.33)    (1.30)     (1.78)       (2.77)        (2.97)        (0.30)   (0.52)      (0.86)         (0.42)

 FIRST        —.0544     —.0342     .0110      .0054        .0090         .0086         .0426     .0247      .1240          .1266
              (10.86)    (3.51)    (1.00)     (0.20)       (1.35)        (0.99)       (12.01)   (3.28)     (52.98)        (44,68)

 TWIN           .0035    —.0262     .0407      .0396       —.0218    —.0269            —.0982   —.0881       .0177        —.0062
               (0.01)    (0.26)    (1.49)     (1.33)       (0.86)        (1.24)        (6.95)   (5.32)      (0.12)         (0.01)

                                                             —             —
 WLE          —.0014     —.0024    —.0250     —.0251                                    .0324     .0336      .0568   .0573
                                                             —             —
               (0.01)    (0.03)    (6.39)     (6.38)                                   (8.60)   (9.24)     (13.75) (13.96)

                                                                                                   (continued on    next   page)
                                                      TABLE V      (concluded)

                        ACABN               SCHABS                     IHEIGHT                     IWEIGHT                        APERI
Explanatory        Eq.          Eq.       Eq.        Eq.             Eq.         Eq.             Eq.              Eq.           Eq.         Eq.
 Variable          (1)           (2)      (1)        (2)             (1)         (2)             (1)              (2)           (1)         (2)

  FINC             .0020         .0020    .0043      .0044           .0040     .0006             .0237            .0191        —.0175      —.0167
                  (1.03)        (0.99)   (3.52)     (3.77)          (0.16)   (0.004)            (5.27)           (3.50)        (5.37)      (4.89)
  HFINC           —.0019     —.0018      —.0036     —.0036           .0077     .0069            —.0080           —.0075         .0045       .0047
                  (1.97)        (1.79)   (5.30)     (5.41)          (1.26)    (1.05)            (1.29)           (1.16)        (0.77)      (0.82)
  FEDUCAT          .0016        .0020     .0011      .0013           .0155       .0113           .0073            .0060        —.0241     —.0209
                  (1.74)        (2.67)   (0.55)     (0.80)          (6.16)    (3.32)            (1.31)           (0.90)       (26.57)     (19.61)

  MEDUCAT         —.0007     —.0004      —.0023    —.0017            .0257       .0134           .0152            .0033        —.0218     —.0177
                  (0.24)        (0.08)   (1.89)     (0.96)         (12.75)    (3.37)            (4.21)           (020)        (16.24)     (10.07)

  FLANG            .0254      .0233      —.0122    —.0138          —.0666    —.0584              .0279            .0287        —.0099     —.0159
                  (6.41)     (5.37)      (1.11)     (1.41)          (1.69)    (1.33)            (0.28)           (0.31)        (0.07)      (0.17)

  NOFATH          —.0212     —.0263       .0285      .0281         —.0352    —.0263             —.0266           —.0493         .0701       .0405
                  (3.18)        (4.70)   (4.26)     (3.94)          (0.34)    (0.19)            (0.18)           (0.62)        (2.38)      (0.76)

  FIRST            .0050        .0059    —.0076    —.0026            .1742       .1410           .2024            .1440         .0185       .0162
                  (0.60)     (0.69)      (1.03)     (0.10)         (28.04)   (15.34)        (36.01)          (15.21)           (0.56)      (0.35)

  TWIN            —.0143     —.0207       .0229     .0108          —.0365      .1313            —.0341            .1193        —.0308     —.0428
                  (0.54)     (1.07)      (1.06)     (0.22)          (0.13)    (1.70)            (0.11)           (1.33)        (0.17)     (0.31)

  MALE            —.0026 —.0028          —.0065    —.0059
                  (0.20)     (0.23)      (0.93)     (0.77)

*Coefficjenta   are statistically significant at           the 5   percent level       if the    "F"is great.r than 3.84 for a
two-tailed   test, or    2.69 for a one—tailed     test.   The explanatory variables             in Equation 1 are FINC, HFINC,
FEDUCAT, MEDUCAT. FLANG, NOPATH, MALE           (when relevant), FIRST, TWIN, NEAST,             MWEST, SOUTH, URB1, URB2, URB3,
and NURL The explanatory variables          in Equation 2 include those in Equation                    1   and   also     LESS2O, LIGHT1,
LIGHT2, CABN, MNGRXPT, MWORKFT, LMAG, HMAG, DENT12 and DENTIST3.
                                          — 30       —




subsequent    tables because none of its explanatory variable coefficients are
statistically significant).
       The partial effects of income on the various health measures are sur-
prisingly small and are statistically significant only for the variables
PFtGREALTH, SCHABS, IWEIGHT, and APERX •        As   an example of the magnitudes of
these coefficients, a $1,000 increase in annual family income is associated
with a decrease of only .01 in the probability of parents' rating their
children's health as poorer than "very good" (see eq. 1). The magnitudes
tend to become    even   smaller when the set of endogenous variables is in-

cluded (eq.    2), but the pattern of statistical significance is not altered.
In addition, in some cases higher income is associated with poorer rather
than   better health (HDBP, ALLEG, ACABN, TENS, SCHABS), although this per-
verse relationship is statistically significant only for SCHABS. With
respect to differences in income effects between low and high income
families, a significant difference is observed only for SCHABS. In that
case the negative income effect      in the law      income class completely dis-
appears for the high income      class (the coefficients of FINC and HFINC are
opposite in    sign and approximately equal in magnitude).            To   sustaarize

these varied results,      while income does have a        significant relationship

with   four of the   eleven health measures,    on       balance, the evidence leads one

to   conclude that, overall, income is not an important factor for explaining
health                                                           36
         variations among the children in this sample.

       Unlike family     income, the parents'   educational      attaiiaent has signifi-
cant effects   on most    of the health measures. In          fact, one or both of the

parents'   education measures is statistically significant except when ACABN
and SCHABS are the dependent variables. This is true whether or not the set
of endogenous variables is included in all equations except the weight                     I
                                            — 31   —




equation.    Both for the height and weight measures the inclusion of the en-
dogenous variables causes a substantial (about 50 percent on average) de-
cline in the magnitude of the education coefficients. Contrary to expec-
tations, significant inverse relationships between health and parents'
education are reported for ALLEG and        TENS. This may     be a result of a
reporting bias in that more     educated parents       may be more sensitive to
subtle aspects of ill health in their children. Alternatively, more edu-
cated parents may be more demanding regarding their children's behavior
and achievement, creating greater tension and accompanying allergies.
With the exception of these two measures of the Nj morbidity, hostever,
the coefficients of the parents' educational attainment variables are con-
sistent with the notion that higher parental education leads to greater
efficiency in home health production.37
       Children from    families   where a foreign language is spoken in the home
do not have significantly different health levels from other children except
with respect to the measures ACABN and TENS. Children from such families are
more likely to exhibit an acquired abnorsmlity, but they are less likely to
be   considered tense   by their parents.
         Differences   in children's health associated with the presence or ab-

sence of a father in the household at the time of the survey are not uniform

across   the various health measures, and in       many   cases,   are   not statistically
significant.    The coefficient of the dummy variable NCPATh indicates signifi-
cant positive associations with better health when HDPB and ACABN are the
health measures, and significant negative associations with better health
when health is measured by school absenteeism. In the cases where NOFATH is
not significant, both positive and negative health relationships are again
reported.38 The somewhat unexpected conclusion to be drawn here, then, is
                                            — 32   —




that   having an absent father is neither a clear health advantage nor a clear

health   disadvantage to   a child. One   possible explanation is that, with    family

income held constant, unmarried mothers have more resources to allocate to
their own consumption and to their children than do married couples.
        Among the exogenous family characteristics considered in this subsec-
tion, it is   not family income   that   appears to be of outstanding importance
in   explaining variations in children's health levels (though income does

play a role), but rather parents' educational attainment. With the excep-

tion of the two measures relating to the "new morbidity" (ALLEG and TENS)

children's health status significantly improves as their parents' educa-

tional attainment increases. The remaining two         exogenous characteristics
of   families-—speaking a foreign language in the home and having an absent

father——appear to have minimal negative impacts on children's health, and

in some cases, may even be positively associated with health.

C. Region and City Size

         It is clear from the coefficients of the region and     city   size varia-

bles (in Table VI) that another characteristic of families-—their

location-—accounts for larger differences in children's health than do

those characteristics discussed above. Significant regional differences

exist for the variables PFGHEALTH, AEVIS, ALLEG, AC1IBN, APERI, IHEIGHT,

and IWEIGHT); and significant city size differences exist for PFHEALTH,
AEVIS, HDBP, ALLEG, TENS, IWEIGHT, and       APERI. Regional and city size
differences in children's health are not, however, uniform; there is no
"best"   place to live. For example, health is best in the       West when mea-
sured   by APERI and ACABN, but worst when measured by ALLEG,      IHEIGHT, and

IWEIGHT.     Similarly, health is best in non-urbanized non—rural areas when
measured by HDBP, but is best in medium sized cities (1 to 3 million
people) when measured by PFG}!EALTH and      ALLEG.
                                                  TABLE VI
                               Coefficients of Region and City Size Variables*
                                       ("F" statistics in parentheses)


                 PFGHEPLTH                 ASVI S            —     HDBP                    ALLEG                    TENS
Explanatory     Eq.      Eq.         Eq.         Eq.         Eq.          Eq.         q.           Eq.        Eq.            E.
 Variable       (1)      (2)         (1)            (2)      (1)           (2)       (1)           (2)        (1)            (2)


  NEAST       —.0733    —.0663       .0314          .0281    .0107        .0086    —.0693      —.0759         .0029          .0005
              (10.74)   (8.72)      (4.42)      (3.48)      (1.03)        (0.65)   (17.26)    (20.41)        (0.02)         (0.00)


 MWEST        —.0325    —.0302       .0145          .0114    .0042     .0032       —.0607      —.0625       —.0020         —.0052
               (2.69)   (2.30)      (1.20)      (0.73)      (0.20)    (0.12)       (16.92)    (17.65)        (0.01)         (0.06)


 SOUTH          .0718    .0702     —.0057      —.0089        .0156     .0141       —.0477      —.0536         .0176          .0163
               (9.19)   (8.80)      (0.13)      (0.32)      (1.95)    (1.59)        (7.31)     (9.18)        (0.52)         (0.44)


 URB1           .0093    .0161       .0161       .0148       .0110        .0097    —.0007      —.0071         .0544          .0549
               (0.17)   (0.50)      (1.12)      (0.94)      (1.05)    (0.81)       (0.002)     (0.18)        (5.33)         (5.39)


 URB2         —.0732    —.0695       .0145       .0142      —.0015    —.0021       —.0491      —.0527         .0854          .0869
               (8.13)   (7.39)      (0.72)      (0.68)      (0.02)    (0.03)        (6.57)     (7.60)       (10.38)        (10.72)


 URB3          .0003     .0076       .0272       .0258       .0127        .0111      .0240         .0172      .0555         .0572
              (0.00)    (0.12)      (3.48)      (3.09)      (1.52)    (1.16)       (2.18)      (1.11)        (6.05)        (6.35)


 NURB         —.0398    —.0423       .0075       .0073      —.0328    —.0317        .0068          .0050      .0371         .0407
              (2.92)    (3.31)      (0.23)     (0.22)       (8.96)    (8.32)       (0.16)      (0.08)        (2.39)        (2.85)



                                                                                                    (continued on next page)
                                                          TABLE   Vt   (concluded)



                             ACABN               SCHABS                  IHEIGHT               IWEIGIlT                   APERI     —
Explanatory            Eq.            Eq.      Eq.        Eq.           Eq.       Eq.       Eq.       Eq.           Eq.           Eq.
 Variable               (1)           (2)      (1)        (2)           (1)       (2)       (1)       (2)           (1)            (2)
                                                     —
    NEAST               .0217         .0236    .0124      .0142         .0669     .0327      .0454        .0221      .4704        .4894
                       (6.15)        (7.18)   (1.50)     (1.94)        (2.26)    (0.55)     (0.99)   (0.24)       (198.16)   (211.47)



    MWEST               .0242         .0251    .0060      .0076         .1121     .0969      .1423        .1406      .1114        .1225
                       (9.77)    (10.30)      (0.45)     (0.71)        (8.06)    (6.08)    (12.36)   (12.19)       (14.16)    (16.86)



     SOUTH              .0165         .0161   —.0057     —.0050         .0100    —.0058      .0272        .0065      .3566        .3642
                       (3.17)        (3.00)   (0.28)     (0.21)        (0.05)    (0.02)     (0.32)   (0.02)       (101.50)   (105.51)



    URB1              —.0146         —.0135   —.0086     —.0079          .0262     .0058     .1155        .0951    —.0255     —.0175
             •         (2.70)        (2.28)   (0.69)     (0.58)         (0.33)   (0.02)     (6.13)    (4.26)        (0.56)        (0.26)



    URB2              —.0042         —.0037   —.0017     —.0011         .0543     .0470      .1065        .0986      .0066        .0110
                       (0.17)        (0.14)   (0.02)     (0.01)        (1.12)    (0.87)     (4.12)   (3.63)         (0.03)        (0.08)



    URB3              —.0066         —.0053   —.0080     —.0072          .0024   —.0153    —.0828    —.0987          .0344        .0412
                       (0.59)        (0.38)   (0.66)     (0.53)        (0.003)   (0.13)     (3.44)   (4.98)         (1.11)        (1.58)



    NURB                .0002        —.0005    .0082      .0086        -.0499    —.0388    —.0073    —.0068        —.0387     —.0436
                      (0.001)    (0.003)      (0.61)     (0.68)         (1.16)   (0.72)     (0.02)    (0.02)        (1.24)        (1.57)



*
    See Table    V.
                                               — 35   —




          The   reasons for these differences     are varied   and   cannot   be explored
 with the types of data used in this paper. We suggest a nusber of possi-
 bilities: climate, air pollution levels, fluoridation levels, ethnic com-
 position of the population, as well as unmeasured differences in the avail-
 ability and price of medical care. In addition, there are differences in
 stress and      tension associated with     living in cities of various sizes or in
 rural   areas •    To   distinguish between these explanations, one would need to
match up the data in the Cycle II survey with local measures of variables
 like those suggested above. The point we wish             to emphasize here, however,
is   that even when a large nusber of individual family demographic and eco-
nomic characteristics are         held   constant, large   unexplained regional and

city   size     differences in children's health levels exist. These unex-

plained differences are clearly an important issue             for   future epidemio-

logical    research.


D. Eenous Child Endowments

         Coefficient estimates for the       three exogenous child endowment charac-
teristics-—FIRST, TWIN, and        MALE—-appear   at the bottom of Table V.        First

born children have significantly better          health when measured by PFGREALTH,

IHEIGHT, and IWEIGHT, and significantly poorer health when measured by
ALLEG and TENS •         Additional insight regarding the    role of this endowment

measure is obtained by looking at how its cofficient alters when the set

of   endogenous    variables   is included. In this case both the benefits and

disadvantages of being a first born child diminish substantially (except

for TENS), though FIRST remains statistically significant. Thus, the

impact on child health of being a first born operates in part via

such endogenous variables as family size, mother's work status, and dentist

visits.
                                         — 36    —




        These   reported health differences between first borne and others are
consistent with the notion that first born children receive relatively
more time and attention from their parents than other children: their
rate of physical development is more rapid (despite the fact that they
tend to have a lower weight at birth), but at the same time they exhibit a
greater incidence of allergies and     tension   problems. The latter is a likely
result of the increased parental attention (and accompanying expectations)
directed at first borne.
        With respect to the other two   child    characteristics, male    children   are
less   likely   to have poor vision and more likely to have allergies and be

tense   than are female children. These sex differences remain unaffected by
the inclusion of the endogenous     variables.       Twins differ   significantly from
other children in their health statue only in that they are less likely to
have allergies. To conclude, there are health differences associated with

these exogenous child characteristics, in particular with being a first
born child, although these differences are not uniform across the various
measures of health.

E. Endogenous Child Health Endowments
        The coefficients of the five endogenous measures of the child's health
endowment appear in Table VII. Three of these measures reflect differences
in the birth outcome (LIGHT1, LIGHT2, CABN), and the remaining two indicate
the mother's age at the time of the child's birth (IMAG, HMAG). One or more
of the three birth outcome variables is significantly associated with poorer
current health for the measures P?GHEALTH, ABVI S, ACABN, SCHABS • HEIGHT,  I
IWEIGHT, and APERI. Especially notable are the effects of these variables
on height and weight: babies of low birth weight have subsequent height
                                                                                           I
                                                     TABLE VII
                          Coefficients of Family Size and of       Endogenous Endowments*
                                       ("? statistics in parentheses)

Explanatory
 Variable     PFGHEALTH    AEVIS      HDBP      ALLEG       TENS       ACABN    SCHABS   IHEIGHT     IWEIGHT    APERI


    LIGHT1       .0043      .0367    .0448      .0006      .1065       .0584     .0600      —.5135    —.3918    .0928
               (0.004)     (0.66)   (1.99)    (0.000)     (2.33)       (4.91)   (3.81)   (15.02)      (8.32)   (0.85)


    LIGHT2       .1113    —.0102    —.0001      .0003     .0489       —.0005     .0156      —.4529    —.3830   —.0203
                (9.08)     (0.17)   (0.00)    (0.000)     (1.63)     (0.001)    (0.86)   (38.63)     (26.27)   (0.13)


    CABN         .0534     .0590     .0057      .0068     .0504        .0381    —.0172      —.1506   —.1551     .0896
                (2.48)     (6.73)   (0.13)     (0.07)     (2.05)      (8.21)    (1.20)      (5.08)    (5.13)   (3.12)

                                                                                                                        I
    IIIAG       —.0557    —.0034    —.0113     —.0024    —.0156       —.0089    —.0125      —.1783   —.1860     .1229
                (3.42)    (0.03)    (0.63)     (0.01)     (0.25)      (0.57)    (0.79)      (9.01)    (9.32)   (7.41)


    ID4AG        .0992     .0132     .0222     —.0100     .0305       —.0004     .0090       .1315     .1716    .0169
                (4.72)    (0.65)    (3.68)     (0.30)    (1.44)      (0.002)    (0.66)      (7.43)   (12.04)   (0.21)


    LESS2O       .0067    —.0049    —.0024    —.0139     —.0009       —.0009     .0020      —.0536   —.0079    .0110
                (1.85)    (2.20)    (1.11)    (14.32)    (0.03)       (0.22)    (0.80)   (30.70)     (61.51)   (2.24)



*
Coefficients are statistically significant at the      5 percent level    if
                                                                          the F" is greater than 3.84 for a
two—tailed test, or 2.69 for a one-tailed    test.   The explanatory variables included in the equations are
as for Equation 2 (see note to Table V).
                                       — 38   —




and weight of almost half a standard    deviation   below   the   mean   for   their age—

sex cohort.

        The results for the mother's age variables are less uniform. Children

of young mothers are significantly healthier when health is measured by

PFGHEALTH and significantly less healthy for height, weight, and the pen-

dontal index. Conversely, children of older mothers are significantly less

healthy according to the results for PFGHEALTH and HDBP and more healthy for

height and weight. These observed relationships between mother's age and

children's health reflect two forces that go in opposite directions. Rela-

tively young mothers are probably in better physical health when they give

birth, but they are more likely to have unwanted births and consequently

receive poorer prenatal care and spend less time with their children.

Births at relatively old ages pose health risks both to mothers and chil-

dren, but older mothers might be more efficient in caring for their

children.

        As mentioned earlier, all five of these variables are endogenous in

that   they are determined simultaneously with the health measures. There-
fore the    reportedsignificant relationship between a poor birth outcome
and poorer   current health can be interpreted not only as the result of
behavioral   or physiological relationships, but also as     the impact of       un-

measured factors that affect both early and current health (tastes,

attitudes   towards medical care, etc.). A similar remark can be          made   re-
garding the reported coefficients of the two mother's age variables.

F. Family Size
       Family   size has significant health effects only for height, weight, and

the incidence of allergies (see Table VI). Children from larger families

tend   to be shorter and thinner than other children, but they also exhibit a
                                                                                            I
                                     -    —39—



smaller probability of having allergies. Whether these relationships reflect
quality—quantity substitution on the part of the parents or some alterna-
tive mechanism (such as the effects of an exogenous constraint on the amount
of parents' time available to each child) cannot be determined.

G•    Mother' a Work Status
        The two mother's work status variables (MWORICPT, *JORKPT) are         not sig-
nificantly related to most of the health measures (see Table VIII).39 When
an "F" test on the pair of variable coefficients is conducted, they have
significant effects only for IHEIGHT and APERI (we do not show these tests).
In both cases, children of working mothers have poorer health than do other
children. The coefficients of the individual work status variables indicate
that working full—time has a greater impact on the periodontal index, while
working part-time has a greater impact on height. In general these results
reveal that participation by mothers in the labor market is detrimental to
the   health of their children only with respect to two of the measures which             re-
flect the child's nutritional status. This finding is especially plausible

in that working mothers are clearly less able to supervise their children's

diets.


H. Medical Care

         The regression coefficients of the dichotomous variables that identify

children   who last   saw   a   dentist more than   one   year ago (DENT12) and children

who   have never seen a dentist (DENTIST3) appear in Table VIII. These two
variables serve as negative proxies of the amount of preventive medical care
and positive proxies of the price of preventive care: parents of children
who have seen a dentist within the past year are more likely to obtain pre-
ventive medical care services for their children and to face a lower price
                                                            TABLE    VIII
                               Coefficients   of Mother's   Work
                                                               Status and Medical Care Variables*
                                                 ("F" statistics in parentheses)


Explanatory
    Variable     WGREALTH          ABVIS       HDBP    ALLEG         TENS     ACABN   SCHABS    IHEIGHT   IWEIGHT   APERI


    topxp'r            .0333     —.0139    —.0006     —.0023       —.0114    —.0057     .0001   —.1272    —.0179     .0075
                      (2.24)      (0.87)   (0.003)     (0.02)       (0.25)   (0.42)   (0.000)    (8.41)    (0.16)   (0.05)


    ?I0RXFT            .0345       .0066      .0036    .0102       —.0322     .0123    .0025    —.0624     .0164     .0849
                      (2.62)      (0.21)    (0.13)     (0.41)       (2.12)   (2.16)    (0.07)    (2.20)   (0.15)    (7.05)
                                                                                                                             0
    DENT12             .0992     —.0009    —.0211     —.0423       —.0263     .0161    .0026    —.1051    —.0164    .0726
                     (22.41)     (0.004)   (4.55)     (7.30)        (1.46)   (3.83)   (0.07)     (6.47)   (0.15)    (5.34)



    DENTIST3           .0887     —.0227    —.0110     —.0453         .0012    .0153    .0156    —.2098    —.1067    .0897
                     (15.76)      (2.29)   (1.08)     (7.34)       (0.003)   (3.06)   (2.30)    (22.65)   (5.57)



*
    See Table Vt!.




     I.
                                              — 41 —




 of care. These parents may also have preferences for high
                                                           quality children.
 When the periodontal index is the health measure, these two variables also
 proxy direct inputs in the production of dental health.
        One or     of these medical care proxies are significantly related
                 both

 to seven of the ten health measures (all but AEVIS, TENS, and SCHABS).
 For five of the seven (PFGHEALTH, ACABN, IHEIGHT, IWEIGHT, and APERI) chil-
 dren who saw a dentist within the past year have higher levels of health
 than children who saw a dentist more than one year ago or children who
 never saw a dentist. This relationship is reversed for ALLEG and HDBP.
 The perverse allergy effects probably indicate a greater awareness of
allergy problems among parents who            took their   children to   a   dentist within
the   past year. The blood pressure effect is puzzling, and we offer no ex-

planation of it.

       These preventive medical        care        to have the largest im-
                                              proxies appear

pacts on health measures that reflect basic nutritional status. In the
height, weight,    and   peridontal.                                  vari-
                                       index equation, the coefficient of the

able that identifies children who never saw a dentist is large relative to
the coefficients of other independent variables. In the height regression
the coefficient of DENTIST3 equals 21 percent of the standard deviation in
height. The corresponding figures in the weight and peridontal index reg-
ressions are 11 percent and 12 percent, respectively. Not only are these
coefficientslarge, but they apply to a substantial proportion of our
sample: 18 percent of the children in the sample never saw a dentist.
       Thestatistically significant effects of the two dental variables on
the periodontal index are particularly noteworthy since in this case our
estimates directly measure the effect of oral health input on oral health
output. In fact, for this health measure            the beneficial input effects
                                              — 42   —




that   we report are      likely   to understate true input effects because of reverse

causality that runs from a reduction in oral health to an increase in the

probability of contacting a dentist.


                          V. Income Differences in Children's Health

        Much of   the attention policy makers and health professionals     direct at

children's     health   focuses on differences related to family income levels. In

this section, we discuss how our results can be used to provide additional

insight into the nature and causes of these differences.

        Our findings of small, and, in most cases, nonsignificant income ef-

fects on children's health may appear to be at variance with accepted opin-

ion.    Indeed,                                             differences in
                  in our introduction we refer to large reported

health associated with differences in family income. One explanation of
these contradicting conclusions is that the "conventional wisdom" is based
to a large extent on income differentials in infant mortality and low birth
weight. Our paper does not deal with infant mortality, and low birth

weight is treated as an explanatory variable rather than one to be ex-

plained. Moreover,        our sample consists of a cohort of children who sur-

vived beyond the first year of life so that a substantial proportion of low

birth weight infants are not included. (It is well known that low birth

weight has a   strong     positive relationship with subsequent infant mortality

(see   Lewit (40)J.
        In   addressing   the health of children in mid—childhood, we find that
while for some health measures simple income comparisons    reveal large
                                                                 do

differences between the health of children from low and high income families,
these differences largely disappear when one controls for differences in
                                                                                         I
                                         — 43   —




other family characteristics that are highly correlated with income. To dam—
onstrate how large a portion of the apparent (or gross) income differences
would be attributed to associated family characteristics, in Table IX we
provide illustrative calculations for the measures PFGHEALTH, IEZIGHT,
IWEIGHT, ALLEG, and APERI •   These are the only health measures for which
statistically significant gross income differences are observed in our sam-
ple. The third column of      Table   IX shows the gross differences in these
measures between children in families with annual income under $5,000 and
those   in   families with annual income of $5,000 or more. A $5,000 family in-

come cutoff is selected because it identifies the lowest quartile of the in-
come distribution. The gross differences in column            (3)   are to be compared
to health differences that are allocated to         income   when all   other exogenoum

explanatory variables in our basic equations are held constant (column (4)1.
The   "net" income effects are less than one—half (and in some cases, one—
quarter) of the observed gross income differences for these five health mea-
sures. The difference between net and gross income effects becomes even
larger when the set of endogenous variables is also held constant [column
(5)]. The conclusion to be drawn is clear: gross income differences in
health greatly overstate the true relationship between family income and
health.
        If the reported gross income differences are not primarily a result of
differences in income, what does account for them? To answer this question
we calculate how much of the gross high-low income differences in the above
five health variables can be attributed to specific explanatory variables
or sets of these variables. The procedure is simply to multiply the co-
efficients of these explanatory variables by the differences in their mean
values in the high and low family income samples of children. The resulting
                                                     — 44     -



                                                 TABLE   IX
               Income Differences in Selected Current Health Measures


                      Mean,              Mean,                            Net Differenceb
                      Family             Family                         —_______________
                      Income             Income             Gross
                                                                    a   Equation Equation
variable          >    $5,000        c    $5,000         Difference       (1)      (2)


PFGHEALTR              .394               .589             —.195         —.079     —.072


I}IGHT                 .099              —.181                .280        .079       .053


IWEIGHT                .106              —.114                .220        .091       .066


APEBI                 —.097               .117             —.214        —.077      —.071


ALLEG                  .176               .108                .068        .016      .008




   aGross difference equals column (1) minus column (2). As shown in
Table   X,     the gross differences vary little from differences that are
predicted      on the basis of a regression of the health variables on all

the independent variables.

   b
    Net difference is the difference in mean health levels between the

two income classes predicted on the basis of the income coefficients                  in
Table V. LESS 20,             LIGHT1, LIGHT2, CABN • MW0RPT, PIIOR1T, LMAG, HMAG,

DENT12 and DENTIST3 are excluded for equation (1) and included for equa-
tion    (2).
                                          — 45   —




estimates (in Table X) illustrate how much of the gross difference would di.-
appear if   the   low income class ii given the same mean values of the inde-
pendent variables as the high income class and if    the   relationship between
health and the explanatory variables is the same in both income classes.
They also identify which explanatory variables are responsible for the
sizable gap between the grass and the net income effects in Table IX.
      Several results in Table X are noteworthy. First, a1ost all of the
observed differences in the five health measures between the high and low
income subsamples can be accounted for by differences in the independent
variables that we have included in our empirical work (either equation (1)
or (2)). Second, a detailed examination of the decomposition that uses only
the exogenous variables (equation (1)] indicates that differences in parents'
schooling account for a large portion of observed grass income differences
in health. Indeed, for three of the five variables——APERI, IHEIGHT, and
IWEIGHT--differences in parents' average schooling between high and lois in—
come families account for a larger portion of the health differences than
do differences in income • Parents' schooling remains as an important ex-
planatory factor even when the set of endogenous variables is     entered   in the
equation. In            case, however, dental care and, to a lesser extent,
                  the latter

family size also make substantial contributions to the grass income differ-
ences in health.
                                                             TABLE X
                 Components    of the Difference in PPGHEALTH, APERI,        IHEIGHT, IWEIGHT and ALLEG
                                Between Children from High and Low Income Families*


                                 PFGHEALTH              APERI           IHEIGHT               IWEIGHT            ALL
                                                                                                                  -
                                 Eq.    Eq.           Eq.      Eq.     Eq.      Eq.          Eq.     Ec      Eq.       Eq.
    Component                     (1)        (2)      (1)      (2)     (1)      (2)          (1)     (2)     (1)       (2)



Family income                   —.079 —.072          —.077 —.071       .079      .053        .091    .066    .016      .008
Parents schooling               —.071      —.057     —.131    —.111    .115      .070        .062    .027    .045      .035

Other exogenous       family
characteristics                   .001       .004    —.011    —.005    .012      .010        .002    .006    .004      .004

Exogenous    child
endowments                      —.003      —.002      .001      .001   .008      .007        .010    .007    .003      .002

Region                          —.025      —.024      .019      .021   .013      .010        .008    .008   —.005   —.005
                                                                                                                              0'
City size                       —.005      —.008     —.001      .001   .008      .005        .021    .017   —.004   —.005

                                  —                    —                —                     —               —
Family size                                —.004               -.006             .031                .044              .008

                                  -                    —      —.008     —        .014         —      .013    -         .000
Endogenous endowments                        .000

                                  -                    —        .001    —       —.005         —     -.001    —      —.000
Mother's work status                         .001

                                  —                    —                —                     —      .026     —        .015
Dental. care                               —.031              —.028              .059

Total.   — Predicted            —.182      —.193     —.200    —.205    .235      .254        .194    .213    .059      .062
Cross    Difference
Actual Gross Difference                    —.195               —.214             .280                .220              .068


*
 Only exogenous       variables are   in   Equation 1. All variables are    in Equation 2.
                                      — 47   —




                        VI.     Stry and Implications
      In this study aultivariat. techniques have been employed to      ne the
determinants of eleven components of health in a national sampl. of white chil-
dren between the ages of six and eleven. The most important empirical re-
sults and their policy implications are highlighted below.
      Th. partial effects of family income on health are small and seldom
statistically significant. Indeed, some health problems—-high blood pres-
sure, allergies, and tension——are more likely to occur among children from
high income families. This phenomenon can be viewed as the early fore-
runner of, the positive relationship between income and morbidity and mortal-
ity rates observed for adults in the United States (for example, Auster, et
al. (41) and Grossman (25) and (42)]. The general finding of small partial
income effects is supported by analysis of gross health differences between
children from lower (under $5,000 per annus) and higher ($5,000 per annus and
over) income families. In those cases where significant gross health differ-
ences do exist between children from these two income classes, decomposition
of these gross differences shows them to be attributable in large part to
exogenous factors other than income itself.
      In contrast to family income • parents' schooling i. an important deter-
minant of children's health. In most instances children of well educated
parents are in better health than those of less well educated parents. In
fact, for four of the five health measures that have a significant gross
correlation with income, much of this observed income difference is accounted
for by associated differences in parents' schooling. This would suggest that
policies to raise parents' schooling would not only benefit their children's
health, but would also reduce differences in health between children from
low and high income families.
                                             — 48   —




        The   other exogenous family characteristics studied-—the absence of a
father in the home and     the   use of a foreign language    in   the home—-have at
best    small impacts on   children's health. A similar      conclusion   is to be
drawn regarding the child's exogenous endowments--his sex, twin status,
and whether    he is a first—born--with the exception of the latter. First
born children do have some health advantages, but they also rate more
poorly    than other   children when health factors     related   to the new   morbid-

ity (allergies and tension) are examined.
        The final   type of   exogenous variables studied describe the region and
urban-rural    characteristicsthe child's residence. Our major finding
                                 of

with respect to these variables is that locational factors play an impor-
tant,   but largely unexplained,      role in   determining children's health
levels.    This finding emphasizes the need for additional research investi-

gating the source of these striking locational effects on children's health.

        Among the various endogenous variables studied, our most interesting

results are for the     variables representing mother' s     labor force status,

family size, and the      frequency with which the child received dental care.
The mother's labor force status and family size variables are interesting

primarily     because of their   Lack of   importance. That is, both of    these fac-

tors have small health effects and are strongly related only to the health

variables representing the child's nutritional status (height, weight, and

the periodontal index) •       Children   whose mothers are in the labor force or

who come from larger families are likely         to score more poorly with respect
to these nutritional measures. In contrast with the roles of mother's labor
force status and family size, the dental care variables have large and sig-
nificant impacts for most of the health measures. Interpretation of this

finding is not altogether clear-cut, however, since the dental care
                                                                                         I
                                              — 49   —




variables proxy not only the price and availability of medical care, but also
family attitudes towards preventive health care and towards            health   in general.
        The implications of our    findings   are at the same   time   both   heartening
and   disheartening. For example, the finding that differences in health re-
lated solely to income are smaller than commonly believed implies that
policies that aim      to improve the   well—being of children via     income   transfers,
such   as   those advocated by the recent Carnegie Council on Children [Keniston

(3)] would have, at best, very small effects on health. A related implica-

tion pertains to proposals by Newberger, et al. (43), Keniston (3), and

Marmor (44) to restrict national health insurance        to rather complete pre-
natal and    pediatric care coverage to offset variations in health associated

with income. Again, our results indicate that there is not much to offset,

even though pediatric care utilization is very sensitive to family income

[Colic and Grossman (45)]. At the same time, however, our findings regard-

ing the important role of the dental care variables suggest that policies

directed at either improving the availability of medical care or altering

public attitudes towards preventive care could have large health payoffs

for children in all types of families.

       Other favorable implications of our findings relate to three recent

striking trends in the demography of U.S. families. These trends are the

increase in the proportion of families headed by women, the increase in

the labor force participation rate of married women with children, and the
                                               — 50 —




reduction in family size. We find that the absence of a father in the house—
hold has littl. impact on children's health. Therefore, while the recent
rise in the divorce rate might affect certain dimensions of children's well-
being, health does not appear to be one of them. The same ccmaent applies
to the increase in labor force participation rates of married women with the
exception that with respect to our two best measures of long-run nutritional
status—-height and the periodontal index——children rate more poorly if the
mother works. Since, however, height is negatively related to family size,
the detrimental impacts of increases in labor force participation rates are
offset to some extent by the beneficial impacts of reductions in family size.
        The implications of ourresults regarding parents' schooling may ap-
pear to be clear-cut at face value since parents' schooling plays such an
important role in determining children's health. Caution and more research
are required, however, before actually applying them to schooling policies.
First, the differences in years of parents' schooling between the high and
low income samples are very large (three years both for mothers and fathers),
and these would probably be extremely costly              to eliminate. But more impor-

tant, the mechanisms         by which parents' schooling affects children's health
still are     not well known. Consider, for example, the finding that parents'

schooling is an important determinant of children's height. This result has

a very definite policy         implication   if the mechanism at work is a positive

correlation between schooling and        nutritional      intakes or between schooling

and   the   knowledge   of   what constitutes an appropriate diet. The policy im-

plication     is much less clear—cut if the mechanism at work is a positive

relationship between parents'        schooling and genetic inheritance that is not
fully   captured by the exogenous endowment         and   early   health variables in the
                                         — 51 —




regressions.    Clearly, more research on the exact role of parents' schooling

is needed.

        The diverse findings in this paper underscore the multidimensional na-

ture of children's health. In fact, our results illustrate how the use of

a single index could be misleading since the various family characteristic,

can have positive impacts on some components of good health and       negative
impacts   on others. For example, an important distinction is found between
the relationship of parents income and education with the more traditional
health measures (height, the periodontal index) as compared to measures of
the "new morbidity" (the presence of allergies and      tension).   These two
family   characteristics have positive impacts on the traditional measures but
negative impacts on measures of the new morbidity. One can speculate that
the likely upward trend in the new morbidity will lead to more utilization
of physicians' services for problems that are in many cases not amenable to
treatment by physicians, suggesting that some modification in the training
received by pediatricians and in the delivery of pediatric care services
would be desirable.
        Finally, although we do not   altogether   resist speculating about the
implications of our empirical findings, we fully understand that this
paper falls squarely within the sphere of traditional epidemiological re-
search. We document the statistical relationships between family charac—
teristics and measures of children's health in detail, but even though we
outline the    possible role of economic factors, we cannot determine the

exact   nature of the mechanisms that generate these relationships. Nor was
it possible to establish the causal nature of these relationships in a
definitive sense •    One   important and unambiguous conclusion of our study,
however, is that the present tendency to base      government   child health
                                       — 52   —




programs   on simplistic notions that income is the primary source of differ-
ences   in children's   health will not lead towards fruitful or successful   pub-

lic policy regarding children's    health.




                                                                                     I
                                               F_i

                                             FOOTNOTES



          Research for     this   paper was supported by PHS Grant No. 1 ROl ES 02917
from   the National Center for Health Services Research to the NBER and by a
grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation to the NBER. We are indebted
to Victor Fuchs, Robert Michael, Randall Olsen, Mark Rosenzweig, T. Paul
Schultz, and Kenneth Wolpin for couments on an earlier draft; and to Ann
Colle, Jacob Geethalter •         and   Steven Jacobowitz for research assistance.
This report has not yet undergone the review accorded official NBER pub-
lications; in particular, it has not yet been sukmtitted for approval by the
Board of Directors.


         This    change   in emphasis is    partially the result of the Coleman        Report
and   subsequent    research,     which   showed that the   effects of school     quality on
children's    achievement may       be small relative     to the   effects of   family char-

acteristics. Averch, et al. (2) provide an excellent review of this                   liter-
ature.


                 states require    children to receive      certain   ismunizations before
they   nay begin attending school. An exception to the text statement is
Connecticut, which requires school children to have physical examinations
every three years (Foltz and Brown (4)].

         3This definition of the new morbidity is           quoted   from Haggerty, et al.
(5), p. 316.

       4mi. point is made         by Starfield (6) who      emphasizes that although many
persona have studied the effects of           medical    care and socioeconomic character-
istics on   infant mortality,       relatively   few   have examined the   effects of these

variables   on   the health of children who       survive the first year of       life. For
                                             F- 2



a   few recent     exceptions, see Kaplan, et al.(7); Hu (8); Kessner (9);

Haggerty, et al. (5); and Inman (10).


        5This evidence comes from Cycles       II and   III of the   Health   Examination

Survey and    is     reported in NCHS (11), pp. 22—26.


           full description of the sample, the sampling technique, and              the   data

collection is presented in NCHS (12). The one deficiency of this sample from

the point     of   view of studying children's health is the exclusion of children

in   institutions. To the      extent that these children are more likely to have

serious   and disabling     physical   conditions, the reported incidence of certain

conditions    will be    lower in our sample than in the entire population of chil-

dren. In addition, if the probability of the institutionalization of a child

with a given       condition depends on   the various family characteristics studied

here,   our   results   will incorporate unknown    biases.    The number of     institu-

tionalized children is small, however, at about four tenths of a percent of

all children aged 5 through 13 years. [This is the proportion of 5—13 year-

olds living in "group quarters" in 1970 according to the U.S. Bureau of the

Census (13), Tables 52 and 205. The corresponding percentages by race are

.38 percent for whites and .7 percent for blacks.)


         7lntroducing    uncertainty about the number and      quality of     children coin-
plicates the model, but many of the basic insights            provided by the notion of

both    a quantity and quality dimension of children remain valid. Ben              Porath

and   Welch (16) illustrate how uncertainty regarding one aspect of quality——

the child's sex——affects fertility.


         8flecent medical advances     allow some types of    poor genetic endowments to

be detected inter utero and defective fetuses aborted, so that                parents can
now partially control their children's genetic endowments.
                                          F- 3



         9See Willis (15) and Becker and Lewis (14) for a full development of

these points.


         10
           Associated     with this output demand function are input demand func-
tions for parents' time, medical care, and             other    market health inputs.
These input demand functions will not be           studied here.


         11Presumably,     parents' education raises efficiency in the production of
many household commodities. Therefore, there is an "own                   price   effect" due
to an improvement in the efficiency of producing children's health and a
"cross    price effect" due to an improvement          in   the efficiency of producing
other commodities. The statmnent in the text with respect to the impact of
parents'    education on children's health assumes that             the "own price effect"
outweighs    the "cross price effect" if the two effects go in opposite direc-

tions.


                 model   outlined above is not  at explaining variations in
                                                 directed

a child's health during his childhood, but rather treats child health as a
single   datum——his permanent health measured, say, at the end of his child-
hood or    as an average over his childhood.           If one   wanted to investigate
changes    in health during childhood, one       uld want to develop a model which
explicitly examines how patterns of health and health investments over child-
hood are    determined     by life cycle variations in both         the   prices of health
inputs and the marginal products of health investments.

         13tdwards and    Grossman   (17) and   (18)   use this model to study hidrs
health and    intellectual    development, Leibowitz and Friedman (19) use it to
study health inputs, Tomes (20) uses it to examine years of schooling attained,
and   Ishikawa   (21) uses it to explain intergenerational transfers of education
                                               F-4

and   financial wealth. Both Ishikawa (21) and Leibowitz and Friedman (19)
treat family size as egenous.

         4See, for example Sullivan (22), Berg (23), and, more recently, Ware
(24).

         5See    Grossman   (25), P. 58.      This definition is also very similar to

that proposed in Torrance (26).


         16
           A   good discussion of the subsidiary issue of how one        measures     dis-
ability in      children can be found in Schack and Starfield (27).

         170f   course,   there   is a positive relationship between     the   two   in   the

sense that a child with low          health   capital is more likely to contract some

acute    conditions   and   to    have them for a more extended time period. For

example,      Birch and Gussow (28)     discuss how   nutrition   (which is clearly a

determinant      of "permanent" health status) and disease are intimately re-
lated.

         8The    earlier theoretical discussion pertains       to   children's permanent

health status measured        at   the end of their childhood, while health measures

in   the Cycle 11 data are for 6 to 11 year—old children. Our analysis im-
plicitly assumes that health in mid—childhood is a good proxy for the health
stocks    at the end of childhood.


         9In earlier work some        attempts were made to condense     the   health infor-
mation   using principal component analysis. The analysis yielded almost as

many    equally weighted components as         there were initial health measures.
                                              F- 5

                 studies we consulted axe: Wallace (29); Mechanic (30), Mindlin
and Lobach       (31); Talbot, et al. (32); Kaplan, at al. (7); Hu (8); Schack and

Starfiald       (27); Kessner (9); Haggerty, et al. (5); and       Inman (10).

         2The following physicians gave us extremely helpful advice • John

McNamara, M.D., then Assistant Professor of Public Health and Pediatrics
at Colisnbia University       School of Public Health and      Associate Coiimtissioner
in the New York City Department           of Health; Roy   Brown, M.D., Associate
Professor of Cormunity Medicine and Pediatrics at the Mount Sinai School of
Medicine    of the City University of New York; Thomas Travers, D.D.S.,
Director of Ambulatory Care in the New York City Department of Health; and
Ruth T.    Gross, Professor of Pediatrics and Director of Ambulatory Pediat-

rics, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, California.


         221f   the   actual height or    weight   of each age—sex group   is   normally dis-
tributed, IHEIGHT       and IWEIGHT could be translated directly into the child's
height   or weight percentile. In addition            to the continuous height     and   weight
measures,   we also experimented with discrete measures identifying children
who are more than two standard deviations from the mean height or weight for
their age—sex cohort. These measures were used to allow for non—continuous
relationships      between height (or weight) and       family characteristics. For
example,   beyond some     weight   level, problems    with obesity start to develop,

so that more weight is no longer better than less weight. Results using

these   discrete measures did       not   differ greatly   from those based     on using
IHEIGHT and IWEIGHT, so we do not report them here.

        23Ce might argue that corrected rather than uncorrected vision is the
appropriate measure to use here. Unfortunately, information about corrected
                                          F— 6


vision is not available in the Cycle 11 data. Information about whether or

not the child wears glasses is available, but it is not clear that the

glasses he wears actually correct his vision defect. Kessner (9), for ex-

ample, finds that 40 percent of children in a low income sample who were

tested   with   their glasses failed a visual acuity test.


      241n defining ACABN, we exclude abnormalities resulting from accidents

or injuries because these are likely to reflect transitory rather than per-

manent health variations.


      25The periodontal index suffers from the defect that it is subject to

intra-rater and     inter-rater variability.     We have experimented with a some-

what sore objective measure of oral health, the number of decayed permanent

and primary teeth adjusted for age and      sex,    and   have   obtained results similar

to those for the peridontal index. Compared to the number of decayed teeth,

the periodontal index reflects more serious oral. health problems.


      26There is no school form for approximately 500 children in the Cycle II

data set. Since excessive absence due to illness is the only variable taken

from the school form, children without the school form are eliminated from

the empirical analysis    9!y when   school absence is the dependent variable.


      27A $7,000 cutoff point is used because it is most consistent with

available evidence on the distribution of inheritances across families.

See Edwards and    Grossman (17) for an elaboration of this point. Note that
the family income measure is an imperfect measure of long—run income and has

an endogenous component because     it   does   not hold constant the father's experi-

ence and   the mother's labor force status. Therefore, we experimented with an
income measure that     held these two factors constant. The adjusted income
                                       F-7

variable was very highly correlated with FINC (the corrlation coefficient
was greater than .99) and the regression results were not altered when ad-
justed income was used in place of FINC. Consequently, we report results
based on the use of FINC in this paper.

       28See, for example, Birch and Guesow (28). Cycle II does not distin-
guish children who are born prematurely, so we cannot determine to what
extent low birth weight is a result of prematurity or of other factors.

       29 the future the National Center for Health Statistics might pro-
vide us with area—specific input availability and price measures. This
will enable us to examine the effects of medical care prices on health
outputs.

      30lnformation about the time of the child's last visit to a doctor is
also available in the data, but would be greatly contaminated by the child's
health level. We refer to the well-known reverse causality between health
and medical care.

              actuality even some of the exogenous variables may not be truly
exogenous •    For example, women who plan to have large families will be less
likely to make large investments in their own education. Or, families for
whom children'. health is an important component of child quality may choose
to live in healthier (non-urban) areas of the country. Similarly, men who
have a high preference for children may choose less intensive jobs--which
presusably yield lower wages—so that they can spend re time with their
children.

              the case of the family size variable, for example, it is very
difficult to identify exogenous variables that enter the family size
                                               F—8


structural equation or the children's health structural               equation    but not
both.


        33Missing information for birth weight (818 observations), FLANG (324
observations), and        income     (290 observations) account for moat of the isissing
observations. In addition, children who              turned   twelve years old between the
time the sample was         chosen   and   the time of   the interview were also excluded.
(There   were 72 such children in the entire Cycle II sample.)


         34Significant race differences were found for the variables IHEIGHT,

IWEIGHT, PPGHE?IILTH,       ALLEG, and APERI.

         35
              See Nerlove   and   Press (39) for a description of this technique.

         36For the four health measures for which we find significant income
effects, we also experimented with a specification for the income                  variable

which   allows for five discrete income           effects   rather than   two   continuous
income effects • In particular, the variables FINC and HFINC were replaced
with four duniny variables which distinguish between five income classes:
less than $5,000; $5,000 to $6,999, $7,000 to $9,999; $10,000 to $14,999;
and $15,000       and   above.    We do not show the results of this specification

because       it yields only one additional insight: for the highest income
class                  a significant marginal impact on health, while it
         income never has
does for one or more of the lower income classes. The coefficient esti-

mates for the other explanatory variables are not sensitive to chanqes in
the   specification of the income variable.


           might predict that mother's education would be more important in
         370ne

explaining variations in children's health than is father's education since
                                                                                              I
most    child care ii done        by the mother. We do not consistently observe this
                                    F- 9


in our results. One reason might be the high correlation between mother's
and father's education (r — .67 in mother—father families).

      38These estimates "ir4mize" the effect of not having a father in the
sense that they are derived under the extreme assition that father's edu-
cation has the same relationship with child health whether or not the
father is actually present (and that the average educational attainment of
absent fathers is the same as for fathers living with their families).
These assumptions are needed to obtain estimates of the relationship be-
tween NOFATH and the various health measures because there is no informa-
tion in our data on the educational attainment of fathers who do not
currently live with their children. Use of the alternative extreme assump-
tion, that there is no relationship between father's education and child
health for children whose fathers are absent from the home, generates
"minimum" estimates of the effect of having an absent father. These "mini-
mum" estimates also indicate that NOFATH has both positive and negative re-
lationships with better health, depending on the health measure used:
significant positive health relationships with NOFATH are reported for
PFGHEALTH, HDBP, and APERI and a significant negative relationship is re-
ported for SCHABS.

      39This   lack of significance is especially notable because the endoge-
nous nature of the mother' s work status variables biases their coefficients
towards having a larger negative relationship with child health than they
would have simply as measures of the mother's opportunity cost of time.
                                           R- 1


                                         REFERENCES



 1. Landeg, William M., and Solmon, Lewis C. "Compulsory Schooling Legis-
             lation: An Economic Analysis of Law and Social Change in the
             Nineteenth Century." Journal of Economic Histon, 32, No. 1
             (March 1972).

2.   Averch, Harvey A., et a].. How       Effective   is Schooling? A Critical Review
             and   Synthesis of Research Findi. Santa Monica: The Rand
            Corporation,      1972.


3. Keniston, Kenneth, and the Carnegie Council on Children. All Our

            dren: The American Family Under Pressure. New York: Harcourt

            Brace Jovanovich, 1977.


4. Foltz, Anne—Marie, and Brown, Donna. "State Response to Federal Policy:

            Children, EPSDT, and the Medicaid Muddle." Medical Care, 13,

            No. 8 (August 1975).


5. Haggerty, Robert    3.,   et a].. Child Health and     the   Community. New York:
            John Wiley and      Sons,   1975.


6. Starfield, Barbara. "Health Needs of Children." In Children'. Medical

            Care Needs and Treatment. Harvard Child Health Project Report,

            Voli.vne II. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1977.

7. Kaplan, Robert    S.,   et a]..    "The Efficacy of a Comprehensive Health Care

           Project: An Empirical Analysis." American Journal of Public

           Health,   62, No. 7 (July 1972).

                                                                                        I
                                        R- 2



 8. Ru, Teh-Wei. "Effectiveness of Child Health and      Welfare   Programs:   A

              Simultaneous   Equations Approach." Socio—Economic Planni
              Sciences,   7 (1973).

 9.   Kessner, David M. Assessment of Medical Care for Children. Contrasts

              in Health Status, Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Institute of

              Medicine, 1974.


10. Inman, Robert P. "The Family Provision of Childrens Health: An Economic

              Analysis." In The Role of Health Insurance     in the   Health

              vices   Sector, edited by Richard Rosett. New York: Neal Watson
              Academic Publications for the National Bureau of Economic
              Research, 1976.

11. National Center for Health Statistics. Examination and Health History
              Findings   Among   Children and Youths, 6—17 Years. U.S. Depart-
              ment of   Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service,

              Vital   and Health Statistics, Series 11, No. 129 (November 1973).

12. National Center for Health Statistics. Plan, Operation, and Response
              Results of a Program    of Children's Examinations. U.S. Depart-
              ment of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service,
              Vital and   Health Statistics, Series 1, No. 5 (1967).


13. U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1970 Census of Population, Vol. I,

              teristics of the Population, Part 1, U.S. Suituary, Sections

              1 and 2. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1973.
                                       R- 3


14. Becker, Gary S., and    Lewis, H. Gregg. "On the   Interaction between the
              Quantity   and   Quality of Children." In New   Economic   Approaches
              to Fertility, edited by T.W. Schultz. Proceedings of a confer-
              ence sponsored by the National Bureau of Economic Research and
              the   Population Council. Journal of Political Economy, 81,

              No. 2, Part II (March/April 1973).


15. Willis, Robert. "A New Approach to the Economic Theory       of   Fertility Be-

              havior." In New Economic Approaches to Fertility, edited by

              T.W. Schultz. Proceedings of a conference sponsored by the

              National Bureau of Econcinic Research and the Population Council.

              Journal of Political Economy, 81, No. 2, Part II (March/April

              1973).


16. Ben-Porath, Yoraxn, and    Welch, Finis. "Do Sex Preferences Really Matter?"
              The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, No. 2 (May 1976).


17. Edwards, Linda N., and Grossman, Michael. "An Economic Analysis of

              Children's Health and Intellectual Development." National

              Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 180, May 1977.


18. Edwards, Linda N., and Grossman, Michael. "The Relationship between

              Children's Health and Intellectual Development." National

              Bureau   of Economic Research Working Paper No.    213, November

              1977.


19.   Leibowitz, Arleen, and Friedman, Bernard. "Family Bequests and the

              Derived Demand for Health Inputs." Mimeo., 1976.

                                                                                      I
                                            R- 4

20.   Tomes, Nigel. "Intergenerational Transfers of             Human and Non—Human Capi-
                 tal in a Model of Quality-Quantity Interaction." Ph.D. diss.r-
                 tation,    University of Chicago, 1978.

21. Ishikawa, Tsuneo.         "Family Structures    and   Family   Values in the Theory       of
                 Income    Distribution."    Journal   of   Political Economy,    83,    No. 5

                 (October    1975).

22.   Sullivan, Daniel F.        Conceptual Problems in Developing an Index             of

                 Health.     PHS Pub. No. 1000, Vital and Health Statistics
                 Series 2, No. 17. Rockville, Md.: National Center for
                 Health Statistics, 1966.
23. Berg, Robert L. Health Status Indexes. Proceedings of a conference
                 conducted by Health Services Research, Tuscon, Arizona,
                October 1972. Chicago: Hospital Research and Educational
                Trust, 1973.
24.   Ware,   Jr., John E. "The Conceptualization and Measurement of Health
                for Policy Relevant Research in Medical Care Delivery."
                Presented at the annual meeting of the American Association
                for the Advancement of Science, Boston, Massachusetts,
                February    1976.

25. Grossman, Michael. The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
                Investigation.        New York:   Columbia   University   Press   for   the

                National Bureau of Economic        Research,   1972.
                                        R- 5


26.   Torrance, George W. "Health Status Index Models: A Unified Mathematical
               View."    Management   Science   22, No. 9 (May 1976).


27. Schack, E].isabeth, and      Starfield,   Barbara.   "Acute Disability in Child-
               hood: Examination of Agreement between Various Measures."
               Medical Care, 11, No. 4 (July-August 1973).

28.   Birch, Herbert G.,     and Gussow, Joan Dye. Disadvantaged Children: Health,
               Nutrition, and School     Failure. New York:     Harcourt,   Brace and
               World, Inc., 1970.


29. Wallace, Helen M. Health Services for Mothers and Children. Philadelphia:

               W.B. Saunders Company,     1962.

30. Mechanic, David. "The Influence of Mothers on Their Children's Health,

              Attitudes and Behavior." Pediatrics, 33 (March          1964).

31.   Mindlin, Rowland L.,     and Lobach, Katherin S., "Consistency and Change in

              Choice    of   Medical Care for Preschool    Children." Pediatrics, 48
               (September 1971).

32.   Talbot, Nathan B, et al., editors. Behavioral Science in Pediatric

              Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, 1971.




33. National Center for Health Statistics. Height and Weight of Children:

              United States. U.S. Department        of   Health, Education and

              Welfare, Public Health Service, Vital and Health Statistics,

              Series 11, No. 104 (September 1970).
w

                                            R- 6


    34.   National Center for Health Statistics.    Anthropos*etric   and Clinical
                  s.       U.S.   Departhent of Health, Education and   Welfare,   Public

                   Health Service, Vital and   Health Statistics, Publication No.
                   (HRA) 75—1229 (April 1975).


    35.   Seoane, Nicole, and Latham, Michael C. "National Anthropoiaetry in the
                   Identification of Malnutrition in Childhood." Journal of
                  Tropical Pediatric and Environmental Child Health (September
                  1971).

    36. National Center for Health Statistics. Hearing Levels of Children by Age
                  and Sex: United States. U.S. Departhent of Health, Education and
                  Welfare, Public Health Service, Vital and Health Statistics,
                  Series 11, No. 102 (February 1970).

    37. National Center for Health Statistics.      Binocular   Visual Acuity of
                  dren: Demographic and Socioeconomic Characteristics. U.S.
                  Departhent of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Ser-
                  vice, Vital and Health Statistics, Series 11, No. 112
                  (February 1972).

    38. Russell, A.L. "A System of Classification and Scoring for Prevalence
                  Surveys of Peridontal Disease." Journal of Dental Research,
                  35 (June 1956).

    39. Nerlove, Marc, and Press, S. James. "Notes on the Log—Linear or Logistic
                  Model for the Analysis of Qualitative Socioeconomic Data."
                  Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation, 1973.
                                      R- 7



40.   Lewit, Eugene M. "Experience with Pregnancy:    The   Demand for Prenatal
              Care and   the Production of Surviving Infants." Ph.D. disser-

              tation, City    University of New York, 1977.

41. Auster, Richard, et al. "The Production of Health: An Exploratory
              Study." Journal of Human Resources, 4, No. 4 (Fail 1969).


42. Grossman, Michael. "The Correlation Between Health arid Schooling." In

              Household Production and Consution, edited by Nestor E.

              Terleckyj. New York: Columbia University Press for the National

              Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.


43. Newberger, Eli, et al. "child Health in America: Toward a Rational Pub-

              lic Policy." Milbank Memorial Fund quarterly 54, No. 3
               (Summer 1976).

44.   Marmor, Theodore R. "Rethinking National Health Insurance." The Public

              Interest, No. 46 (Winter 1977).


45. Colic, Ann D., and Grossman, Michael. "Determinants of Pediatric       Care
              Utilization."     National Bureau of Economic Research Working

              Paper No. 240, April 1978.




                                                                                  I
