         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




INVENTIORY FLUCTUATIONS, TEMPORARY LAYOFFS
         AND 'IHE BUSINESS CYCLE

            Martin Feldstein
       NBER and Harvard University
             Alan Auerbach
       NBER and Harvard University


          Working Paper No. 259




  NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
           Cambridge MA 02138
                                                     Working Paper 259
                                                             July 1978

                           SUMMARY



Inventory Fluctuations, Temporary Layoffs and the Business Cycle

                        Martin Feldstein
                         Alan Auerbach

     Firms respond to fluctuations in demand by changing their
inventories and their levels of production. The relative magnitudes
of the inventory and production responses have important implications
for the overall cyclical behavior of the economy. Government
policies that affect the costs of holding inventories and the costs
of the temporary layoffs that accompany reductions in the level of
output can therefore have significant effects on the magnitude of
aggregate fluctuations. The current paper presents new econometric
evidence on the nature of inventory adjustments and then examines
how changes in inventory behavior affect the overall business cycle.
      The analysis in this paper was motivated by our discovery that
the parameter estimates of the traditional productional adjustment
model are not consistent with the observed magnitudes of inventory
change and the production. We have shown here that this production
adjustment model is a special case of a more general two-speed adjust-
ment process in which both production and inventory targets adjust
slowly. Our estimates of the two-speed model clearly reject the pro-
duction adjustment model in favor of the target adjustment model in
which the inventory target adjusts slowly to changes in sales but pro-
duction adjusts rapidly to changes in the desirIinventory.
     Our analysis of the spectral properties of a simple macroeconomic
model show that the production adjustment model and the target adjust-
ment model can imply quite different cyclical behavior of the economy
as a whole. Depending on the autocorrelation of the disturbance, govern-
ment policies that reduce the speed with which production responds to
changes in desired inventories and that place greater reliance on
inventoiyadjustment may stabilize national income. Further analysis of
these questions with more realistic models would clearly be desirable.

Martin Feldstein, President                         Alan Auerbach
National Bureau of Economic Research                Department of Economics
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                           Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138                      Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 868-3905                                      (617) 495-2144
         Inventory Fluctuations, Temporary Layoffs and the Business Cycle


                                Martin Feldstein*
                                 Alan Auerbach*



     Firms respond to fluctuations in demand by changing their inventories and

their levels of production. The relative magnitudes of the inventory and

production responses have important implications for the overall cyclical

behavior of the economy. Government policies that affect the costs of holding

inventories and the costs of the temporary layoffs that accompany reductions

in the level of output can therefore have significant effects on the magnitude

of aggregate fluctuations. The current paper presents new econometric

evidence on the nature of inventory adjustments and then examines how changes

in inventory behavior affect the overall bysiness cycle.

     Traditional econometric models of the behavior of inventories of finished

goods assume that firms adjust production to eliminate gradually the difference

between actual inventories and "desired" or target" inventories.1 The usual

parameter estimates imply that this adjustment occurs very slowly; typically,

more than a year is required for half of the adjustment to be completed. In a

previous paper (Feldstein and Auerbach, 1976) we showed that the sizes of the

total inventory changes that are observed are much too small for such a slow


     *
      Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
research is part of the NEER Research Program on Economic Fluctuations. This
paper represents the views of the authors and has not been reviewed by the
NBER Board of Directors. We are grateful to the National Science Foundation
for support of this research and to Shelby Herman of the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, Department of Commerce for providing unpublished data on inventories.

     1See in particular Lovell (1961, 1964), Darling and Lovell (1965), Childs
(1967), Beisley (1969) and Hay (1970).
                                      —2—

adjustment to be plausible.1 In place of the traditional model of inventory

adjustment we suggested a specification which we called the "target adjustment

model": firms adjust their desired or "target" level of inventories to sales

with a substantial lag but then adjust production to make actual inventories

equal desired inventories within a single quarter. This target adjustment

model is consistent with the data and does not involve an implausible contrast

between the size of the production adjustment and the time required for it to

occur.

     The traditional "production adjustment model" and our "target adjustment

model" are both extreme cases of a more general process in which the inventory

target adjusts with a lag to the level of sales and production then adjusts

with a lag to achieve this target. The current paper presents this more

general "two speed adjustment model" and discusses the parameter values that

we have estimated with new data for both durable goods and nondurable goods

manufacturing industries. These estimates coincide almost exactly with the

implications of the target adjustment model and clearly contradict the tradi-

tional production adjustment model.

     The current paper also investigates how changing the parameter values of

this adjustment process would alter the cyclical characteristics of the

economy. For this purpose we specify a very simple model of the economy with

stochastic consumption and then calculate how changes in the inventory adjust-

ment process will alter the stochastic properties of total production. The

effect of the inventory process on cyclical stability is summarized by the



     1During the period since the end of 1958, the largest contraction of
finished goods inventories in the durable goods manufacturing sector occurred
between the first and last quarters of 1971, when inventories fell by $727
million. This was equivalent to less than one day's production. Such a
correction could obviously occur much more rapidly than the traditional models
imply. Similarly, the largest one—year increase in the finished goods inven-
tories in durable goods manufacturing was less than two days of production.
                                    —3—
ratio of the variance of the final output to that of the exogenous stochastic

element as well as by the transfer function value at selected frequencies. We

then discuss how the changes in the inventory adjustment process that we

examine could be brought about by a policy of inventory subsidies or by

changes in the employer tax that finances unemployment insurance benefits.
                                        -4




1. The Production Adjustment Model


        It is useful to begin by presenting and estimating a basic model of

production adjustment. The desired end—of—period level of finished goods
              *
inventories (In) is specified most simply as a linear function of sales (Se):

          1 =         + 3.
(1.1)
                cS
For the moment, we assume that sales during the period are known with certainty

at the beginning of the period.

        Production during the period     is the sum of sales and the change in

inventories:


(1.2)    Pt =   St   +t       —


Desired production can therefore be written as

          *         *
(1.3)    Pt = St + It —


The production adjustment model emphasizes that actual production adjusts to

the desired level of production with a lag. The extent of this production

smoothing depends on the cost of changing the rate of production, the cost of

holding inventories, and the loss that would result from inadequate inventories

(see Holt, et al, P.160). A simple proportional adjustment of the production

rate implies:


(1.4) Pt -      _i    =   A       —



Using equations 1.1 and 1.3 to eliminateP yields the estimable equation



     'A linear inventory target function of this form is derived explicitly
from a quadratic loss function in Holt et.al. (1960).
                                                        -5--




(1.5) Pt =      X+      A(l)S        -
                                         t—l +       (1-A) _1
                                                                        1



      Because the actual sales in a period cannot be known precisely at the

beginning of the period, it is customary to assume that inventory targets are

initially based on the sales expected before the period begins (S) and then

revised as information on actual sales accumulates. We can extend the model

of equations 1.1 through 1.5 by specifying that the inventory and production

targets are based on a weighted average of the initial sales expectation and

the ultimate level of actual sales: 85e +                                    This implies
                                                                (1_e)S.

(1.6) 1* =
            t   as t + aO (Se    —               +
                             t       S
                                         t   )




and


(1.7) P =       St
                     + (S —
                                   S)    + I —
                                                     Ii
The estimable production equation is therefore:


(1.8) Pt             + X(1-4-a)S     —
                                         Ai1 + A8(lfcLXSe           —
                                                                        S)   + (1A


We can convert this production equation into an inventory investment equation

by using equation 1.2 to substitute sales plus inventory investment for


     1The production adjustment model thus differs somewhat from the model of
inventory adjustment developed and estimated by Lovell. In Lovell's formula-
tion, the lagged adjustment refers to the correction ofinventories rather
than production: equation 1.3 is thus I —     —
                                                 =       — 1t—l I  We believe
that there is no reason for this assumption tia produchon adjusts fully to
changes in sales but only partially to changes in desired inventory. We regard
the production adjustment process of equation 1.3, in which production adjusts
at the same rate to all changes in desired production (whether due to changes
in sales or to changes in desired inventory) as a more appropriate description;
see Holt, et.al. (1960) and Hay (1970). In Feldstejn and Auerbach (1976), we
examined Lovell's inventory adjustment model and found that it had the same
implausible parameter values as the current production adjustment model.
                                   •
                                           -6-




production :1


(1.9) It — 1t—l =   X   + ,kcS —       +

                                       + (1—x) 1t—l 1t2 + St —   S1).
     We have estimated equation 1.9 with quarterly data for durable goods

manufacturing industries and for nondurable goods manufacturing industries.

The sample period extends from the first quarter of 1960 through the third

quarter of 1976.2 All of the variables are expressed in constant dollars.

Expected sales are represented by the predictions generated by an ARIMA

process.3 We are grateful to the Department of Commerce for providing newly—

constructed unpublished estimates of constant dollar inventories.

     Ordinary least squares estimates of the parameters of equation 1.9 will

be biased if the random disturbances are serially correlated. We can elim—

mate the effect of first order serial conclation by an autoregressive trans-

formation of equation 1.9; we use nonlinear least squares to obtain an

efficient estimate of this autocorrelation coefficient together with the other

parameters of equation 1.9. Since higher order serial correlation could still

bias the parameter estimates, we also used an alternative instrumental variable

method which provides consistent parameter estimates that are robust with



     1Note that this equation differs from Lovell's inventory adjustment model
by the presence of the final term; see previous footnote.

     2The inventory series used here is only available from the fourth quarter
of 1958. We start with a later period because we require lagged values of the
dependent variable.

     3Although a sales expectation series based on survey data is available,
we have substantial reservations about its quality. Our ARIMA estimates are
based on a fourth order autoregressive process fitted to percentage changes in
sales. In Feldstein and Auerbach (1976) we used the survey data on expecta-
tions and found similar results for the target adjustment model.
                                     -7-




respect to the degree of serial correlation.1 The results of this instrumental

variable procedure were similar to the results of the autoregressive trans-

formation and will not be presented separately.

    The parameter estimates of equation 1.9 for durable goods implies an

implausibly slow speed of adjustment: A = 0.057 with a standard error of

0.024. This implies that only 5.7 percent of the total adjustment between

desired and actual production occurs with one—quarter. During the sample

period, the maximum peak—to—trough production adjustment, which occurred over

a period of six quarters, was equivalent to less than three weeks of produc-

tion.2 It is inconceivable that production smoothing would induce such a slow

adjustment when the entire amount of the change was equivalent to so few days

of production.

     The parameter estimates of equation 1.9 for the nondurable goods inven-

tories were also implausible but for a different reason. The long—run

inventory—sales ratio (am equation 1.9) has an estimated value of only 0.15

for less than one—third of the average ratio of inventories to sales during

the sample period.

     It is clear from these estimates that the traditional production adjust-

ment model is inadequate. We turn therefore to the richer two—speed adjustment

model.


     ore specifically, we used instrumental variables for the lagged
investment terms in 1.9 and then used a nonlinear procedure to obtain constrained
estimates of the other parameters; see Amemiya (1974).

     2Production fell from $38.16 billion in 1973:4 to $31.69 billion in 1975:2,
a drop of $6.47 billion.
                                             -8-



2. The Two—Speed Adjustment Process


     In our previous study, we challenged the assumption that the desired

level of inventories adjusts immediately to changes in the level of current

sales. Firms may adjust their target or desired inventory slowly for a

variety of different reasons: inventory guidelines are often established

in multiyear plans and revised only slowly; inventory targets depend on the

company's warehousing facilities and personnel, which can adjust only slowly;

learning and adjustment may be slow because excess inventories involve rela-

tively little cost; etc. We therefore extend equation 1.1 and specify that

the inventory target adjusts according to:


(2.1) I -        =       (+   czS -
                                      Ii).
     Since actual sales are not known at the beginning of each quarter, it may

be preferable to regard equation 2.1 as a model of the adjustment of the

inventory target as of the end of each quarter and to assume that production

planning is based on an inventory target that depends on a weighted average of

the sales anticipated at the beginning and the actual sales during the period.

Letting 1*a denote this anticipated ortentatjve inventory target, we may

write:


(2.2) i -   I        =   C(8S + (1-e) S) + -

Desired production is then given by:
                                                       i1J.

(2.3) P =        +            + 1*a -
            es       (1_o)s             1


                                                   *
Note that this depends on *a
                           I and not on                we therefore combine equations

2.1 and 2.2 to eliminate I and obtain:
                                                        -9-




(2.4) I        =
                   i—(l—p)L
                                         +   )   +
                                                     ect(s — Se).

        The two—speed adjustment model combines this adjustment of the inventory

target with the partial production adjustment of equation 1.4. Rewriting this

production adjustment as

                        A           *
(2.5)    Pt     1-(l-X)L


and using 2.3 and 2.4 to define Pt yields the two—speed production adjustment

equation:


(2.6) Pt =                                           (l+u) e (s—s)J
                l—(1—A)L [St —
                                                                                   +
                                                     [1-(1--A)Lj [l-(1-)LJ     t


Since P =
                S   +           —
                                    I_   ,   equation    2.6 can be rewritten as the corresponding

two—speed inventory adjustment model:


(2.7) It —                  =                 (cS + ) + X( + ci) 0 (S -
                1t-l            £l-(l-i)L                                          S)   + (1—A) 1t-l —

                                                          — (1—A) (S -             —
                                                                             S1)
        In   contrast to equation 2.7, the simpler target adjustment model assumes

that the evolution of the inventory target is the only source of lags in the

production process, i.e., A = 1.                     This implies:1

(2.8) It =                          St + $)   + (1 + cz) o (Se —
                1—(1--i)L                                             Se).


        We have estimated equation 2.7 and tested whether the parameters are

consistent with the pure target adjustment model. Our basic conclusion is

that the target adjustment model is a very good approximation: firms adjust

actual inventories to the changes in the target level of inventories within


     'Note that this differs slightly from the original target adjustment
model discussed in Feldstein and Auerbach (1976) but that the two are equi-
valent when 0 = 0.
                                              -10-




the same quarter but the target itself adjusts only slowly.

         Equation 2.7 was estimated by non—linear least squares after a first—order

autoregressive transformation.1 The sample period extends from the first

quarter of 1960 through the third quarter of 1976. The equation was estimated

separately for durable goods and nondurable goods manufacturing industries.

Table 1 presents the parameter estimates and the sum of squared residuals

corresponding to the full two—speed adjustment process, to several restricted

cases of the two—speed adjustment process, and to the target adjustment process.

         Consider first the estimates relating to nondurable goods. Equation Nl

shows that the production adjustment parameter (A) is almost exactly one

(A =     1.01),   implying that production adjusts fully within the quarter to changes

in desired production. In contrast, the inventory target adjustment parameter

(i.i)   is   only about one—tenth (.i   = 0.11),   indicating that only about 10 percent

of the full adjustment of the inventory target to changes in sales occurs

within the first quarter. More generally, A = 0.11 implies that half of the

target adjustment occurs in six quarters and that three years is required for

75 percent of the full target adjustment to occur. These values of A and            u

clearly       indicate that the target adjustment model is a more appropriate

description than the traditional production adjustment model.

        The estimated value of      =   0.53 the equilibrium ratio of inventory stock

to sales, is only slightly below the average inventory—sales ratio of .67 that

prevailed during the same period and clearly more than the value implied by


     'The nonlinear least squares procedure constrains the coefficients to
provide efficient estimates of the parameters. Relaxing the constraint does
reduce the sum of squared residuals by a statistically significant amount.
This suggests that a more general model than the two—speed adjustment process
might be more appropriate. Our analysis of several possible generalizations
did not produce such an alternative. We therefore limit our analysis to the
general two—speed adjustment model and to restrictions upon it.
                                              —11—




                                           Table 1

                  Estimated Parameters of the Two—Speed Adjustment Model



Equation   X           .i              8         0                   p      D.iS   SSR


                                           Durable manufacturing

Dl         0.94        0.045   0.53    4.87      —.05                0.35   1.77   2.75

D2         0.98        0.044   0.54    4.84          (0.00)   —      0.41   1.78   2.82

D3         (1.00)      0.042   0.53    5.16      0.01         —      0.43   1.72   2.85

D4         (1.00)      0.042   0.53    5.16          (0.00)   —      0.43   1.72   2.85

D5         (1.00)      0.058   0.57    3.17    (0.00)    0.61     0.10      1.84   2.77
                                         Nondurable manufacturing
Nl         1.01        0.111    0.53   4.39    0.06      —        0.49      2.06   2.44

N2         0.97        0.097    0.51   4.87          (0.00)   —      0.41   2.06   2.49

N3         (1.00)      0.104    0.52   4.57          0.05     —      0.47   2.07   2.45

N4         (1.00)      0.107    0.52   4.50          (0.00)   —      0.46   2.06   2.51

N5         (1.00)      0.142    0.54   3.83          (0.00)   1.17   0.63   2.07   2.48




Estimates of equation 2.7 are based on quarterly data from the first quarter of 1960
through the third quarter of 1976.

Figures in parentheses are constrained values rather than sample estimates. The value
of p is the estimated first order serial correlation of the disturbances.
                                         -12-




the production adjustment model. The value of 8 is very low (0 =      0.06),
implying that the inventory target adjusts to actual sales rather than a

weighted average of actual and predicted sales. This is quite consistent with

the slow speed of target adjustment.1 Equation N2 constrains 0 to be zero;

this changes the other coefficients only slightly and raises the sum of

squared residuals by an insignificant amount.2

     Equation N3 is the target adjustment model with A constrained to equal

one. Since the unconstrained estimate in equation Ni was so close to one,

imposing the constraint has almost no effect on the sum of squared residuals.

The same is true in equation N4 when 0 is also constrained to be zero.

     Equation N5 presents a more general form of the target adjustment model;

the one—parameter geometric adjustment process is replaced by the more general

two—parameter Pascal distribution. The point estimates of the two parameters

are i     0.142 and V= 1.17; V is thus quite close to the geometric value of

V =1 and      is quite close to the previous estimates. Comparison of the sums

of squared residuals of N5 and N4 shows that the two—parameter Pascal distri-

bution is not statistically superior to the simpler geometric proportional

adjustment model.

        The results for the durable goods industries are very similar to the

nondurable results. Equation Dl shows a value of A that is close to one

and a value of .i   that   is quite low. When the insignificant (and negative)


     'The small coefficient on the difference between actual and expected sales
was always a paradox in the context of the traditional production adjustment
model: production appeared to react slowly to changes in the target but
rapidly to the gap between actual and expected sales. This apparent paradox
is eliminated by the target adjustment model.

     2The SSR rises from 2.44 to 2.49. The likelihood ratio for a sample of
55 observations is .572; using the large—sample approximation that minus twice
the logarithm of this ratio (1.116) is distributed as chi—square under the
hypothesis implies a test Statistic of 2.706 at the 10 percent probability
level; we therefore do not reject the null hypothesis that U = 0.
                                     -13-



value of 0 is constrained to be zero (equation D2), the estimate of A is 0.98.

The target adjustment model is thus favored by the data over the more general

two—speed process. The Pascal lag process shown in D5 is again not statis-

tically better than the simple geometric response lag of equation D4.
                                        -14-



3. Cyclical Properties of a Simple Macroeconomic Model


     The regression results presented above indicate that inventory behavior

in U.S. durable and nondurable goods manufacturing is well described by what

we have referred to as the "target adjustment" model, with slow movements in

inventory targets and rapid production adjustments to meet these targets and

correct for errors in sales prediction. This characterization stands in

marked contrast to the theory introduced by Metzler (1941) and empirically

developed by Lovell and several others which stresses the importance of the

unexpected component of sales in generating inventory cycles as firms slowly

adjust production to replenish buffer stocks and approach new target inventory

levels.

        It is important to emphasize that the difference between our target

adjustment model and the traditional production adjustment model is not merely

a matter of interpretation but has potentially important implications about

the stability of the economy. To understand these characteristics of the

business cycle and the implications with respect to the design of stabilization

policy, we incorporate a two—speed adjustment model into a small macroeconomic

model. Using the techniques of spectral analysis, we analyze the transmission

of a stochastic element in the consumption function and how it is influenced

by the relative importance of the lags in adjustment of inventory targets and

output.

        Firm production in our model follows the two—speed adjustment process.

Desired, or "target" end—of—quarter inventories, I, partially adjust to a




(3.1)     1 -
                I
long run level, determined by sales, S:


                    = (cLS   -
                                 I)
                                          -15-




(3.1) is a simpler version of the model empirically examined above in that the

constant,     and the the sales prediction error are omitted. The desired level

of production, P, is that level necessary to meet sales demand and desired

inventory accumulation,              —



(3.2) P =     I        1t-l +   St

As before, the relation between actual and desired changes in production

follows a partial adjustment model:


                       =
(3.3) Pt

We   complete our characterization of production behavior with the requirement

that production must equal sales plus inventory accumulation:


(3.4) Pt =         —        +
                                St


All output in this economy takes the form of consumption goods, either sold

immediately or accumulated as inventories. Consumption demand, S, is stochastic

and follows the permanent income hypothesis. Permanent income, Y, adjusts

slowly to actual income,


            - Y_l      =
                                - Y_1)

Consumption   is    a constant fraction of permanent income, plus a stochastic

element,


(3.6)    St = mY*   +


We   assume that the random term, ,      is   generated by a Markov process:
                                         -16-




(3.7)        =
                 p1   + v


where the underlying disturbances,        are serially independent and stationary,

with zero mean.

        To close our model, we include the income—production identity:


(3.8) Y =

        Before analyzing the model consisting of equations (3.1) to (3.8), we must
briefly review certain elements of spectral theory.1

        It is a fundamental result that any real time series sequence,

generated by a covariance stationary stochastic process may be exactly

represented by an aggregation of mutually uncorrelated random periodic

functions, varying in frequency from zero to Tt   radians   (½ cycle) per unit time.

The variance of the component of frequency w, written f(w), is referred to as

the power spectrum at w. Since the random components are mutually uncorrelated,

the variance       of z is just the integral over w from 0 to ir of the power

spectrum:


(3.9) a2 =Jf(w)dw

Thus, we may view the time series as being composed of a continuum of periodic

elements, each contributing to the overall variance according to the magnitude

of f(w), the power spectrum.

        If the random variables in the sequence are serially uncorrelated, the

process is referred to as white noise, and has a flat spectrum; that is, the



        more complete exposition of the application of spectral analysis to
economic problems niay be found in Granger and Hatanaka (1962), Nerlove (1964),
or Fishman (1968).
                                                 —17-




spectrum of a white noise series is:

(3.10) f(w) =        2                   0 < w <   it


     A linear combination of different elements of a time series is known as

a filter. The spectral characteristics of the resulting series are neatly

related to those of the original series.

     Consider the filter:


(3.11) rt =      E
                s=0 S
                         a Z
                               tS
     Letting   L be the lag operator,                   we may alternatively describe the

filter in (3.11) in terms of


(3.12) r =      a(L)z

where:


(3.13) a(L) =        s0 aLS
If we define the filter's transfer function at frequency w by:


(3.14) T() =              s0                 2
                                    acosws) + s0 asinws)
                                                                  2




then the spectrum of r obeys:


         f (w) = T
(3.15)
         r            rz,
                            (w) f (ui)
                                    z


Thus, the transfer function determines the extent to which the filter magnifies

or attenuates the variance component at each frequency.

     It is a simple extention of the above result that the application of a

second filter, with transfer function T ,               to   series r will result in a series
                                                                      t
                                       qr
   with power spectrum:
                                                      -18-



(3.16) f (w) = T (w)T (w)f (w)
        q       qr   rz   z


     The model outlined in equations (3.1) —                  (3.8)   describes a series of

filters through which white noise, represented by v, is transmitted to the

output series, P. Through manipulation of these equations, we obtain the

"final form" of output expressed in terms of the exogenous random shocks:

                                              —1
                           -      xlii
(3.17)
               c1(L)           [1—(1-x)L)

where the lag polynomials                 (L) and 1(L) are:


              (L) = 1     + (-3+2X+)L + (1-X) (3-2)L2 - -X) (l-)L3
          0
(3.18)
         1(L) = (l+pci)X + Ei(l—c)—1J XL

Similarly, we obtain from (3.7)


              =
(3.19)                [1-pU1

Both (3.17) and (3.19) define linear filters with infinite lags, which we will

represent by the lag polynomials a(L) and aE(L), respectively.

     Returning to our original objective, we are interested in determining

the relationship between
                                      , the       stochastic demand component, and output,

and how it is influenced by the values of the production parameters T.,                   A and ct


Of particular interest are the magnitude and spectral shape of the transfer

function, T, of the filter a(L), and the relative size of the overall
                  2
variances,             of P and       of c.
                  p               C

     Letting          T be the transfer function of the filter aC(L), the variance of

output is:




(3.20) o =
                  )'    f(w)dw =         Gv   f   T   (w) T ()   dw
                                          -19-




It is easy to demonstrate that


(3.21)
           2   = a 2,      2
                    1(1 — p )


                        22
Thus, the ratio ar/GE, which we shall denote R, is:


               (l-p2)
(3.22) R =
                        j T()T(w)    dw


        A computer algorithm was used to calculate the filter coefficients of

akL) and a(L); these were then used to calculate the transfer functions.

Since both filters have an infinite number of coefficients, truncation was

necessary. Starting from the zero lag, coefficients were calculated success-

ively until stringent partial sum convergence criteria were satisfied.

Experiments with different criteria indicated that the truncation error

imparted to T      and T   was negligible. The actual number of coefficients
                        pv
calculated tended to be about 280 for a(L) and fewer for aE(L).

        To calculate the variance ratio R, the integral in (3.22) was approximated

by a summation over a grid of size IT IN:

                   2t
(3.23) R                si T(s ) T(s)

After experimentation with different values of N, a grid size of TF /360 radians,

or       was used. There was virtually no change in R caused by using a finer

grid.

        In the simulation runs, the unit of time was taken to be one quarter,

since our empirical findings were based on quarterly data. The values of in and

i were kept fixed at .9 and .15, respectively, the latter value indicating an

adjustment of permanent to actual income of a little less than 50 percent in

the first year.
                                      -20-




     The regression results of the previous two sections have supported the

view that it is inventory targets, rather than production levels, which adjust

slowly, and that production itself adjusts quite rapidly. The cyclical

behavior of output implied by this "target adjustment" model (TAM) is compared

in Table 2 with that which results from the more traditional "production

adjustment" model (PAM). For each case, the parameter a is set at .5, a value

close to those empirically estimated above. For the production adjustment

model, we set A = .05 and p =   1, while for the target adjustment model, X= 1
and p =   .05.
     The two models imply clearly different cyclical characteristics. The

transfer function from the stochastic element c to output P, which measures

the relative variance of periodic components of P and c at particular

frequencies, is more uniform across different frequencies for the TAN than

for the PAN. The maximum value of the TAM transfer function is lower and its

minimum value is higher. While, for the TAM, the transfer function falls

between 1 and 5 for all but 3% of the periodic frequencies, the corresponding

values for the PAM lie outside this range for 96% of all frequencies, falling

both below unity and above 5. Thus, the stability of output under the production adjust-

ment model depends more on the particular "spectral shape" of the random element,

.   When the autocorrelation coefficient, p equals zero,       is white noise and

has a flat spectrum. In this case, under PAN, output has a variance which is

smaller than that of c (R =         = 0.99),   while for TAM the variance of output

is almost twice that of c (R =   1.94).   As p increases, the spectral shape of

changes and leads to increases in the volatility of output under both regimes.

Although the impact of this change in the spectral shape of c is greater in the

PAN, only as P approaches 0.9 does output become more volatile under PAN than

under TAN.
                         -21-




                     Table 2




                    Production          Target
                    Adjustment          Adjustment
                    Model               Model
                    j'=l, X=.05, c=.5   t=.05,    A=l, cL=.5


ap2 /a 2

p=0                 0.99                1.94

p=.5                2.90                3.31

p=.9                13.90               12.27




Transfer Function

Maximum value       71.3689             69.3114

Minimum value       0.0007              1.2278

% below 1.00        91%                 0%

7.   above 5.00     5%                  3%
                                     -22-




     In short, our analysis of the simple stochastic model suggests that an

economy in which inventory investment follows the target adjustment model will

on average experience greater variance of production than an economy that

follows the producthn adjustment model. Although this is true on average, the

PAN economy will have greater cyclical volatility in response to disturbances

of particular frequencies combined with much less sensitivity over a broad

range of frequencies. Since the model used in this section is obviously over-

simplified, these implications must be regarded as only suggestive. They do

however show the importance of distinguishing the two types of inventory

behavior and indicate the desirability of examining their stability properties

in more realistic models.

     In concluding this section, it is useful to examine how tax policies that

alter the costs of different inventory and production policies affect the

stability of the economy. When demand for a firm's output fluctuates

cyclically, firms may react to such shifts by initiating changes in the level

of output, by running up or down the level of inventories, or by the use of

some intermediate policy. Shifting production and employment levels involves

costs for the firm. However, relying on inventories to respond to fluctuations

is also costly, since a greater level of inventories must be kept on hand, on

average. The relative magnitude of the costs of shifting employment and holding

inventories will determine the pattern of production. Feldstein (1976) has

suggested that the current structure of unemployment compensation in the U.S.

reduces the cost to the firm of temporarily laying workers off in response to

cyclical drops in demand. Hence, enactment of various proposed reforms could

be expected to lead to a decline in the use of temporary layoffs to respond

to changes in demand, with a concommitant increase in average inventory holdings.

In our model, this corresponds to a decline in the production adjustment
                                          -23-




parameter A, and a rise in the long—run inventory—sales ratio, a. The appli-

cation of a subsidy to the holding of inventories would have a similar effect.

    We may use our target adjustment model to analyze the net impact on the

cyclical stability of production of policies which lower A and raise a. Figure

1 shows those combinations of a and A which yield the same variance of output

as occurs when A =   0.95 and a = 0.50.    These values of A and a are representa-

tive of the empirical findings presented above. Each curve corresponds to a

different autoccrrelatiort coefficient of the random comport c.

     In all cases examined, increases in the inventory—sales ratio a lead to an

increase in the variance of output. However, for low values of the error auto—

correlation, small decreases in A make output much less volatile. For example,

with p = 0 a decrease in A from 0.95 to 0.90 would be sufficient to offset an

increase in a from 0.50 to 0.85. In this situation, a policy that reduced the

speed of production adjustment even slightly would be stabilizing even if the

policy also raised the inventory—sales ratio substantially.

     However, as p increases, the stabilizing impact of a decline in A diminishes

to the point where, at p =   0.9,   a slower speed of production adjustment would

be destabilizing. For very high values of p ,     the   adoption of policies that

raise a and lower A would therefore be destabilizing.

     The very simple character of the model that we have studiei implies that

these results must be regarded with caution. They do suggest however that

policies that change the current incentives for rapid production adjustment

with correspondingly low inventories may increase overall stability.
                               -24-
                           Figure 1



1


                                      p =0




                    p=s

.5                  p=.9




 0
     .5   .6   .7               .8     .9    1


                           A
                                      -25-



4. Conclusion


    The analysis in this paper was motivated by our discovery that the

parameter estimates of the traditional productional adjustment model are not

consistent with the observed magnitudes of inventory change and production. We

have shown here that this production adjustment model is a special case of a

more general two—speed adjustment process in which both production and

inventory targets adjust slowly. Our estimates of the two—speed model clearly

reject the production adjustment model in favor of the target adjustment model

in which the inventory target adjusts slowly to changes in sales but production

adjusts rapidly to changes in the desired inventory.

     Our analysis of the spectral properties of a simple macroeconomic model

show that the production adjustment model and the target adjustment model can

imply quite different cyclical behavior of the economy as a whole. Depending

on the autocorrelaticnof the disturbance, government policies that reduce the

speed with which production responds to changes in desired inventories and that

place greater reliance on inventory adjustment may stabilize national income.

Further anlaysis of these questions with more realistic models would clearly be

desirable.
                                        -26-




                                 Ref erences




Amerniya, T., "The Non—Linear Two—stage Least—Squares Estimator," Journal of
     Econometrics, 2:2 (July 1974), PP. 105—110.

Beisley, D.A., Industry Production Behavior: The Stock—Order Distinction,
     Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1969.

Childs, C.L., Unfilled Orders and Inventories, Amsterdam: North—Holland, 1967.

Darling, P. and M.C. Lovell, "Factors Influencing Investment in Inventories" in
     J.S. Duesenberry et.al., eds., The Brookings Quarterly Econometric Model
     of the United States, Chicago: Rand—McNally, 1965.

Feldstein, M.S., "Temporary Layoffs in the Theory of Unemployment," Journal of
     Political Economy, 84:5 (October 1976), pp. 937—957.

Feldstein, M.S. and A.J. Auerbach, "Inventory Behavior in Durable Goods Manufac-
     turing: The Target Adjustment Model," Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, 1976:2, pp. 351—396.

Fishman, G.S., Spectral Methods in Economics, Cambridge: Harvard University
     Press, 1968.

Granger, C.W.J. and M. Hatanaka, Spectral Analysis of Economic Time Series,
     Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1964.

Hay, G.A., "Adjustment Costs and the Flexible Accelerator," Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 84:1 (February 1970), Pp. 140—3.

Holt, C.C., F. Modigliani, J.F. Muth and H.A. Simon, Planning Production,
     Inventories, and Work Force, New York: Prentice—Hall, 1960.

Lovell, M.C., "Manufacturers' Inventories, Sales Expectations, and the Acceler-
     ation Principle," Econometrica, 29:3 (July 1961), pp. 293—314.

_____________________________ "Determinants of Inventory Investment," in
     National Bureau of Economic Research, Conference on Research in Income and
     Wealth, Models of Income Determination, Princeton: Princeton University
     Press, 1964.

Metzler, L.A., "The Nature and Stability of Inventory Cycles," Review of
     Economic Statistics, 23:3 (August 1941), pp. 113—29.

Nerlove, J., "Spectral Analysis of Seasonal Adjustment Procedures," Econometrica,
     32:3 (July 1964), pp. 241—280.
