                NBER Working Paper Series




             ADJUDICATION AS A PRIVATE GOOD

         William   M. Landes and Richard A. Posner
            University of Chicago Law School




                    Working Paper No. 263




       National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
    204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305




                          July 1978



This paper has not undergone the review accorded official
NBER publications; in particular, it has not been submitted
for approval by the Board of Directors.


This work was supported by a grant to NBER from the National
Science Foundation. The research assistance of Sharon Wallace
and Donna Patterson, and John Langbein's advice and comments
on an earlier draft, are gratefully acknowledged.
                                                     NBER Working Paper 263
                                                            July 1978



                    ADJUDICATION AS A PRIVATE GOOD

                William M. Landes and Richard A. Posner


                              Abstract


        This paper examines the question whether adjudication can be
viewed as a private good, i.e., one whose optimal level will be generated
in a free market. Part I focuses on private courts, noting their limita-
tions as institutions for dispute resolution and rule creation but also
stressing the important role that the private court, in its various
manifestations, has played both historically and today. Part II discusses
a recent literature which has argued that the rules generated in the
public court system, in areas of the law where the parties to litigation
are private individuals or firms and the rules of law are judge—made,
are the efficient products of purely private inputs. Our analysis suggests
that this literature has overstated the tendency of a conmion law system to
produce efficient rules, although areas can be identified where such a
tendency can indeed be predicted on economic grounds. Viewed as a
contribution to the emergent literature on the positive economic theory
of law, our finding that the public courts do not automatically generate
efficient rules is disappointing, since it leaves unexplained the
mechanisms by which such rules emerge as they seem to have done in a
number of the areas of Anglo—American judge—made law. However, our other
major finding, that the practices and law governing private adjudication
appear to be strongly influenced by economic considerations and explicable
in economic terms, is evidence that economic theory has a major role to
play in explaining fundamental features of the legal system.

                                            William M. Landes
                                            University of Chicago Law School
                                            1111 East 60th Street
                                            Chicago, IL 60637
                                            312/753—2434
                     ADJUDICATION AS A PRIVATE GOOD


                William N. Landes and Richard A. Posner*

                              Introduction



     Adjudication is normally regarded as a governmental function and judges

as public officials. Even economists who assign a highly limited role to gov-

ernment consider the provision of judicial services an indisputably apt func-

tion of government; this was, for example, Adam Smith's view.1 Few economists

(and few lawyers) realize that the provision of judicial services precedes the

formation of the state; that many formally public courts long had important

characteristics of private institutions (for example, until 1825 English judges

were paid out of litigants' fees as well as general tax revenues);2 and that

even today much adjudication is private (commercial arbitration being an impor-

tant example). Further, most cases, both civil and criminal, in the public

courts are settled out of court rather than litigated to judgment, and most of

the inputs into the litigation of such cases are private.


* Landes is Professor of Economics, University of Chicago Law School, and Re-
search Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. Posner is Lee and Brena
Freeman Professor of Law, University of Chicago Law School, and Research Assoc-
iate, National Bureau of Economic Research. The research assistance of Sharon
Wallace and Donna Patterson, and John Langbein's advice and comments on an ear-
lier draft, are gratefully acknowledged. This paper continues our study of the
creation of rules (precedents) in systems of adjudication, which is supported
by the Law and Economics Program of the University of Chicago Law School, and
by the National Bureau of Economic Research under a grant from the National
Science Foundation for research in law and economics. An earlier draft of this
paper was given at a conference sponsored by the Liberty Fund, Inc., and by the
Law and Economics Center of the University of Miami Law School. We are grateful
for the support of the Fund and the Center and for the advice of the Center's
Director, Henry C. Manne.

1. See Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations 231 (vol. II) (Edwin Cannan ed. 1976).

2. See Brian Abel—Smith & Robert Stevens, Lawyers and the Courts: A Sociologi-
cal Study of the English Legal System 1750—1965, at 38 (1967).
                                   —2—




    This paper examines from an economic standpoint the operation of private

judicial systems.3 We do not stop with private court systems, however, since

some of the concepts we develop in our examination of such systems, such as that

of the competitive provision of judicial services, have interesting counterparts

in public court systems and since the outcomes of public adjudication may, ac-

cording to some recent theories, be privately determined.

     Part I of the paper analyzes the demand for and the supply of judicial ser-

vices, applies this analysis to the judicial systems of primitive societies and

to commercial arbitration (both being examples of the private provision of judi-

cial services) and examines judicial competition——both between private and public

systems and among public systems (as under the diversity jurisdiction of the fed-

eral courts). Private nonjudicial substitutes for adjudication (such as liquida-

ted—damages clauses, a substitute for judicial damage assessment) are also exam-

ined. Part II of the paper analyzes the private determinants of public judicial

outcomes. Building on recent articles by Priest, Rubin, and Goodman, we examine

the circumstances that may lead a public judicial system to bring about results

similar to those of a private market.

                   I. The Market for Judicial Services

                            A. Economic Model


     1. Introduction. A court system (public or private) produces two types of

service. One is dispute resolution——determining whether a rule has been violated.

The other is rule formulation——creating rules of law as a by—product of the dis-

pute—settlement process. When a court resolves a dispute, its resolution, espec-

ially if embodied in a written opinion, provided information regarding the likely


3. We are not aware of any previous economic analysis of this subject, apart from
a brief discussion in Gordon Tullock, The Pure Theory of Legal Procedure ch. VIII
 (mimeo. 1977).
                                      —3—



outcome of similar disputes in the future. This is the system of precedent which

is so important in the Anglo—American legal system although less so in other legal

systems.

     Both judicial services——dispute resolution and rule creation——are more ac-

curately described as intermediate goods (inputs) than as final goods. Dispute

resolution is not a good in itself but an input into compliance with socially de-

sired standards of behavior. Rule creation is not desired in itself either but

is a means of particularizing the standards of socially desired behavior in order

to promote compliance with them. For the present, however, it will be more conven-

ient to regard dispute resolution and rule formation as the final products of a jud-

icial system rather than as an input into the real final product——which is right

behavior.

       The two judicial services are in principle severable and in practice often

severed. Jury verdicts resolve disputes but do not create precedents. Legisla-

tures create rules of law but do not resolve disputes. In the Anglo—American le-

gal system rule formation is a function shared by legislatures and (especially ap-

pellate) courts; elsewhere judicial law—making tends to be less Important.

       2. Dispute Resolution. Imagine a purely private market in judicial ser-

vices. People would offer their services as judges, and disputants would select

the judge whom they found mutually most agreeable. The most popular judges would

charge the highest fees and competition among judges would yield the optimum amount

and quality of judicial services at minimum social cost. This competitive process

would produce judges who were not only competent but also impartial——and would thus

fulfill the Ideals of procedural justice——because a judge who was not regarded as

impartial could not get disputes submitted to him for resolution. One party would

always refuse.

      A voluntary system of dispute resolution does not presuppose that the dis-

pute has arisen from a consensual relationship (landlord—tenant, employer—employee,

seller—buyer, etc.) in which the method of dispute resolution is agreed on before
                                    —4—



the dispute arose. All that is necessary is that when a dispute does arise, the

parties to it choose a judge to resolve it. Though complete strangers, as in the

typical accident case, the parties can still choose a judge to determine liability.

     Although dispute resolution could thus be provided (for criminal as well as

civil cases, be it noted) in a market that would operate free from any obvious el-

ements of monopoly, externality, or other sources of "market failure," it may not

be efficient to banish public intervention entirely. Public intervention may be

required (1) to ensure compliance with the (private) judge's decision and (2) to

compel submission of the dispute to adjudication in the first place. The first of

these public functions is straightforward, and no more compromises the private

nature of the adjudication system described above than the law of trespass compro-
                                                                            submis-
mises the private property rights system. The second function, compelling

sion of the dispute to judge, is more complex. If A accuses B of breach of con-

tract, the next step in a system of private adjudication is for the parties to

select a judge. But suppose B, knowing that any impartial judge would convict him,

drags his feet in agreeing to select a judge who will hear the case, rejecting name

after name submitted by A for his consideration. Although a sanction for this kind

of foot—dragging akin to the remedies the National Labor Relations Board provides

 against refusals to bargain collectively in good faith is conceivable, there may

 be serious difficulty in determining when the bargaining over the choice of the

 judge is in bad faith——it is not bad faith, for example, to reject a series of un-

 reasonable suggestions by the other side.

      Two ways of overcoming the submission problem come immediately to mind. The

 first is for the parties to agree on the judge (or on the method of selecting him)

 before the dispute arises, as is done in contracts with arbitration clauses. How-

 ever, this solution is available only where the dispute arises from a preexisting

 voluntary relationship between the parties; the typical tort or crime does not.
                                      —5—



The second solution is to randomize the choice of the judge; then the parties do

not have to negotiate over his selection. But randomization undermines the compe-

titive process whereby the optimal level of judicial services is encouraged. With

random selection even an incompetent judge can anticipate an income as a result of

the process by which judges are chosen to hear cases. And there is still the pro-

blem of compelling the party who fears the outcome of impartial adjudication to

submit to the random—selection process.

     Another type of private solution to the problem of enforcement and selection

of private judge is available when both parties to the dispute are members of the

same (private) group or association. The group can expel any member who unreason-

ably refuses to submit to an impartial adjudication (perhaps by a judge selected by

the group) or to abide by the judge's decision. To the extent that membership in

the group confers a value over and above alternative opportunities, members will

have incentives to bargain in good faith over selection of the judge and to abide by

his decision. In these circumstances dispute resolution can operate effectively

without public intervention.4

     This solution is an instance of the Becker—Stigler model of employer control

over employee malfeasance.5 The sanction for malfeasance is assumed to be dismis-

sal (expulsion) and the employer pays a salary above the competitive level for the

position in order to make dismissal a costly sanction to the employee.6




4. A qualification is necessary, however: there is a danger of a faction's seiz-
ing control of the association and using its control to expropriate the rents of
the other members.

5. See Gary S. Becker & George J. Stigler, Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Com-
pensation of Enforcers, 3 J. Legal Studies 1, 6—13 (1974).

6. Monopoly profits to employees can be prevented by, for example, auctioning off
positions.
                                   —6—



Obedience to the employee's contractual obligations is thus secured without public

intervention.

     3. Rule Production. Private production of rules or precedents involves two

problems. The first is that because of the difficulty of establishing property

rights in a precedent, private judges may have little incentive to produce prece-

dents. They will strive for a fair result between the parties in order to pre-

serve a reputation for impartiality, but why should they make any effort to explain

the result in a way that would provide guidance for future parties? To do so would

be to confer an external, an uncompensated, benefit, not only on future parties but

also on competing judges. If anything, judges might deliberately avoid explaining

their results because the demand for their services would be reduced by rules that,

by clarifying the meaning of the law, reduced the incidence of disputes. Yet des-

pite all this, private judges just might produce precedents. We said earlier that

competitive private judges would strive for a reputation for competence and impart-

iality. One method of obtaining such a reputation is to give reasons for a deci-

sion that convince the disputants and the public that the judge is competent and

impartial. Competition could lead private judges to issue formal or informal "opin-

ions" declaring their interpretation of the law and these opinions, though intended

simply as advertising, would function as precedents, as under a public judicial

system.8 But this scenario is no more than plausible. If there were cheaper methods

of advertising one's impartiality as an adjudicator than by writing opinions, those



7. Though a residual public machinery is implicit to protect the employee if the
employer dismisses him wrongfully.

8. An alternative possibility would be to give judges property rights in precedents——
e.g., a royalty every time one of their decisions was cited. See William M. Landes &
Richard A. Posner, Legal Precedent: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, 19 J. Law
& Econ. 249, 272 (1976). But it would be difficult to prevent lawyers and judges
from using, without actually citing, prior decisions, especially in out—of—court set-
tlement negotiations by which most legal disputes are terminated.
                               —7—



methods would be chosen and precedents not produced. Some evidence that this

may be the case is presented later.

     The second problem with a free market in precedent production is that of

inconsistent precedents which could destroy the value of a precedent system in

guiding behavior. If there are many judges, there are likely to be a bewilder-

ing profusion of precedents and there is no obvious method of harmonizing them.

An individual contemplating some activity will have difficulty discovering its

legal consequences because they will depend on who decides any dispute arising

out of the activity. Stated otherwise, there would appear to be substantial,

indeed overwhelming, economies of standardization in the precedent market, akin

to those that have given us standard dimensions for electrical sockets and rail-

road gauges. While many industries have achieved standardization without mono-

poly, It is unclear how to achieve standardization or commonality in the prece-

dent market without a single source for precedent production,wlthout, that is

to say, a monopoly. We find it hard to visualize a competitive process by which

the precedents of competing judges would converge to a social optimum. Suppose

the socially optimal rule for internalizing the costs of sonic boom is to make

the airplane owner strictly liable for sonic—boom damage. Any judge who adopted

such a rule could be certain to have no sonic—boom business, for the airplane

owner would never submit to the jurisdiction of such a judge. The problem is

that the private benefit of the rule to a "customer" whose agreement to purchase

judicial services from the judge is essential to the judge's ability to sell his

services diverges radically from the social benefit of the rule.

     A related problem is that a system of voluntary adjudication is strongly

biased against the creation of precise rules of any sort. Any rule that clearly

indicates how a judge is likely to decide a case will assure that no disputes

subject to the rule are submitted to that judge since one party will know that it
                                  —8—



will lose. Judges will tend to promulgate vague standards which give each party

to a dispute a fighting chance.

     This problem disappears if the parties agree in advance to the submission

of any disputes arising to a particular judge applying a known set of rules. It

can also be overcome, in the association setting, simply by the association's

monopolizing the production of the relevant rules or precedents. It is overcome

in the traditional family by the monopoly of authority enjoyed by the head of

the family.

     Of course, without a rigorous empirical study of the costs of public dispute

resolution and precedent production relative to those of private provision of

these services, one cannot conclude that private provision, with all its prob-

lems, is less efficient than public. However, one can conclude that, outside of

the association setting (an important qualification), a private market is more

likely to emerge in dispute resolution than in rule creation; we shall see this

hypothesis corroborated later on when we examine private adjudication in the

real world.

     The distinction just noted suggests the possibility of severing the two ju-

dicial functions and committing the rulemaking function to a public body, a

legislature, that does not engage in dispute resolution, and the dispute—resolu-

tion function to private judges. But if there are economies of scope that enable

the functions to be provided more cheaply by one than by separate "firms," this

would be an inefficient solution. The literature on the common law system sug-

gests that there may be such economies, which may explain why, in the Anglo-

American system, the same public officials——the judges——are vested with both dis-

pute—resolution and precedent—production functions.

     4. The Financing of Judicial Services. That unlimited competition in the

provision of judicial services would be inefficient does not necessarily imply,
                                          9—



of course, that a public monopoly is the most efficient method of providing

these services. Various intermediary possibilities come to mind, including

competitive bidding for a judicial monopoly along lines once suggested in an-

other context by Harold Demsetz.9 We shall not consider these possibilities

here, but will examine the related question of how to finance publicly pro-

vided judicial services.

     Ronald Coase has shown that even if (because of free—rider problems),

compulsion is required for the optimal provision of lighthouse services, it

does not follow that such services must or should be financed out of general

tax revenues.10 An alternative is to finance them out of user fees. This

was indeed done in the early history of the English lighthouses. The analo-

gous choice in the judicial arena is between paying the judges out of general

tax revenues and paying them out of litigants' fees. The choice of the latter

method is, however, less attractive in the judicial than in the lighthouse con-

text. The social benefits of lighthouses are limited to the shipping industry,

which paid the lighthouse fees. But much of the social benefit of litigation,

viewed as a rule—creating activity, is received by people who may never be in-

volved in any litigation. The existence of this external benefit may justify

externalizing some of the costs of litigation by financing judges' salaries out

of general tax revenues and keeping litigant fees low.

     In England, until comparatively recently, judges received not only salar-

ies paid out of general tax revenues but also a portion of the fees charged the
                                     11
litigants in the cases they heard.         This is an inefficient method of compensa-

ting judges who are engaged in precedent production, so one is not surprised



9. Harold Demsetz, Why Regulate Utilities?, 11 J. Law & Econ. 55 (1968).

10. R. H. Coase, The Lighthouse in Economics, 17 J. Law & Econ. 357 (1974).

11. See note 2 supra.
                                  —10—



                                          and, so far as we know, everywhere else).
that it has been abandoned (in England
                                                                   rather than
We noted earlier that dispute resolution is really an intermediate
                                               with proper standards of behavior.
final good, the final good being compliance
                                         is precedent. The judge who is not paid
The other input into this final good
                                                                        but
proportionately to either his final output or his precedent production,
                                                                 incentive to
solely according to the number of cases he decides, will have an

overproduce that input. He may write confusing opinions that generate unneces-
                               unmeritorious rights; he may even (as we shall see)
sary disputes; he may create
                                                                       for jud-
promulgate rules that discourage the growth of nonjudicial substitutes

 icial dispute resolution.
                                                  judges the gains to each from de-
      To be sure, if there were many competing
                                                                       would be
 ciding cases in a way that increased the demand for judicial services
                                             added demand were met simply by appoint-
 small. This is particularly true if any
                                                                             tends
 ing new judges. However, as noted earlier, the production of precedents
                                    having a supreme court) in order to avoid the
 to be monopolized (for example, by
                                       of precedents would engender; and a monopol-
 confusion that competitive production
                                      number of cases decided will have the undes-
 ist of precedents who is paid by the

 irable incentives mentioned above.
                                               economic reason why the movement to
      The foregoing discussion suggests an
                                                     coincided, in England at least,
 abolish the payment of litigant fees to judges,
                                              precedent on a more systematic basis
 with the movement12 to place decision by
                                  of judicial opinions. The fee system is efficient
  by regularizing the reporting
                                               settlement alone. Commercial arbi-
  only if the judges are engaged in dispute

  trators——who, as we shall see, are not engaged in the production of precedentS

  are still paid on a fee basis and this makes economic sense.



  12. Described in John P. Dawson, The Oracles of the Law 80—83 (1968).
                                 —11—



     An alternative, in principle at least, to paying judges flat salaries

would be to pay them for their final output. Such a compensation system would

require both (1) a dollar—weighted measure of compliance with law and (2) a

determination of the individual judge's contribution to compliance through his

decisions resolving disputes accurately and creating helpful precedents. The

measurement problems created by this system would be intractable, however.

They would be severe even if judges were instead paid separately according to

both disputes resolved and precedents created. Even though, as we have ar-

gued elsewhere, the number of citations in subsequent judicial opinions may be

a tolerably accurate proxy for the precedential value of a decision,13 it would

be difficult to attach dollar values to citations so as to weight them against

number of disputes resolved.

     A further consideration is that monetary compensation may not be necessary

in order to induce judges to produce precedents. The production of precedents
                                                    14
may yield substantial nonpecuniary rewards to judges——especially in a system

where they are paid salaries unrelated to the number of disputes resolved.

     The question how to finance adjudication feeds back into the original

question whether judicial services can be efficiently provided by the market.

Insofar as it is difficult or impossible to finance these services out of user

fees, as in the case of precedent creation, the attractions of private provis-

ion are reduced, because it is difficult to see how these services would be

financed in a free market except on a user—fee basis. This point reinforces

our earlier suggestion that the precedent—creating function of adjudication,

more than the dispute—resolving function, may invite public intervention in the

judicial—services market.



13. See William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, Legal Precedent: A Theoretical
and Empirical Analysis, supra note 8.

14. See Id. at 272—73.
                                      —12—




                     B. Examples of Private Adjudication:
                Primitive Societies and Commercial Arbitration




     1. Adjudication in Primitive Societies. The anthropological literature
                                              societies15 provides one source of
on the judicial institutions of primitive

data for testing the economic analysis in the previous subpart.

     The literature shows that adjudication is not dependent on the existence
                                                                   institutions of
of a state as we would understand the term. The governmental

primitive societies are often rudimentary to the point of nonexistence. There
                                        executive (as distinct from a chief who
may be no legislature, no permanent

leads in wartime), no government bureaucracy, no public judges, no public pro-

secutors or police——indeed, no concept of public law. Yet even in such socie-

ties, there will often be adjudication)6 For example, the Yurok Indians of

California had no government at all but a well developed system of private
           17
judging.        A Yurok who wanted to prosecute a legal claim would hire two, three,

or four nonrelatives from a community other than his own and the "defendant"
                                                                 between the liti-
would do likewise. These men (called "crossers") would go

 gants (who generally did not meet in person during this period) to ascertain



 15. See,       Henry Maine, Ancient Law (Everyman's Lib. ed. 1917); E. Adatnson
 Hoebel, The Law of Primitive Man: A Study in Comparative Legal Dynamics (Athen-
 eum ed. 1968); Paul Bohannan, Law and Warfare: Studies in the Anthropology of
 Conflict pts. I—lI (1967); Leopold Pospisil, Anthropology of Law, A Comparative
 Theory (1971).
                                                          properly, between med-
 16. The anthropological literature distinguishes, quite
 iation and adjudication, the former referring to negotiation through intermed-
                                                          does not include media-
 iaries who have no decision—making powers. Our analysis
 tion.

 17. See A. L. Kroeber, Law of the Yurok Indians, 2 Atti del XXII Congresso In—
 ternazionale degli Americanisti 551 (1928); E. Adamson Hoebel, pa note 15, at
 24—25; Robert Redfield, Primitive Law, in Paul Bohannan, supra note 15, at 3,
 9—10, 17; Walter Goldscbmidt, Ethics and the Structure of Society, 53 Am.Anth
 ropologist 506 (1951); Harold E. Driver, Indians of North America 334, 361 (1961).
                                  —13—



claims and defenses and collect evidence. After hearing all of the evidence

the crossers would render a judgment for damages. Each crosser received some

shell currency from the litigants for his work.

     Three questions immediately arise in analyzing the Yurok system of adjudi-

cation from an economic standpoint. First, what was to prevent each party from

hiring as his "crossers" people he would be sure would act as his agents? Then

a guilty defendant would never be convicted.18 Second, how was the crossers'

judgment enforced in the absence of public coercive authority? Third, how were

the rules of law applied by the crossers created in the first place given the

absence of a legislature or a permanent judiciary?

     The first and third of these questions are not directly answered by the

anthropological literature on the Yuroks but can be inferred from what is known

of other primitive societies. The answer to the second is straightforward:

someone who failed to pay a judgment rendered by the crossers became the plain-

tiff's wage slave and, if he refused to submit to this punishment for "contempt

of court," he became an outlaw——that is, he could be killed by anyone without

any liability attaching to the killer. This is an example of a sanction that is

effective though not backed by the coercive power of any state. It is an ex-

treme form of the ostracism or boycott sanction discussed earlier.

     The first question is tougher, but the essential clue to its answer is pro-

bably to be found in the requirements (1) that each party had to pick at least

two crossers and (2) that each crosser had to be a nonrelative of the party

choosing him and had to reside in a different community from the party. These

requirements minimized the probability that either litigant would be able to



18. This is not a strategy the plaintiff could usefully     employ. Assuming he
hired stooges and defendant likewise, the plaintiff would   have only half the
votes. Presumably a tie vote among the crossers resulted    in judgment for the
defendant, although this question Is not addressed in the   literature.
                                  —14—



find a friend to serve as crosser. To be sure, they did not eliminate the pos-

sibility of a corrupt crosser——i.e., one paid by the litigant to render a judg—

merit in his favor irrespective of the merits of his position. Bribery, however,

is a general threat to judicial integrity rather than a special problem of prim-

itive society. Whether Yurok society had a rule against bribery of crossers

and, if so, how such a rule was enforced——since crossers were the only judges——

are questions that the literature does not answer.

     Despite the absence of any formal rulemaking machinery, the Yurok Indians

had a well—developed body of rules——not of criminal law, because that presup-

poses a state, but of tort and property law. Where did these rules come from?

The answer suggested by the anthropological literature, and one consistent with

the economics of the problem, is custom. Societies that adhere to certain rules

will enjoy an advantage in the competition with other societies. For example, a

society that had no strictures against unlimited killing within it would be at

a disadvantage in competition with other societies and would tend to disappear.

The societies that survive into recorded history can be expected to have rules

that promote social coherence and effectiveness. The rules emerge by a competi-

tive or evolutionary process without need for a formal organ to promulgate them

in a deliberate or self—conscious fashion.19 (As we shall see in Part II, an

evolutionary perspective may also have some value in explaining rule creation in

our own, more self—consciously rule—creating, society.)

     Presumably, as the conditions in a society change, the customary law will

change in an adaptive fashion.20 A problem arises, however, because there is



19. There is no evidence, for example, that the crossers issued any form of
oral or written "opinion" that might have contributed to the evolution of the
customary law of Yurok society'.

20. If social change is rapid, however, a system of customary law will prob-
ably break down, as its evolutionary character would seem to preclude rapid
change.
                                  —15—



no mechanism for declaring a custom repealed. This is the source of the

"legal fiction,"the pretended adherence to one rule when a contrary rule is

in fact being followed.21 Legal fictions are found primarily in legal systems

where the mechanics of formal rule promulgation, and hence of formal rule

change, are deficient. The custom changes but the statement of the former

custom persists. Maine associates legal fiction as the method of law change
                                                      22
with the earliest stage of legal system's development.     It might be more ac-

curate to regard legal fiction not as the agent of change but as a symptom that

change in the formal statement of law is lagging behind actual change in the

law. The lag is apt to be longest in a system of customary law.

     Another striking feature of primitive law, and one closely related, we

conjecture, to the character of private adjudication, is Its extreme, and to

modern eyes excessive, exactness. Yurok law, for example, consisted of a ser-

ies of very precise rules unsoftened by any general principles which might al-

low for flexible application. These are familiar features of primitive legal

systems.23 One possible explanation is that the "primitive mind" is incapable

of conceptualization, but another, more congenial to economic analysis, is that

the Yuroks' adjudicative machinery, consisting as it did entirely of the ad hoc

crossers, lacked incentives for the promulgation of general principles that

would modify the customary rules of the society. The benefits of such princi-

ples would adhere not to the parties who had hired the crossers but to future

parties. This problem is avoided in modern commercial arbitration by the fact



21. See generally Lon L. Fuller, Legal Fictions 56—80 (1967). A famous ex-
ample of fiction in English law is the use of the action in ejectment to try
title to real estate by the fictitious allegation that the land is occupied
by a tenant who has refused to leave upon the expiration of his lease.

22. See Henry Maine, supra note 15, at 15

23. See, e.g., Id. at 184, 218.
                                 —16—



that, as we shall see, the law applied by the arbitrators is, normally, either

the relevant formal law (which includes the precedents created by public judges)

of the society or the formal rules of some group or association. The problem

is also avoided in those primitive societies where adjudication is the respon-

sibility of a chief or other official who has continuity as an adjudicator and

obtains material or other rewards not only from resolving disputes as they arise

but also from maintaining the basic harmony and effectiveness of the society.

We conjecture that such societies have more flexible rules than those found in

pre—political societies such as that of the Yuroks.

     2. Commercial Arbitration. We could provide additional examples of pre—

political judicial systems similar to those of the Yurok Indians but rather than

do so we shall move on to a modern counterpart of primitive courts——the system

of commercial arbitration.24 The main parallel is that arbitrators are private

individuals compensated by the parties rather than by the state. (A modern,

though only approximate, parallel to the Yurok Indians' method of decision by

"crossers" is the type of arbitration in which each disputant appoints one ar-

bitrator and the two then appoint a third.) As in primitive law, arbitrators

are appointed anew for every controversy, and do not write opinions25 and hence

are not a source of rules or precedents.

     When we examine the way in which modern arbitration seeks to overcome the

problems identified in our discussion of primitive private judging, some illum-

inating differences——as well as further parallels——emerge. One problem is the

selection of the arbitrator. As discussed earlier, if one party to a dispute

expects that an impartial arbitrator would rule against him, he has an incentive



24. We exclude——for no good reason other than limitations of space——the field
of labor arbitration.

25. With an important exception noted later.
                                 —17—



to drag his feet in agreeing to the appointment of an arbitrator. Consistently

with this point, writers on arbitration agree that the problem of selection

makes arbitration a virtually unusable method of dispute resolution where there

is no preexisting contractual or other relationship between the disputants.26

This suggests a clue to the superior ability of primitive compared to advanced

societies to function without public institutions of adjudication. Primitive

communities tend to be quite small27 and their members bound together by a var-

iety of mutually advantageous relationships and interactions. Expulsion, out-

lawry, ostracism, and other forms of boycott or collective refusal to deal are

highly effective sanctions in these circumstances. Another way of putting this

point is that reputation, a factor recognized in the literature as deterring

people from breaking contracts even in the absence of effective legal sanc-

tions28 is a much more effective deterrent In a small community, where news

travels rapidly throughout the entire circle of an individual's business and

social acquaintances, than in large, modern, impersonal societies.

     Yet even in modern society, certain trade, religious, and other associa-

tions correspond, to a degree, to the close—knit, primitive community. For

example, securities or commodities exchange whose members derive substantial

benefits from membership can use the threat of expulsion as an effective sanc-

tion to induce members to submit to arbitration.29 So can a religious associa—



26. See, e.g., Frances Kellor, American Arbitration——Its History, Functions
and Achievements 64 (1948); Britt—Mari Blegvad et al., Arbitration as a Means
of Solving Conflicts 94 (1973).

27. See, e.g., the statistics on the population of Yurok villages in Harold
E. Driver, supra note 17, at 334 (50—165 inhabitants).

28. See, e.g., Arthur Allen Leff, Injury, Ignorance and Spite——The Dynamics
of Coercive Collection, 80 Yale L. J. 1, 26—33 (1970).

29. This process, as it operated in the New York Stock Exchange before re-
cent developments in antitrust intcrpretation impaired it (see text at notes
56—57 infra), is described in Howard C. Westwood & Edward C. Howard, Self—Gov—
ernment in the Securities Business, 17 Law & Contemp. Prob. 518—25 (1952).
                                  —18—



tion in which excommunication is regarded by members as a substantial cost;3° so

can a university. Exchanges, religious associations, and (private) universi-

ties are in fact important examples of modern "communities" in which private

adjudication (whether called arbitration or something else) is extensively

utilized in preference to public adjudication. But one cannot generalize from

such small close—knit communities to the state or national "coimnunity" to which

individuals and organizations also belong. For example, if there were no pub-

lic judicial remedies for breach of contract, one who breached a contract in

curcumstances where he expected an impartial arbitrator to rule against him

would have an incentive simpiy to refuse to agree to the appointment of any

arbitrator suggested by the other party to the contract. To be sure, if other

potential contracting parties learned of his behavior, they would be reluctant

to make contracts with him; but if the circle of potential contract partners

was a very large one, this reputational cost might not be sufficiently great to

induce him to submit to arbitration. Accordingly, one is not surprised to find

that, in our society, private arbitration3' (or its equivalent) is largely lim-

ited to two types of case: (1) those where a preexisting contract between the

parties requires submission to arbitration according to specified rules for sel-

ecting the arbitrator, and (2) those where the disputants belong to an associa-

tion which provides both arbitration machinery for its members and a set of ef-

fective private sanctions for refusal to submit to arbitration in good faith or

to abide by its results.



30. The threat of excommunication was, for example, the ultimate sanction for
refusal to submit to, or obey the decision of, the medieval English ecclesias-
tical courts, which had an immense jurisdiction covering matrimonial disputes,
perjury, and a variety of other matters as well as strictly religious disputes.
See Jane E. Sayers, Papal Judges Delegate: the Province of Canterbury 1198—1254,
at 157 (1971); Brian L. Woodcock, Medieval Ecclesiastical Courts in the Diocese
of Canterbury ch. X (1952).

31. We exclude cases where a statute compels arbitration, as in small claims
in Pennsylvania. See Martin Doinke, The Law and Practice of Commercial Arbitra-
tion 7—8 (1968). These are not examples of genuinely private adjudication.
                                  —19—



     Even (1) is effective, in major part anyway, only because the public courts

enforce such contracts; if they did not, there would often be no effective sanc-

tion against the party who simply breached the contract to arbitrate. In sum,

unless ostracism or some similar form of reputation—related private remedy is

available because the dispute is between members of a close—knit community, a

public remedy will often be necessary to induce a disputant who is pessimistic

about the outcome of arbitration to submit to it.

     The existence of sanctions for refusal to submit to arbitration is not, how-

ever, sufficient to assure that the selection process will operate effectively.

As mentioned earlier, itmay be difficult to determine whether a party who re-

jects an arbitrator suggested by his opponent is acting in bad faith. The op-

ponent might be proposing a totally unsuitable candidate precisely in order to

cast on the other party the onus of refusing to arbitrate. Given these diffi-

culties, ascertaining bad faith——the essential predicate for applying a sanction,

whether public or private——may be quite costly.

     This explains, we believe, why students of arbitration tend to disfavor the

familiar selection process whereby each party appoints an arbitrator and the two

party—selected arbitrators then agree on a third.32 This process is said to lead

to foot—dragging. The why and how are easy to see. The party who fears the out-

come of an impartial arbitration need only instruct hisIt arbitrator to refuse

to agree to the selection of an impartial third arbitrator.

     This problem is overcome and the costs of arbitration reduced by the pro-

cedure used by the American Arbitration Association, a private association that



32. See Robert Coulson, How to Stay Out of Court 153 (1968); Ernest J. Cohn,
The Unification of the Law of Commercial Arbitration, 24 Trans. Grotius Soc'y
1, 15 (1939); Lionel S. Popkin, Practical Problems Confronting the Practicing
Lawyer, 19 Law & Contemp. Prob. 653, 654 (1952).
                                 —20--




off ers an arbitration service.33 The AAA invites parties to contracts who wish

to include an arbitration clause to specify that the arbitration will be con-

ducted in accordance with the rules of the AAA. These rules provide (among

other things) that should a dispute triggering the arbitration clause arise AAA

will send each party a list of arbitrators selected by the AAA's staff on the

basis of the nature of the dispute. Each party is free to cross off any names

from the list it deems unsuitable and to rank its preferences for the others.

The staff then selects (as sole arbitrator) the individual most preferred by the

parties. A party who crosses everyone off the list hurts only himself, by guar-

anteeing that the arbitrator will be selected from among the names not deleted

by his opponent.

     The problem of enforcing the arbitrator's award once made is parallel to

that of compelling the recalcitrant party to submit to arbitration in the first

place. But, if anything, the problem of enforcement is less serious (or at

least less complicated) than that of submission, because refusal to submit to

an award is a clearer signal of bad faith than foot—dragging in the selection

of the arbitrator.

     The third problem addressed in our discussion oE primitive adjudication

was the creation of the rules that the private adjudicator applies. Arbitra-

tors generally do not write opinions; nor is an arbitrator's award appealable

to an "appellate court" of arbitrators. As a result, arbitration awards are

not a source of rules or precedents. This is understandable in the case of gen-

eral commercial arbitration because of the public—good character of precedent.

A system in which arbitrators wrote opinions would be at a competitive disadvan-

tage vis——vis one in which they did not write opinions; the former would cost



33. The AAA is described in Frances Kellor, supra note 26. See also Soia
Mentschikoff, Commercial Arbitration, 61 Colum. L. Rev. 846, 862—65 (1961).
                                  —21—



more but would yield no greater private benefits and, being private, could not

coerce the necessary financial support by invoking the state's taxing powers.

This point also explains why, to the extent that the value of appeal proce-

dures lies primarily in the creation of precedent, arbitration does not have

an appellate stage.

     Here is important evidence, incidentally, that a free market in judicial

services would not lead to the production of precedents as a by—product of the

efforts of the competing judges to demonstrate their competence and impartial-

ity through the issuance of judicial opinions. The American Arbitration Assoc-

iation does not employ this mode of advertising; nor do we know of any other

group that   does.
     The situation with regard to the incentives to produce precedents in a

regime of private arbitration is different where arbitration is prescribed by

a tightly knit religious or commercial association which can presumably "tax"

the membership to support rule creation by the association's judges. An ex—

ample is the elaborate "common law" of Jewish religious duties evolved by the

Rabbis in their interpretation of the Old Testament in disputes brought before

them——a body of law côdif led in the Talmud. Of course, in many associations

(as in many foreign legal systems) the rule—creation function is separated from

the adjudicative, and then we have an independent reason for not observing

written arbitration opinions. Nonetheless, it has been said that arbitration

decisions are accorded precedential value in trade association but not in gen-

eral commercial arbitration and that trade associations often provide appellate

tribunals as part of their arbitration machinery and general Commercial arbitra-

tion does not.34 These observations support our analysis.

     Where, then, do the rules applied in general commercial arbitration come



34. On these points see Soia Mentschikoff, supra note 33, at 857; and G. Ellen—
bogen, English Arbitration Practice, 17 Law & Contemp. Prob. 656, 673 (1952).
                                 —22—



from? They usually come from the courts and other sources of public law; ar-

bitrators typically apply the same rules as courts deciding similar questions,

often because the arbitration contract will specify that the arbitrator is to

apply the contract law of a particular jurisdiction.   Indeed, arbitration is

generally limited to disputes where the rules are perfectly clear and the only

issue is their application to the facts.35 In either case, the parties may be

said to be taking a "free ride" on the public legislative—judicial system; but

this is not a very fruitful invocation of the free—rider concept. Since pub-

lic adjudication is financed out of general tax revenues rather than litigant

fees, the parties to arbitration receive no greater net benefit from the pub-

lic court system than the litigants in that system do; they actually receive

less benefit because they have to pay for the arbitrator whereas the state pays

for his counterpart in the public court system.

     Because arbitration is a voluntary service provided in a competitive mar-

ket, it may appear that the procedures widely used in arbitration must be effic-

ient procedures for deciding the type of dispute submitted to arbitration. If

so, arbitration procedures could be used as a criterion for evaluating the ef-

ficiency of the public judicial system in areas such as contract and commercial

law where most arbitrable disputes arise. Before invoking such a presumption,

however, one would want to know how arbitration was actually faring in competi-

tion with the public judicial system. If only a minute fraction of commercial

disputes were submitted to arbitration——and especially if the fraction were de—

dining over time——one might conclude that, whatever a priori reasons there

might be for believing a private service to be more efficient than its public

counterpart, these reasons had been refuted by the verdict of the market in



35. See American Management Ass'n, Resolving Business Disputes——The Potential
of Commercial Arbitration 46, 115—16 (1965); Sola Mentschikoff, supra note 33
at 866.
                                  —23—



favor of the public service. To complicate the picture still further, it is

necessary to factor out the artificial competitive advantage that the public

competitor enjoys by virtue of being supported out of general tax revenues

and providing its services at no charge36 ——although, for reasons suggested

earlier, this may not be an unfair (inefficient) advantage if arbitration is

taking a "free ride" on the precedent—creating activities of the public courts.

     Still a further complication is that, even If the precedents or proced-

ures used in the public court system were as or more efficient than those of

arbitration, the existence of a long court queue——which is equivalent to a

price for judicial services——might reduce the net value of the judicial ser-

vices provided by the public system to the point where arbitration, though

socially less efficient, was an attractive substitute. Finally, uniformity

of procedure between arbitration and the courts may yield significant economies

since the same lawyers participate in both sorts of procedure37 and may tend

to homogenize them. This may be why arbitration procedures are said to resem—
                                                           38
ble the judicial procedures found in the same jurisdiction.

     The foregoing considerations make it difficult to use arbitration as the

benchmark for judging the court system——and it is no help that the statistics

of the number of cases submitted to arbitration are inadequate. Although the

American Arbitration Association maintains statistics of the number of commer-

cial arbitrations it conducts, there are no statistics on the number of trade



36. However, this would primarily affect the proportion of disputes submitted
to arbitration rather than the rate of change of this proportion.

37. Parties to commercial arbitration are generally represented by lawyers.
See American Management Ass'n, supra note 33, at 26 n. 5; Hal M. Smith, Com-
mercial Arbitration at the American Arbitration AssocIation, 11 Arbitration
J. (n.s.) 3, 12 (1956).

38. See Britt—Mari Blegvad, supra note 26, at 112; cf. Sola Mentschlkoff,
The Significance of Arbitration——A Preliminary Inquiry, 17 Law & Contemp. Prob.
698, 707 (1952).
                                 —24—



association, exchange, etc. arbitrations conducted outside of the AAA.39 A

further difficulty is the absence of statistics of the number of court cases

which might have been arbitrated——i.e., the number of contract and commercial—

law cases.

     For what it is worth——which is not a great deal in light of these dif-

ficulties——Table 1 presents a comparison of the number of commercial arbitra—

dons (excluding insurance) conducted annually by the AAA with the number of

contract (excluding insurance) cases filed in the federal district courts

under the diversity jurisdiction. Table 1 indicates that since 1959 commer—

                      [Insert Table 1 about here]

cial arbitrations have been increasing at about the same rate as court cases.4°

But more work must be done to determine the survival characteristics of arbitra-

tion versus litigation, since our figures may be dominated by shifts in the AAA's

market share of arbitrations or in the federal district courts' market share of

adjudications.
     Notwithstanding all the above reservations, the use of arbitration as a

benchmark for evaluation of the judicial system may help resolve a recent con-

troversy between Gordon Tullock and others regarding the relative efficiency of

 the Anglo—American adversary and Continental inquisatorial procedural systems.41

 It appears that most arbitrations are conducted according to English or American



 39. A study conducted in the mid—1950's on the basis of a mail questionnaire
 sent to trade associations found that the AAA accounted for 27 percent of all
 commercial arbitrations conducted either by it or by the trade associations
 sampled. Soia Mentschikoff, supra note 33, at 857.

 40. We use 1959 rather than 1957 as our base year because of the increase in
 the jurisdictional minimum amount for bringing diversity cases in the federal
 courts from $3,000 to $10,000 in 1958.

 41. See Gordon Tullock, On the Efficient Organization of Trials, 28 Kyklos
 754 (1975); Fred S. McChesney, On the Procedural Superiority of a Civil Law
 System, 30 Id. at 507 (1977); J. A. Ordover & Phillip Weitzman, On the Effic-
 ient Organization of Trials: A Comment, 30 Id. at 511 (1977).
                                    —25—



                                  TABLE 1


              Comparison of Judicial and Arbitration Caseloads

                                1957 — 1976



                        Contract (excluding                Commercial (excluding
                        insurance) cases filed             insurance) cases filed
                        in federal district                with the American Arbi-
                        courts under the diversity         tration   Association
                        jurisdiction


    1957                            3918                             677

    1958                            4329                             711

    1959                            2687                             707

    1960                            2624                             820

    1961                            3090                             N.A.

    1962                            3180                             N.A.

    1963                            3470                             N.A.

    1964                            3599                             N.A.

    1965                            3538                             N.A.

    1966                            3931                             N.A.

    1967                            4252                             N.A.

    1968                            4532                             1634

    1969                            4642                             1964

    1970                            5619                             2658

    1971                            6882                             2672

    1972                            7310                             3092
&


    1973                            8344                             3228

    1974                            9619                             3809

    1975                           11883                             4128

    1976                           12229                             4093



    Sources: American Arbitration Association; Annual Reports of the Director of
             the Administrative Office of the United States Courts
                                  —26—




arbitration procedure42——and, as mentioned, a nation's arbitration procedures

tend to follow its judicial procedures. Here, then, is some, albeit limited,

market evidence of the superiority of the adversary system.

     Were it possible to use arbitration procedures as a standard of judicial

efficiency, several points would be notable.43 First, arbitration never invol-

ves trial by jury, and rarely is there more than one arbitrator; yet commercial

arbitrators normally are not lawyers either, but are rather businessmen expert

in the particular industry in which the dispute to be arbitrated arises.   So


evidently it is not the lay character of the jury that is inefficient (using

arbitration procedures as the benchmark for judging the efficiency of a proced-

ural system), but the jury's lack of expertise with regard to the subject matter

of the litigation. The evidence from arbitration is that a single qualified lay

judge is superior to six or 12 randomly selected laymen——on reflection, a not im-

plausible suggestion.

     The second point to be noted is that there is no appeal in general conimer—

cial arbitration. This suggests that the principal value of appellate proceed-

ings is not to correct errors at the trial level but to formulate rules of law.44

Third, although there is pretrial discovery in arbitration, it is much less



42. See Michael Marks Cohen, A Venue Problem With the Arbitration Clauses Found
in Printed Form Charters, 7 J. Maritime L. & Comm. 541 (1976); Lynden Nacassey,
International Commercial Arbitration: Its Origin, Development and Importance,
24 Trans. Grotius Soc'y 179, 199 (1939); Donald E. Zubrod, Arbitration from the
Arbitrator's Point of View, 49 Tul. L. Rev. 1054, 1055 (1975).

 43. A description of these procedures may be found in the Domke treatise, supra
 note 31, and in Soia Mentschikoff, supra note 33, at 862—65.

 44. It is consistent with this analysis that appellate tribunals are sometimes
 provided in trade association arbitration. See note 35 supra. It is also pos-
 sible, of course, that there is less emphasis on appeal in arbitration because
 the arbitrator is a more expert factfinder than a jury. But the presence of
 appeals in trade association arbitration argues against this view, as does the
 traditionally restricted character of appellate judicial review of purely fact-
 ual questions.
                               —27—



extensive than under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure——which are much crit-

icized for excessive liberality in this regard. Fourth, the rules of evidence

of ordinary litigation are observed—in spirit albeit not in letter——in arbitra-

tion, even though the arbitrator is not a lawyer. This suggests that trial by

jury is not a sufficient explanation for the Anglo—American rules of evidence.

A fifth point is that, judging from arbitration practice, the judicial rules

denying specific performance of particular types of contract, e.g., personal—

service contracts, are inefficient since arbitrators are not bound by these rules

and do not in fact observe them.45 Sixth, while the arbitrator's fee is typi-

cally added to the arbitration award (i.e., is paid by the defendant if the plain-

tiff wins, and split between the parties if the defendent wins), unless the ar-

bitration contract specifically provides that the winning party's attorney's fees

are to be indemnified by the loser they are not.46 This is some evidence that

the English and Continental rule of indemnity may not be more efficient than the

American rule, which does not provide for indemnity. It is important evidence

since the theoretical economic analysis is indeterminate on the question,47 but

inconclusive since it is possible that most arbitration contracts do provide for

indemnity. We know of no evidence on that question.

             C. Competition in the Judicial—Services Market

     1. Nonadjudicative Substitutes f or Public Adjudication. We have thus far

assumed that the only substitute for public adjudication is some sort of private

adjudication. But this is obviously incorrect, though, since our major interest



45. See Staklinski v. Pyramid Electric Co., 6 N.Y. 2d 159, 188 N.Y.S. 2d 541,
160 N.E. 2d 78 (1959); Grayson—Robinson Stores, Inc. v. Iris Construction Corp.,
8 N.Y. 2d 133, 202 N. Y. S. 2d 377, 168 N.E. 2nd 377 (1960).

46. See Martin Domke, supra note 43, at §S42.0l —   .04.

47. See Richard A. Posner, Economic Analysis of Law 450—53 (2d ed. 1977).
                                      —28—




in the paper is in adjudication, we will not elaborate this point fully. If

there were no private courts yet the substantive rules or the procedures of

the public courts were inefficient, substitution away from dispute resolution

would take place. An important example of the substitution possibilities is

the liquidated—damages clause, whereby the parties substitute a damage—assess-

ment formula of their own choosing for whatever rules of contract damages or

methods of damage assessment the courts employ. The more costly or less ac-

curate the judicial methods of damage assessment, the more we would expect

parties to resort to liquidated—damages clauses. Thus, in principle at least,

ebbs and flows in the popularity of such clauses could be used to measure the

efficiency of judicial damage assessment methods.

     Many other examples of substitutes for judicial dispute resolution come to

mind, but we will mention only two.    (1) Inefficient judicial debt—collection

remedies can be expected to induce a substitution of cash for credit transac-

tions——or simply an increase in lenders' bad—debt reserves and higher interest

charges. (2) If accident victims could not obtain reasonably prompt and com-

plete compensation in the courts, they could be expected to reduce their in-

volvement in activities giving rise to accidents or to increase their purchase

of accident insurance. The relationship between nonadjudicative substitutes

and public courts is analyzed in greater detail in Part II of this paper.

     2. Competition Between Court Systems. Not only does the public court

system face potential competition both from private methods of dispute resolu-

tion and from substitution away from activities that lead to judicially cogniz—

able disputes; there is also the possibility of competition between public

court systems. In the American judicial system, for example, many plaintiffs

have a choice between a state and a federal court for a variety of disputes
                                     —29—



because the state and federal courts have concurrent jurisdiction of, for example,

disputes between citizens of different states and accidents subject to the Fed-

eral Employees Liability Act); and some plaintiffs have a choice between sev-

eral different state courts.48 Contracting parties can stipulate the juris-

diction whose law they want applied to the contract——which might even be a for-

eign nation——and these stipulations are generally honored.49 In the early his-

tory of English law, the three royal courts were in competition with each other,

with the court of Chancery, with the ecclesiastical courts, and with a variety of

manorial and other local courts, for litigants.50 We have now to consider the

character of judicial competition.

     Imagine a system in which there are several courts, public or private,

with overlapping jurisdictions, and the judges are paid out of litigant fees

and therefore have a direct pecuniary interest in attracting business away from

competing courts. If we put to one side the problem discussed earlier of pre-

cedent production under conditions of judicial competition and fee—per—case

judicial financing, it might seem that competition would lead to an optimal

set of substantive rules and procedural safeguards. But this is incorrect. The

competition would be for plaintiffs, since it is the plaintiff who determines

the choice among courts having concurrent jurisdiction of his claim. The com-

peting courts would offer not a set of rules designed to optimize dispute resol—

ution but a set designed to favor plaintiffs regardless of efficiency.51



48. Where cases instituted in state court are removable to a federal court, it
is the defendant who has the choice.

49. See American Law Institute, Restatement of the Laws Second, Conflict of
Laws 183—200 (1968).

50. See Theodore F.T. Plucknett, A Concise History of the Connnon Law 81, 98
(1956); C.R. Cheney, From Becket to Langton: English Church Government 1170-
1213, at 108—17 (1956).

51. Although this tendency would be held in check to some extent by the ability
of potential defendants to substitute away from activities generating litigable
disputes.
                                —30—




     This problem could be overcome by allowing the defendant to opt out

of the forum chosen by the plaintiff. This would mean that the parties

would have to agree on the court to which their dispute was submitted. How-

ever, this "solution" would simply reintroduce, in a different form, the

problem discussed at length earlier in the paper of the party who, fearing

the outcome of an impartial adjudication of his dispute, refuses to agree

to the selection of an impartial adjudicator. This problem can be over-

come only if the parties to a contract agree in advance to the submission

of any dispute arising from the contract to a particular tribunal.

     The foregoing analysis predicts the pattern that we in fact observe

in the history of English and American law. The public judicial system

tends toward monopoly save in cases where the parties agree in advance to

submit any dispute to another tribunal (such as some system of private ar-

bitration). The rare exception to the public judicial monopoly is where

plaintiff choice (with the danger of favoritism it imports) is thought to

be required to offset some bias toward defendants. This is the theory of

the federal diversity jurisdiction. Even so, competition between state and

federal courts for diversity plaintiffs might be intolerable if judges were

compensated out of litigant fees (as they are not), for then the competing

court systems might outdo each other in offering plaintiffs procedural advan-

tages beyond any required to offset prejudice against them as citizens of

other states.

     Left unexplained by this analysis is the actual pattern of competition

in the English courts during the centuries when the judges were paid out of

litigant fees and plaintiffs frequently had a choice among competing courts.

There is evidence of competition among the courts for plaintiffs through
                                —31—



substantive and procedural innovation,52 but none (of which we are aware) of

the kind of blatant plaintiff favoritism that our economic analysis predicts

would emerge in such a competitive setting. Why it did not emerge (assuming

it has not simply been overlooked by legal historians) presents an interest-

ing question for further research.

     Analysis of competitive forces suggests another respect in which paying

judges out of litigant fees might be inefficient. If one assumes that an ef-

fective system of arbitration requires judicial enforcement both of agree-

ments to submit to arbitration and of arbitration awards, then the judges

stand in two relations to arbitration: as suppliers of an essential input

into arbitration services——namely public enforcement of the agreement to ar-

bitrate and of the award53——and as competitors for cases and fees. The judges

can reduce competition from arbitration by refusing to enforce the agreement

to arbitrate or the award. Although they lose the fees they would have

charged the parties to the arbitration enforcement suit, they gain added

fees from the diversion of disputes from arbitration to the courts.

     Such an analysis provides an economic basis for allegations that the

refusal of the common law to order specific performance of agreements to



52. Though, for a skeptical view regarding a famous example of this alleged
competition (Slade's Case), see A.W.B. Simpson, A History of the Common Law
of Contract: The Rise of the Action of Assumpsit 294—95 (1975).

53. There is another, less important respect in which judicial intervention
may be necessary in arbitration: to compel attendance of disinterested wit-
nesses (i.e., witnesses indifferent to the grant or denial of the arbitration
award). See e.g., United States Arbitration Act, 9 U.S.C. §7. Of course, a
party could be required to negotiate with a witness over the terms of his
attendance, but that would create potentially serious problems of bilateral
monopoly and of incentives to lie.
                                 —32—




arbitrate,54 a refusal that dates from the time when the English judges

received litigant fees, was in fact motivated by hostility to the competi-

tion of arbitration.55 The analysis, however, is incomplete. Since the

judges supply an essential input into arbitration, namely enforcement of

agreements to arbitrate and of arbitration awards, they could in principle

fix a schedule of fees for these services that would extract the entire pro-

fits of arbitration. If arbitration were a more efficient method of dispute

resolution than formal adjudication, those profits would exceed what the

judges could obtain by snuffing out arbitration.

     The refusal (mysterious to an economist) of the courts to enforce pen-

alty clauses in contracts is sometimes attributed to a competitive hostility

to the liquidated—damages clause, a substitute, as we have seen, for jud-

icial dispute resolution. But the same puzzle recurs. Judges could ex-

tract the profits of substituting liquidated—damages clauses for judicial

damage assessment in the fees they charged for enforcing such clauses.

     The mystery is dispelled by reflection on the actual nature of judicial

compensation. Even when English judges received a substantial part of their

incomes in the form of litigant fees, they also received public salaries;



54. Breach of a contract to arbitrate was actionable, but damages could
never be proved, as the only injury to the victim of the breach was to be
remitted to his legal remedies for whatever wrong he wanted the arbitrator
to remedy. See discussion in Kulukundis Shipping Co. v. Amtorg Trading
Corp., 126 F. 2d 978 (2d Cir. 1942). For a summary of the common law of
arbitration see 6A Corbin on Contracts 383 (1962), and for detailed his-
tories, Julius Henry Cohen, Commercial Arbitration and the Law (1918); and
Morton J. Horwitz, The Transformation of American Law, 1780—1860, Ch V (1977).

 55. See, e.g., Scott v. Avery, 25 L.J. Ex. 308, 313 (1855). Judicial
 hostility to arbitration, although well documented, was by no means uniform.
 See Morton J. Horwitz, supra note 54; John H. Langbein, Book Review, 18 Am.
 J. Legal Hist. 88, 91—92 (1974).
                                     —33—



nor, so far as appears, had   the   judges much, if any, control over the setting

of the fees. If the judges did not control the fee levels, the alternative

(to discouraging arbitration) of setting fees for enforcing arbitration

awards or compelling submission to arbitration would be unavailable to them,

and the second—best solution of "foreclosing" competition might be chosen.

     More mysterious is judicial hostility to competition in an era when

judges' compensation is no longer proportioned to their output of disputes

resolved. An example is the judicial antipathy to boycotts. One can under-

stand why a boycott designed to enforce a cartel would be struck down under

the antitrust laws, but not why a boycott designed to create an effective

system of arbitration would be, as was done in Paramount Famous Lasky Corp.

v. United States.56 A group of motion—picture producers agreed to include

in their contracts with exhibitors an arbitration clause and, in effect, to

boycott exhibitors who refused to arbitrate or to abide by the terms of an

arbitration award. There was no evidence (at least mentioned by the Court)

 that the purpose or likely effect of the agreement was other than to make
                                                                          of con-
arbitration effective by imposing an effective sanction——termination

 tractual relations with other members of the producer group——for refusal to

 arbitrate.

      A superficially more liberal attitude toward the use of the boycott to

 effectuate a system of private adjudication appears in the later case of

 Silver v. New York Stock Exchan&e,57 which held that enforcement of stock—

 exchange rules by boycott would not violate the antitrust laws if adequate

 procedural safeguards were afforded in the exchange's disciplinary proceeding.



 56. 282 U.S. 30 (1930).

 57. 373 U.S. 341 (1963).
                                  —34—



Yet before Silver, it was generally assumed that the antitrust laws had no

application to the private self—government schemes of the regulated ex—
           58
changes.

     The result in Paramount Lasky is sometimes explained on the basis of

hostility to private government. But this formulation simply restates the

result of the decision. It is quite true that expulsion, ostracism, and

similar forms of boycotting are, as we have seen, methods by which private

systems of adjudication compensate for their lack of public coercive powers.

But the fact that the boycott is an importan; perhaps indispensable method

of enabling such systems to operate simply indicates that there is a legiti-

mate justification for the use of the device and makes it improper to treat

boycotts as       se violations of antitrust law when their purpose is not to

restrain trade.

     A somewhat more plausible objection to the boycott device is that it

could be abused by the dominant faction in an association.59 That is a ser-

ious problem where the association does not operate within the framework of

a larger polity having coercive authority, but that is not the case with

modern associations. Any contractual rights that members of an association

may have against majority oppression (analgous to those of minority share-

holders in corporations) would be enforceable in the public courts.

     Three features of judicial competition remain to be discussed briefly.

      (1) Where parties can feasibly stipulate the forum, public or private,

 for adjudicating disputes arising between them, competition is feasible and

we would expect efficient rules of substantive law to emerge. A famous



 58. See Howard C. Westwood & Edward C. Howard, supra note 29.

 59. See note 4 supra.
                                 —35—




example of this is the absorption of the law merchant by the English courts.

Throughout the middle ages European merchants had their own private courts

for the adjudication of commercial disputes——the system known as the lex

mercatoria.6° Gradually, the doctrines developed by these courts to deal

with contract and commercial matters were absorbed into the common law and

the official courts began winning business from the merchant courts.6' Con-

ceivably the financial self—interest of the English judges, who, as previous-

ly noted, were paid in part out of litigant fees during this period, was a

factor in the absorption of the law merchant into the common law. In similar

vein English procedural reform in the nineteenth century has been attributed

in part to the competition from private arbitration.62

     Notice that the English courts could not have won merchant business

simply by favoring plaintiffs, for merchants would terminate relations with

fellow merchants who utilized a biased court system. Notice further that the

process by which competition between a public and a private judicial system

yields efficient rules of substantive law will work even if, because of the

method of judicial compensation or for other reasons, the judges are indif f—

erent to the siphoning off of cases to competing public or private adjudica-

tive systems. After siphoning has occurred, the cases observed will be those

decided in systems which offer   efficient rules. Those cases will shape the

observer's impression of the content of the law. The general conclusion is

that we can expect more efficient rules of contract and commercial law (in-

cluding corporation law, which is also based on consensual arrangements) than



60. See Wyndham Anstis Bewes, The Romance of the Law Merchant pt. I (1923);
Julius Henry Cohen, supra note 54, at 73—81; William Mitchell, Essay on the
Early History of the Law Merchant (1904).

61. Theodore F.T. Plucknett, supra note 50, at 657—70.

62. See Brian Abel—Smith & Robert Stevens, supra note 2, at 39.
                                   —36—




of tort or criminal law, because parties to contracts face a competitive

supply of court systems.63

     (2) As mentioned earlier, state and federal courts are competitors

with regard to dispute resolution in the areas of their overlapping juris-

diction (for example, the diversity jurisdiction), but there is a monopoly

so far as the production of precedent is concerned. A federal court decid-

ing a tort case under the diversity jurisdiction uses its own     factfinding
procedures but applies the law of the state in which the tort took place;

it may not create its own    precedents   in competition with the courts in that

state. Litigants can opt out of the public dispute settlement machinery

entirely through arbitration but the body of legal principles known as the

conflict of laws (or choice of law) prevents disputants from shopping among

jurisdictions to find a more favorable body of substantive law. In general,

though not invariably, "forum shopping" is limited to a search for an alter-

native dispute settlement procedure or tribunal. Further, although there

are many judges within a court system, a single tribunal——a supreme court——

will monopolize the precedent production of the system through its power to

reverse any discordant lower—court decision.

     (3) We may be able to explain the movement toward centralization of the

judicial function——e.g., the growth of the royal courts in England and of

the federal courts in the United States. In a society with little mobility,

a system of local courts will not generate intolerable competition among

systems of substantive law. But with a mobile population, the system of re—

gional court monopolies breaks down and must be superseded if competition in

substantive law with resulting information overload is to be avoided.



63. This point is analyzed more fully in Part II of this part, infra.
                                —37—



    II. Are Public Judicial Outcomes Also Privately Determined?

                         A. Introduction


    Where a judicial system is established and financed by private parties

without public regulation or intervention, the procedures and outcomes of

that system may fairly be regarded as privately rather than publicly deter-

mined, and a set of substantive rules evolved by such a system would have

the highest claim to be regarded as efficient. One would not expect public

court systems to have an equally private character. Yet recent writers on

public adjudication——Rubin, Priest, and Goodman——have argued that the out-

comes of public judicial processes are indeed privately determined.64 The

basic reason for this result is that in their analysis the only inputs into

public, as into private, adjudication that count are private.   The decision

of parties to litigate their dispute in a public court or settle it out of

court is assumed both to be determined by the efficiency of the rules they

are contending for and to determine the outcome of litigation and ultimately

the legal rule themselves. Rubin and Priest argue that under certain condi-

tions this process leads to the development over time of more efficient

legal rules.65 Inefficient rules——ones that impose greater costs on par-

ties in, for example, accident avoidance or contract formation——are less

likely to survive not because judges favor or even understand principles of



 64. Paul H. Rubin, Why Is the Common Law Efficient?, 6 J. Legal Studies 51
 (1977); George L. Priest, The Common Law Process and the Selection of Effic-
 ient Rules, 6 id. at 65; John C. Goodman, An Economic Theory of the Evolu-
 tion of Common Law (unpublished).

 65. For this conclusion to hold, Rubin requires that both parties have sig-
 nificant (and approximately symmetrical) on—going interests in future cases
 similar to the one currently being litigated. Priest's analysis does not
 incorporate this requirement, but does require a higher litigation rate when
 legal rules are inefficient compared to when they are efficient.
                                —38—



efficiency but as a consequence of systematic differences in the trial—set-

tlement choices of parties subject to efficient and inefficient rules. Thus

the rules that survive are determined by private choices.

     The approach assimilates public to private courts. Moreover, if correct,

it has important implications for the economic theory of the common law, which

predicts that common law rules are efficient but has been unable to discover

the mechanism that generates these results. In this part of our paper we

modify and extend the Rubin—Priest approach. Because our analysis, like theirs,

is formal, we include here a brief, nonmathematical summary.

     The economic model of litigation66 is concerned with identifying the cir-

cumstances under which a legal dispute will be litigated rather than settled

out of court. Since settlement is assumed to be cheaper than litigation, why

would disputants ever go to trial? The answer requires identifying the ex-

pected gain to the plaintiff and the expected loss to the defendant from lit-

igating. If the expected gain is less than the expected loss——if defendant

expects to lose more than the plaintiff expects to gain——both parties will be

eager for settlement. But if the plaintiff's expected gain is greater than

the defendant's expected loss, the defendant will be unwilling to make an at-

tractive settlement offer and litigation will ensue. The determinants of the

expected gains and losses are the subjective probabilities of victory by each

of the parties and the stakes to each of them.

     The parties' decision calculus may be affected by the precedential char-

acter of the decision in their case, if the case is litigated to judgment. A

decision in plaintiff's favor will increase the probability of the plaintiff's



66. See, e.g., John P. Gould, The Economics of Legal Conflicts, 2 J. Legal
Studies 279 (1973); William N. Landes, An Economic Analysis of the Courts,
14 J. Law & Econ. 61 (1971); Richard A. Posner, An Economic Approach to Legal
Procedure and Judicial Administration, 2 J. Legal Studies 399 (1973). A very
simple version of that model appears in Richard A. Posner, supra note 47, at
434—36.
                                 —39—



winning similar cases in the future, and a decision for defendant will in-

crease the probability of his winning similar cases in the future. Either

way, the decision will alter (though, in an incremental, conunon law system,

we assume slightly) the ratio of favorable to unfavorable precedents appli-

cable to the parties' future activities.

     Many plaintiffs and defendants will, of course, be indifferent to the

precedential effect of a judgment in their case because they do not expect

to be involved in a similar dispute in the future; for them, precedent does

not enter significantly in measuring the stakes of victory and defeat. But

for others, precedential effect is an important dimension in deciding wheth-

er to litigate the present case because they do anticipate future similar

disputes. These are the parties who in our terminology have "future stakes"

in the current dispute.

     Rubin concludes that where future stakes of comparable importance are

present for both parties the tendency of the common law process is to gener-

ate efficient rules. We argue that this conclusion is determined by the par-

ticular fashion in which, in his model, the decision in the present litiga-

tion operates as a precedent for future disputes. In Rubin's model, if a

decision is against efficiency it has no impact on the state of the law,

while if it is for efficiency it dramatically alters the balance of prece-

dents in favor of the efficient rule. When an inefficient rule is in force,

the party hurt by the rule has a strong incentive to challenge it because if

he wins the rule will be replaced by an efficient rule which (by definition)

will confer greater benefits upon him than losses on his opponent. But

if an efficient rule is in effect, the party who loses from that rule

does not have an equivalent incentive to litigate because a victory

will confer smaller future benefits upon him than losses on his opponent.
                                 40




The net effect is that disputes governed by inefficient rules are litigated

until the rule is reversed in favor of efficiency.

    We, in contrast, assume that current decisions have small and

symmetrical effects on the state of the law or balance of precedents.

We are therefore led to expect more litigation in areas where the rules

are already efficient. For, in such areas, the likely outcome of the

litigation will be a decision placing liability on the party who is the

cheaper cost avoider (the party who will be induced by liability to

take steps that minimize the relevant costs), thereby reducing the

future costs of the activity. If, however, the dispute arises in an area

where the likeliest outcome is a precedent that will strengthen an

existing inefficient rule, litigation will be avoided because its

expected yield is negative. Therefore, we expect litigation to arise

mainly in areas where there is already a tendency toward efficiency,

and this tendency will be further strengthened by litigation that creates

additional precedents. Areas dominated by inefficient rules will tend

to become dormant in terms of litigation activity.

     The analysis as we have outlined it thus far rests on rather austere

assumptions: that both parties have future stakes in the litigation;

that these stakes are approximately equal; that the parties' current

stakes and perceived probabilities of victory are the same; and that

their expenditures on litigation are fixed. When we relax these assumptions,

we find, first, that if the parties have asymmetrical stakes, the

conclusion that there will be little litigation in areas dominated by

inefficient rules is weakened. This follows because if the people

benefitted by these rules have much larger future stakes than those
                                  —41—



hurt by them, they will have incentives to litigate in order to

strengthen the rule by adding precedents supporting it. Second, if

neither party has       future stake, the analysis collapses, for then

neither party has an interest in precedent, so the costs and benefits

generated by precedent will not enter into their decision to litigate.

This conclusion parallels the analysis in Part I of this paper. Precedent

has    "public good" aspects that may result in underproduction in a private
market. However, to the extent that the costs and benefits     of precedent

willbe borne (in the future) entirely by the parties to the suit in
which the precedent is created, precedent is a private rather than public
good.
       When the parties can, if they wish, contract around a rule of law,

either by expressly stipulating to the contrary or opting out of the

public court system entirely, as through an agreement to arbitrate, the

effect is to place a floor under any tendency of the legal system to

produce (for example, in circumstances where people who benefit from an

inefficient legal rule have much greater future stakes than those hurt

by it) inefficient rules. Such a rule will be followed only where the

inefficiency is less than the cost of contracting around the rule. But

the prediction of a tendency toward efficiency in areas where the legal

rules are already efficient will not be affected. Hence, as one would

expect, in areas where contracting around is feasible (or, in the

terminology of Part I of the paper, where there are private alternatives

to the public court system), the tendency of the common law toward

efficiency is accelerated even if the judges are indifferent to the

loss of business that contracting around entails.

        If the assumption that litigation expenditures are exogenous (j_.,

independent of any of the variables in our model such as the efficiency
                               —42—



of the legal rules or the current stakes of the parties) is relaxed, our

conclusions are actually reinforced. In general, treating litigation

expenditures as endogenous implies that an increase in the expected gains

of suit will cause a party to spend more on litigating his case, which

in turn will increase his chances of winning. This magnifies, for

example, the effects of assuming asymmetrical stakes. The party with

the larger future stakes will spend much more on litigation than the

party with smaller future stakes and this in turn will increase still

further the first party's probability of winning.

     Priest's model, unlike Rubin's, assumes that the parties to the

current dispute have no interest in precedent. Future stakes are not

an element of his analysis —— he focuses on present stakes entirely.

As noted earlier, other things being equal, an increase In the stakes in

a case will increase the tendency to litigate. Because an inefficient

rule is by definition more costly than an efficient one, Priest concludes

that the stakes will tend to be greater in cases where the governing rule

is Inefficient. Therefore there will be a greater tendency to litigate

such rules and, in the process of litigation, judges will occasionally

reexamine the rule, overrule it, and replace it with an efficient rule.

Efficient rules, In contrast, because they involve smaller stakes on

average, will tend to be relitigated less often and hence overruled

(and replaced by inefficient rules) less often.

    We believe, to the contrary, that once precedent is introduced into

the litigation model, Priest's results are reversed. Even though the

parties themselves have no interest in the precedential significance of

the decision in their case, that decision will both be influenced by

and influence the balance of precedents and hence the efficiency of the
                                —43—




rule. If, as Priest suggests, litigation will be more frequent in areas

of inefficient rules because the costs of such rules are greater, then the

tendency of these rules toward inefficiency will be strengthened by each suc-

cessive decision. To say that the governing rule is inefficient is to say

that cases within the domain of the rule are more likely to be decided in-

efficiently than efficiently, and every time that happens the rule is

strengthened by the greater accretion of precedents. There will be less

litigation of efficient rules and hence a smaller accumulation of precedents

confirming and thereby (in a system of decision according to precedent)

strengthening those rules.

     The rest of this paper develops the analysis sketched above. After

setting out some general considerations and assumptions, we next consider

(subpart C) the relative survival properties of efficient and inefficient

rules when the disputants have no prior contractual relationship with each

other and litigation expenses are exogenous. We then generalize the an-

alysis both to include parties that have a prior contractual relationship

with each other and thus are able to contract around inefficient rules

(subpart D), and to consider the situation where litigation expenditures

are endogenous, being determined, in part, by the relative stakes of the

parties (subpart E). Finally, we attempt to develop more rigorously Priest's

analysis of the long—run equilibrium of the legal system when litigation

rates are related to the relative efficiency of legal rules(subpart F).
                                        —44—




                         B. Some General Considerations



      We use the following notation in our analysis:


             A        plaintiff

             B         defendant

             x         amount of damages that A is seeking from B

                                        driving) that gave rise to A's claim for
             j         activity
                       dainag es

                       probability that in the event of a trial B will be liable
             p
                       for damages of x (thus 1—p is the probability that B will
                       not be liable)

             A         ratio of precedents (or legal capital) favoring A's claim
                       to those favoring B's claim

                       litigation expenses of A and B, respectively

             S         sum of present values of all future damages and expend-
                       itures to reduce both the probability and amount of
                       damages in activity j (including losses from reduced
                       participation in j).


                                                        in the event of a trial is a
       We assume that the assignment of liability

function of both A and the parties' litigation expenses as in


                 p
                           ab
                     p(A, r ,r )
                                                                      (1)


                                                                 and
where p/A > 0, ap/ra > 0 and p/ rb <0 To simplify further, let A
B's litigation expenses be equal and fixed.67 If A =         1, the precedents are

evenly divided in support of the two parties and hence p =          .5 given that

ra =   rb.       Similarly, if A >   1, the precedents on balance support A and p >


67.  This assumption is consistent with the Rubin and Priest papers since
neither author systematically treats litigation expenses as an endogenous
                                                                  as the out-
variable. In contrast, Goodman analyzes litigation expenditures
                                                  modification of Rubin's
come of a noncooperative game, resulting in some
conclusion regarding the efficiency of the conmion law.
                                    —45—



.5, while if A <   ]   p <    568   We assume that both parties have equal access

to the relevant precedents and hence identical and unbiased estimates of p.

    Precedents provide information not only on the expected outcome of the

current dispute between A and B but also on the likely outcome of similar

disputes in the future. This information will in turn affect the allocation

of resources across activities. For example, the likely assignment of lia-

bility for accident losses in activity j (assuming that transaction costs

prohibit negotiation between the parties prior to the accident) will affect

an individual's decision whether or not to participate in the activity, the

level of his participation, the amount of resources he will allocate to re-

ducing the likelihood and size of damages given participation, and, finally,

the number of accidents. S. the present value of the sum of future damages

and avoidance costs, will therefore depend in part on expectations of the

likely assignment of liability in j. These expectations, in turn, depend

on the stock of precedents.

     To analyze the survival properties of efficient and inefficient rules,

it is necessary first to specify which liability assignment leads to a more

efficient resource allocation. Using Calabresi's terminology, suppose that

B is the "cheaper cost avoider" in activity j so that S is minimized when

liability is assigned to B (and similarly situated defendants in general).

Since p is the probability that B is liable, S will tend to decline as p



68. This formulation implicitly allows for any biases judges may have in
favor of plaintiff or defendant. For example, if judges favor plaintiff,
this would reduce the number of precedents favorable to A that are required
to make A = 1 (holding constant the number favorable to B).
     It should be emphasized that A is not simply a ratio of the number of
precedents favoring A and B respectively. Because of differences in the re—
cency and authority of precedents, a smaller number of precedents in A's
favor might outweigh a great number favoring B, and this, in our analysis,
would result in a A greater than 1. On the factors which influence the
weight of a precedent see William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, Legal Pre-
cedent: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, 19 J. Law & Econ. 246 (1976).
                                   —46—



increases, as in


                   S =   S(p)                               (2)


where aS/np <0. When p increases, the marginal return of, and hence B's

expenditures, on damage avoidance rises, since that marginal return is

simply the          reduction in damages brought about by those expenditures

discounted by the probability that B will be held liable. By similar reason-

ing, when p increases, the marginal return of A's accident—avoidance expen-

ditures falls.69 This shift in avoidance expenditure between A and B lowers

S because of our assumption that B is the cheaper cost avoider.

     Figure I illustrates both the relationship between S and p and the effect

of assuming that the parties have significant and symmetrical on—going in-

terests in activity j. B's future costs (Sb) of accident avoidance increase

as p increases because B is more likely to be liable for damages in the future

and so will spend more on accident avoidance, but since these costs are more
                                       a   a    b                  .
                                                                            70
than offset by A s lower future costs (S ), S + S decreases as p increases.




69. Notice that we are implicitly analyzing the choice between a strict—
liability (i.e., B always liable) and a no—liability (B never liable) rule.
We do this to simplify the analysis; our conclusions would be unaffected by
extending the analysis to other liability rules (e.g., negligence).

 70. Rubin, in contrast, assumes that if p < .5, A and B act as if A is
 always liable and therefore S takes the value S(0) for all p's between 0
 and < .5. Alternatively, if p > .5, A and B act as if B is always liable
 and S equals S(l) f or all p's > .5. Thus, the S curve would be horizontal
                                                                       .5 it
 at S(0) until p = .5; at p = .5 it would be discontinuous; and at p >
 would be horizontal at a lower value of 5(1). We assume, on the contrary,
 that cost—minimizing behavior on the part of plaintiffs and defendants will
 generate marginal changes in S in response to changes in the likely assign—
 ment of liability (p), giving rise to a declining and approximately contin-
 uous S function as in Figure I.
                                 —47—




                              Figure I

S




                                                              S




                                                          +



                                 I
                                                          p
                                p2 p0 p1

     Some examples will illustrate the relationship between future costs CS)

and expected trial outcome:

     (1) Let the alternatives in eminent—domain proceedings be that either

the government (B) pays or it does not pay the plaintiff (A) for taking

his property. In the former instance, landowners will allocate land to its

most efficient use, thereby maximizing its present value. To be sure, there

will be social costs from raising the tax revenue necessary to compensate

landowners in eminent—domain proceedings (e.g., distorting labor—leisure

choices and tax—collection costs) but, when balanced against the gain in

value from more efficient land use, assignment of liability to the govern-

ment will probably minimize S. As the likelihood of goverent liability

declines (i.e., as p falls), landowners will begin to discount the expected

return from investments in land and at the margin will reduce or alter the

timing of these investments (e.g., biasing them toward the present), pro-

ducing deadweight losses. These deadweight losses, and hence 5, will in-

crease as a negative function of p, and will reach their maximum when the
                                   —48—




legal   rule allows the government to take property without compensation.7'

        (2) When a ship is in distress at sea, exigencies of time may   preclude
voluntary negotiations between the ship's master and potential rescuers

(salvors). Under one possible assignment of liability, the rescuer is

never entitled to compensation for his costs. Since this rule will signi-

ficantly reduce the incentives of rescuers, ships would undertake excessive

investments in safety or make other adjustments to avoid hazards that might

give rise to losses at sea.72 If instead rescuers are entitled to salvage

awards to cover their expenses, the allocation of resources to safety and

rescue will approximate the results that a competitive market would achieve

if transactions between rescuees and rescuers were feasible. In terms of

Figure I, if p were defined as the probability that a salvor would be com-

pensated (assuming he was successful in his rescue efforts), then, as p in-

creased, the social costs (S) associated with shipping activity would de-

crease.

        (3) B, a professional photographer, contracts with A, to develop B's

film. A loses B's film and B sues for damages that     include   the costs of B's

trip to Africa where the photographs were taken. Assuming B is the cheaper

cost avoider (perhaps because B could have taken a second roll of film to

Africa or explicitly informed A of the value of the film and obtained extra

 care in exchange for a premium above the usual costs of development), the

 assignment of liability to A for B's full damages would increase the costs



 71. The resource—allocation effects of inefficient rules are similar to
 those of factual errors in the application of efficient rules, analyzed
 in Richard A. Posner, supra note 66, at 402—05, 452—55.

 72. Rescues may not decline to zero, however, since altruism would still be
 a factor motivating some rescues. For a detailed analysis of the economics
 of rescue and its application to salvage awards see William M. Landes &
 Richard A. Posner, Salvors, Finders, Good Samaritans, and Other Rescuers:
 An Economic Study of Law aid Altruism, 7 J. Legal Studies 83 (1978).
                                —49—



of developing compared to assigning liability to B. Thus, the damages and

avoidance costs would decline as p increased.

     These examples illustrate the proposition that alternative liability

rules affect resource allocation. Examples (1) and (2) differ from (3),

however, because in (3) the parties had an existing contractual arrangement

when the mishap that created damage arose and therefore could have contracted

around an inefficient liability rule in advance of the mishap. Thus A, if

liable in (3), could insert in its developing contracts an explicit clause lim-

iting liability to the costs of the film. This, in turn, would induce B

either to inform A of the value of the film and negotiate a waiver of the

limited liability clause or to take several rolls of film with him to Africa.

The possibility of recontracting limits the costs of an inefficient legal

rule to the costs of contracting around the rule. In the analysis that fol-

lows we first assume that no recontracting is possible and then allow for the

possibility of recontracting around an inefficient legal rule.


         C. No Contractual Relationship Between the Parties

     1. Trial—Settlement Decision. To facilitate exposition, assume A is

a pedestrian and B a driver, and A is suing B for damages of x arising out

of an accident. B is by definition the cheaper cost avoider and therefore

the efficient legal rule is for B to be liable. We assume that there are

three possible outcomes of A's legal action against B:

         state 0        out—of—court settlement——A voluntarily drops
                        suit or settles with B for a sum < x

         state 1        trial——A wins and B is liable for x; p is the
                        probability of state 1 given a trial

         state 2        trial——B wins and is not liable for x; (1 —   p)   is
                        the probability of state 2 given a trial
                                          —50--




We use the following additional notation:

             a       b        A and B s wealth, excluding their share of S from
            w ,w
                                     participation in activity j

            a,
             o
                 5b           A and B's future costs (present value of damages
                              plus expenditures to reduce probability and amount
                              of damages) if an out—of—court settlement is reached

             a   b               A and B s future costs if         state   1 occurs
            S1, S2

                                 A and B's future costs if state 2 occurs
            S, S

     A's expected wealth if he pursues his claim against B and goes to trial is

                 =   a ra   +px —   (pS
                                          + (1 —
                                                     p)S)                        (3)



 and if he does not pursue his claim is

                      a
            wao =wa —S.
                      0
                                                                                 (4)




 Thus,   A's net expected gain from going to trial             ( —    wa) is

                                     —
                 =   px — ra +           (pS      + (1 —
                                                           p)S)1                 (5)


 where the expression in brackets denotes the expected change in A's future

 costs if the current dispute between A and B goes to trial.73 Observe that


                                                                                  (6)
             S <a
 because if a trial occurs and B is held liable (state 1), the ratio of prec-
                                                                            which in turn wili
 edents (A) will shift marginally in favor of plaintiffs,

 increase the probability that defendants will be held liable for damages in



                                                     Risk aversion and risk
  73. We assume that all parties are risk neutral.
  preference have been incorporated into previous models of the litigation
  process but to do so here would unnecessarily complicate the analysis.
the next period.74 Since A is presumably a member of the class of future

plaintiffs, the present value of A's future costs (Sa) will decline compared

to an out—of—court settlement (state 0) which would involve no legal deter—
                                                      75
minatiori of the dispute and therefore no change in A.     Conversely, if B

is successful at trial, A and p will fall and A's future costs will in-

crease compared to a settlement. Thus, by going to trial litigants are gam-

bling not only on whether they will win and if so how large the amount of

damages will be but also on changes in the amount of future damage and avoid-

ance costs brought about by the judgment. The magnitude of the gamble on

future costs will depend on the importance of the current decision relative

to the existing stock of precedents and on the responsiveness of future costs

to a change in precedents.76



74. Of course, not every litigated judgment creates a precedent. Jury ver-
dicts, and indeed most trial—court judgments, are not published and there-
fore have little or no precedential significance. Most precedents are gen-
erated at the appellate level. This would make no difference if all judg-
ments were appealed, for then we could simply treat the trial and appeal as
a single litigation. But not all judgments are appealed. In general, one
would expect the appeal rate to be positively related to the stakes in the
case and the parties' future stakes (i.e., their interest in the preceden—
tial significance of the case). A more elaborate model than the one we use
here would recognize the distinction between trial and appeal and would focus
on precedent—creating litigation rather than simply litigation as we do. We
do not think, however, that the more elaborate model would alter our conclu-
sions materially. It might actually reinforce them by strengthening the pos-
itive relationship in our model between future stakes and (precedent—creat-
ing) litigation.

75. Initially, we assume that if someone is a plaintiff (defendant) today,
he will also be a plaintiff (defendant) In the future. If not, there would
be a conflict between a litigant's present and future interest. We remove
this restriction later on.

76.. Notice that a necessary (and we assume sufficient) condition for A to
press his legal claim against B is that A's net expected gain from going to
trial exceeds zero. If C < 0, the gains to A from suing B will be less than
the costs of legal action against B and hence A would drop his suit. Unless
explicitly stated to the contrary, we assume that C > 0.
                                                  —52—



        B's expected wealth if a trial takes place is

              —b
              w  =    b
                     w —   rb—              b           b
                                    px — (pS1 + (1 — p)S2)                (7)


and if A drops his claim is
               b  b   b
              w=w   —S.                                                   (8)

B's net expected gain (or loss) from a trial compared to A's dropping his

claim is

             Gb =    -px   -   rb       + [Sb —         + (1 -
                                                  (pS            p)S)]    (9)

where

             sb>sb>sb
              1  o  2
                                    .                                    (10)

The ordering in (10) is reversed compared to that of (6) because if B wins

(state 2) the precedents shift in B's favor and his future costs fall rela-

tive to state 0, whereas if B loses (state 2) the precedents shift in A's

favor and B's costs rise relative to state 0.

        A well—known result of the economic analysis of litigation is that the

decision to go to trial or settle out—of—court depends on whether

              ir=Ga +G b>
                        <0.                                              (11)

If ii   >0   (e.g., A expects to gain 10 but B expects to lose 7), B's maximum

settlement offer will be less than A's expected gain and a trial will occur.

Alternatively, if ii <0 (e.g., A expects to gain 10 but B expects to lose 15),

B's maximum settlement offer (=15) will exceed A's expected trial gain and

both parties will be better off with any out—of—court settlement greater than

10 but less than

        We are interested in how the decision to go to trial is affected by pre-

cedent, since this will reveal how the private decisions of the parties to

lawsuits affect the creation of legal rules through the litigation process.



77. In both examples, the costs of bargaining to a settlement are assumed
to be negligible.
                                       —53—



But we approach this question differently from Professor Rubin who as noted

earlier, assumes that if A loses (and hence the Inefficient liability rule

prevails)   there is no change in A but that If A wins (and the efficient rule

prevails) the precedents shift in favor of plaintiffs so that in the future

the probability that defendants will be liable will exceed .5. Under Rubin's

approach, for example, if p equalled .1 but A nevertheless was successful

at trial, the earlier precedents——which overwhelmingly favored defendants——

would be sharply devalued and In the future p would be > .5 But while the

efficient rule would thus replace the Inefficient one if A von, the ineffic-

ient rule would not be strengthened if he lost. As a result of this asymmetry,

when both parties have approximately equal stakes in the future there is never

an incentive to litigate an efficient liability rule, but there is an incen-

tive to litigate an inefficient rule anytime the expected present value of

the gain from moving to an efficient rule is greater than the litigation costs
                      78
of the two parties.




78. Rubin's model implies that if precedents initially favored B,     =    and
                                                                                 S
sb =    because if B wins (state 2) future costs will not increase for A or
dcrease for B relative to the no trial situation. The trial—settlement con-
dition is then                                         <
              ii = —r
                      a — b
                             r
                            + p[(Sa + S)
                                       b
                                         — a + S1)]
                                                  b
                                                      > 0.
                                                    (S1
The term in brackets is positive (assuming symmetrical future stakes) because
B is the cheaper cost avoider. Suppose initially that B is not likely to be
liable (p < .5) but 7t is positive. Although A Is likely to lose (which doesn't
alter p in Rubin's analysis), eventually an A litigant will win, shifting
liability to B. But since B is now the cheaper cost avoider, if A were to
                                                                      and S =
litigate again there would be no gain in efficiency and hence S =
Sb. Therefore
                                                                             S
 0
                           _ra
                  7r =           rb + (1 —   p)   [(Se + Sb) -
                                                                 (S +   S)] <0
because if B were to win in a trial (state 2), A's and B's costs would be
higher than if the case were settled. Thus, once the inefficient rule is
overturned in Rubin's model, there is no longer an incentive to litigate
any further.
                                            —54-.




    Judge—made law, however, does not change as drastically as Rubin's anal-

                                            favoring an efficient outcome is unlikely to
ysis implies. A single decision
                                                                  inefficient one.79 Gradual
eradicate a hundred prior opinions supporting an

or incremental change is the dominant form of change in a decentralized sys-

tem of judge—made law. Our analysis, in contrast to Rubin's, assumes that
                                                             precedents8° ——
current decisions generate marginal and symmetric changes in

i.e.,   an inefficient rule becomes more or less durable depending on whether

the outcome of the current trial is or is not In conformity with it.

        2. Efficiency Implications. We can rewrite the decision to go to a

trial or settle out of court as

             =   _(ra                            + (1 -           +   [Sb -   (pS
                                                                                    + (1 -
                                                                                             p)S)]<O,   (12)
                        + rb) + ES: -      (pS            p)S)1

noting that S < s           <
                                S,   S >         > S,   and for all participants in j that

    <   S<              (The latter follows from the assumption that in the aggregate
                 S2.

 it is less costly to assign liability to B.) These inequalities are illustrated
                                                                        of B's liability and p1
 in Figure I, where p equals the initial probability
                                                           conditional on the outcome of the
 and p2 (< p1) the subsequent probabilities

 current dispute.



                                          If the decision is at the trial level.
 79. This is especially true, of course,
                                       have little, and some zero, preceden—
 Many unappealed trial—court decisions
                                                    in jury trials, are not
 tial value (many trial—court decisions, especially
                            Rubin's analysis——like our own in this part of the
 even reported). We assume
 paper——is implicitly limited to decisions at the appellate level.
                                                 can be found in our paper on
 80. Some empirical support for this assumption
 legal precedents, supra note 68. Utilizing citations in federal appellate
                                                   decisions, we estimated a
 and U.S. Supreme Court judicial opinions to prior
 relatively low depreciation rate (4—5 precent) for legal precedent. See id.
 at 279.
                                                —55—



Let


                                                              sb=sb_sb<o
                                                                  0  1
                                                                                      (13)

            a,5a5aa <          2
                                                           6bsbsbsb>oo    2

      and 15b denote changes in future costs when B's liability increases, and

       and bsb changes in future costs when B's liability decreases. Since

   and           are likely to be approximately of the same magnitude, the exposition

is simplified if we assume that 6a = 6b =                  8l    Since ó. <   0,   the choice

between a trial or settlement now depends on whether

       it   =   _(ra   + rb) + (p + (1 -       p)5)    (Sa + sb) < 0.                 (14)

       We can derive the following implications from (14):

       (1) If the on—going interests in activity j of both parties are negli-

gible,                 0, sb       0, and it   < 0;   hence there will be an out—of—court set-

tlement. This is the well—known result that if both parties agree on the

expected outcome of a trial (and future costs are ignored), a trial is equiv-

alent to a gamble with a negative expected value, so that risk—neutral and

risk—averse persons will always prefer to settle. Since in this example the

expected assignment of liability has no effect on the incentive to litigate,

efficient and inefficient precedents would have the same survival value.



81. When A wins and liability marginally shifts to B, part (but not all) of
A's reduction in future costs will be shifted to B. As a first approximation,
therefore, we can write
      1Sb/tSa          -k
where 0 <k <  1. By analogous reasoning, if B wins, part of B's gain involves
a transfer of costs to A such that
                  — k.
This, of course, implies that ôa ;
                                                      —56—



      (2) Suppose that both parties have substantial and approximately equal

future stakes in activity j and that 6 =                     _l.82   The limiting case would be

where activity j is specific to A and B and hence 5a + sb =                       s.    In general

we would expect

                              + sb< 5a + sb <a + sb,                                   (15)
                          1      1   o   o   2    2

because if A wins (state 1), liability will shift towards B, the cheaper

cost avoider, and in the aggregate S1 <S0, whereas if B wins (state 2) lia-

bility will shift towards A, the more expensive cost avoider, and 2 >                          S.
Assuming the parties have sufficient and symmetrical stakes, their combined
              a    b                   a         b       a   b
                                                                  will move
future costs (S + S ,              S     +   S      and S + S )               in the same direction
              1    1                   o         o,      2   2

as the aggregate future costs (S1, S and S2) and (15) will hold (see Figure I).

The ordering in (15) implies that:

                               +         >       o.                                    (16)

      Since 6 = —1, n is necessarily negative if p <.5. Alternatively, if

p >   .5,   'iT   is   more likely to be positive the greater is p, the smaller the

r's, and the larger the combined gain (5a + Ash) of the two parties from

the marginal shift in liability to the cheaper cost avoider. This suggests

that, given strong and symmetric stakes:

                  (a) the disputes most likely to go to trial are those where, on
                      balance, the existing precedents already favor an efficient
                      outcome (I.e., the probability that B Is liable is greater
                      than .5); and

                  (b) the disputes least likely to go to trial are those where the
                      existing precedents favor an inefficient allocation (p < .5).



82. 6 = —l implies that the precedential significance of winning and of
losing a trial Is approximately the same, and hence the corresponding de-
crease and increase in future costs would be of equal magnitude. The latter
implication always holds for the case of linear cost functions, but holds
only for marginal changes in costs in the case of nonlinear cost functions.
                                   —57—



Over time, (a) and (b) imply a tendency towards an increase in the average

efficiency of legal precedents since efficient precedents become more so

while there is no obvious change in                      inefficient prece-

dents.83 If all legal rules tended to favor efficiency (p's >     .5),   then the

degree of efficiency would be strengthened over time provided the combined

savings in costs weighted by 2p — 1 exceeded the costs of going to trial.

     This result has an interesting interpretation. When the legal rules

that govern particular disputes are uncertain, disputes will never be liti-

gated if an inefficient outcome is more likely than an efficient one (p <

 5)84   Litigation will (assuming the parties have roughly symmetrical future

stakes) be confined to disputes in which the existing legal rules on balance

favor efficient outcomes (p >   .5).   Moreover, this process is cumulative be-

cause, ohter things being equal (e.g., in the absence of legislative inter-

vention), litigation will tend to occur in those areas of law where the rules

are becoming progressively more efficient.

     This analysis suggests that inefficient rules will lie dormant but at

the same time will affect behavior——i.e., people will be guided by these

rules in their allocation of resources to damage avoidance but will not liti-

gate when disputes arise. This surprising result, however, is probably an

artifact of our assumption that the parties always agree on p. In fact, dif-

ferent estimates by disputants of the likely outcome of litigation are pro-

bably a very important, indeed dominant, cause of litigation. And such


83. Given p > .5, the stock of precedents would become continually more
favorable to A until in the limit p approached 1. Although we hgve not done
so here, we could build in the assumption that as p rises a + S falls at a
decreasing rate which would tend to more than offset the gain from going to
trial as p rises. Eventually, a long—run equilibrium would be reached at p< 1.

84. This assumes that parties agree on p and x. If the parties disagree on
these variables, then litigation will arise even though the parties have no
stakes in the future and the existing legal rules favor inefficiency. We
take up these points later.
                                         —58—



differences are prohably a negative function of the age of the relevant

precc'de'its, since it is more difficult to infer from an old precedent how

the court will decide a current dispute than from a recent precedent. If this is

correct, the very dormancy of an area of legal disputes will raise the lit-

igation rate in that area. This is, indeed, a direct implication of our

analysis elsewhere of how precedents are created in a system In which the
                                                                     85
author of a precedent is not directly compensated for his efforts.

       To summarize, in the case of strong and symmetric future stakes, we

agree with Rubin——though we reach his result by a slightly different route——

that the common law system of rule creation is biased in favor of efficiency
                                                                for efficient
not necessarily because of any systematic judicial preference

outcomes but as a function of the sample of cases that are likely to be

litigated in a system where the decision to sue or litigate and the invest-

ment in litigation are private. Moreover, this conclusion holds whether

plaintiffs or defendants are the cheaper cost avoiders and also where par-

 ties do not know whether they will be plaintiffs or defendants in future
             86
 disputes.


 85. See William M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, supra note 68, at 271—72.

 86. (1) If plaintiffs rather than defendants were the cheaper cost avoid-
 ers, so that resource allocation would be improved were defendants not lia-
 ble, the disputes most likely to go to trial would be those where precedents
 now favored defendants (i.e., p < .5). For, when plaintiffs are the cheap-
 er cost avoiders
              S1 >So >S 2
 and
              8a+
               1    1
                        >   5a
                            o    o
                                     >
                                         2      2

 then
                            <

                                             (see (14)) for a trial is p < .5
 Assuming that 6 = —1, a necessary condition avoider.
 or that precedents favor B, the higher—cost          Since defendants will
 on average win more trials than they lose, precedents will gradually shift
 over time in favor of defendants, leading to a more efficient allocation of
 resources. In contrast, If inefficient precedents predominate (p > .5),
                                      —59—




     (3) But now suppose the parties have asymmetrical stakes In future costs.

A natural way to define asymmetry Is to order the parties' combined costs

according to which party has the greater stake In S. Thus, if A had the

greater future stake S + s <Sa + sb <            + S, while if B had the greater
future stake, S + S > S +            > S + S. The former implies that        +
sb > 0 and the latter that a + b < 0.             In terms of the trial—settle-

ment choice (equation (14)), a necessary condition for a trial is that the

odds favor the party with the greater stake. If that were A, a trial would

occur only if p > .5, and if B, only if p <      .5.   Since by assumption B is the

cheaper cost avoider, the precedents will shift in favor of or against effic-

ient liability rules depending on whether A or B has the greater stake. In

the latter case (i.e., B has the greater stake) we have an example of a ten-

dency to strengthen an Inefficient legal rule, but the tendency is probably

weak. A is unlikely to press his claim (since a Is likely to be <0) and



86. (cont'd) disputes will not be litigated. Therefore inefficient rules will
persist but will not become more entrenched over time.
       (ii) Imagine that both parties continue to have substantial future stakes
 in activity j, but neither knows whether he will be a plaintiff or a def end—
ant in the future. For example, suppose A is suing B for patent infringe-
ment suit because both are heavily involved in inventive activity. Or, in
our earlier example of rescue at sea, both parties may be engaged in shipping
and equally likely to be either a salvor or a victim of distress in the fut-
ure.    (A more common example would be the contract litigation of a business
 firm.   Since the firm both buys inputs and sells outputs, it is performer—
payee with regard to some of its contracts and payor with regard to others.
However, this is an example of a preexisting contractual relationship be-
 tween the parties and is therefore considered in subpart D infra.) If we
denote by q the probability that A or B will be a future plaintiff, and assume
   = —1, then (14) becomes

          11 =   _(ra   + rb) + (2p - 1) 2(qASa + (1 — q)LISb)   (O
If each party is equally likely to be a plaintiff or defendant, q = .5 and
the above Is identical to (14). Thus, our analysis of the relative survival
properties of efficient and Inefficient precedents depends only on both par-
ties' having significant future interests in activity j and not on each par-
ty's ability to identify the position (plaintiff or defendant) he will occupy
in the future.
                                    —60—




therefore a trial will not take place.87
                                assumption of our model is that both parties
     (4) The most restrictive
                                                                           would
                          first glance, it might seem that this assumption
have future stakes. At
                         limited subset of cases, mainly involving business
be satisfied in only a
                                                             victim, for example,
                                   The individual accident
firms and government agencies.
                                                             future accidents is
                              involved in litigation over
whose probability of being
                                                                               i—
                                                  in the precedential signif
very small, would not have a significant stake
                                                     the accident. This is true,
                         determining liability for
 cance of the decision
                            does contain various devices for bringing future
 and yet the legal system
                             litigation. One is the ainicus curiae (friend of
 stakes to bear in current
                            enables an individual or other entity who anticipates
 the court) brief, which
                                to which he is not a party will be a precedent
 that the decision in a case
                                                         litigation (though in a
                                 to participate in the
 affecting his own activities
                                                                             the
                                Also, trade and other associations
 highly circumscribed way).
                                                                  of firms or in-
                                firms, and other organizations
 NAACP), public_interest law
                                   in precedent can sometimes participate dir-
  dividuals having future stakes
                                                         cases," etc.) in litiga-
                                 class actions, "test
  ectly or indirectly (through
                              parties do not themselves have significant future
  tion in which the nominal

  stakes.
                                     is an aspect of the general externality
       The problem discussed here
                                  production examined in Part I of this paper.
  problem in private precedent
                                                            the parties to the case——
                                      are not limited to
  The social benefits of precedent
                                                            disputes for which the
                              have no interest in future
   indeed, if those parties


                                  (5) that Ga falls and is more likely to be
   87. It follows from equation
                             Notice, however, that If A were the cheaper cost
   negative as p decreaSes.                             be more likely to occur
   avoider and had the greater stake, litigation  would                   will
                                               to be positive, litigation
   when p > .5. Since C is also more likely
                                   on balance favor efficient legal rules.
   be more likely when precedents
                                   —61—



decision in their case might constitute a precedent they derive zero private

benefits from helping to create a precedent. It is only if they have such a

future interest, or if others who do are somehow represented in the litiga-

tion, that the social benefits of precedent can be privately appropriated.


            D. Contractual Relationship Between the Parties

     When it is feasible to contract around a legal rule, the parties will

do so if the costs are less than those of the legal rule.88 Let m denote

the costs of a voluntary or market assignment of liability where m equals

the present value of the sinn of contracting costs, future damages, and avoid-

ance costs. Figure II illustrates the relationship between a +           and m.



    + sb,           + sb

                                                              Figure II




                                                       +


                              p0                        p


     Notice that m is constant and Independent of the probability of B's

liability under the legal rule. If p < p    in Figure II, the parties would

choose to contract around the legal rule, assigning liability to B, the

cheaper cost avoider, because m <   a   + sb. In contrast, if p >   p,   the

contracting solution would be more costly and the parties would prefer the



88. We assiuue that the agreement between the parties Is enforceable. If
not, the analysis of subpart C would apply here even though a contractual
relationship exists between the two parties.
                                            —62—



legal rule even though the probability of B's liability is less than unity.

In the latter instance, the costs of contracting, which would have enabled

the parties to assign liability to B with a probability near unity, are

greater than the gains associated with the increased certainty of B's fut-

ure liability.

       Suppose initially that the existing legal precedents assign liability

to B with a probability p, resulting in joint future costs                    of S ÷ .    If
A were to go to trial and lose (state 2), the precedents would shift mar-

ginally in B's favor but A and B's future costs would not change because they

would opt for the market or contract alternative where                  m =     + sb.89 How-

ever, if A wins and liability shifts towards B (state 1) both parties gain
                       a    b    a   b
in the aggregate since S1 + l < s + S. Thus, the truncation of the cost
                                                         =   sb, and hence the trial—settle—
function at p implies that 5a
                            o
                              = 5a2 and              o        2
             o
ment condition becomes
                            =   _(ra   + rb) +     (5a + sb)><o                  (17)


The possibility of contracting around the legal liability rule has some in-
                                                                       decision and the evol-
teresting implications regarding the trial—settlement

ution of legal rules:

        (1) Since it   is   greater when the parties are able to contract around the

 legal rule (compare equation (17) to (14) ),                the   likelihood of a trial is

 also greater.9° This does not necessarily imply a greater tendency for

 legal rules to become more efficient over time.                   That depends critically on



 89. Although there is no change in aggregate costs, the distribution of
 costs between A and B may differ depending on whether the parties choose
                                                                   that the
 the market or legal assignment of liability. We assume, however,
 distribution of future costs is not affected by this choice.

 90.    it   is
           greater in (17) than (14) by the amount                  (? + 5b)   (l.p) assum-
 ing 5 = —l in (14).
                                  —63—



the value of p (p being defined in general as the probability where m =

  + Sb). If p > .5 and the parties go to trial, A will win on average and
the precedents will shift in favor of A. As a result either:

          (a) a more efficient legal rule will replace the market
              assignment of liability (assuming at p or slightly
              less than p , the parties were contracingaround the
              legal rule nd incurring future costs of S ); or

          (b) the existing legal rule will tend to become more effi-
              cient over time (assuming at p or slightly greater
              than p , the parties were utilizing the legal liability
              rule agd incurring future costs of S + S ).
                                                  0    0

In contrast, if p   < .5, the parties may   still   go to trial when contracting

is available. If so, the legal rule will tend to become less efficient (at

least in the neighborhood of p), but will not affect resource allocation

or future costs because A and B will find it cheaper to contract around the

less efficient legal rule and incur costs of m. This result is equivalent

to the noncortt:racting solution (subpart C) because r was negative when p < .5,

and hence there was no tendency for the legal rule to become more inefficient

over time. In sum, the option of contracting tends to improve the efficiency

of legal rules when p > .5 but has no effect on these rules when p0 < .5.

     (2) When the stakes are asymmetrical, the option to contract plays a

crucial role. We showed earlier that in the absence of this option a dispute

would tend to go to trial if A had the greater future stake and p > .5 or if

B had the greater future stake p. < .5. In the latter case, an inefficient

rule could become more so over time. But not if contracting is possible, for

then, although B would be able to shift the precedents in his favor by going

to trial, he would derive no gain from this shift. Since B is in a contrac-

tual relationship with A, competition among B's will generate the least

costly method of assigning liability. And at p         <    5m is the least costly
                                      —64—




                                    that B's product is sometimes defective and
solution. For example, imagine
                                Although both A and B can spend resources to re-
accidents to A can result.
                                                                      avoider, the full
                                accidents, if B is the cheaper cost
duce the frequency of these
                              be lower when B assumes liability than under a
costs of B's product will
                             liability to B with a probability less than .5.
legal rule that assigns
                                                               tendency for the le-
                             available, there Is no longer a
Thus, if contracting is
                                                      with the larger future
gal rule of liability to evolve in favor of the party
                                 efficient than the market alternative.
stake when the rule is less
                                       of obtaining and disseminating information
      (3) Suppose the private cost
                                                              around legal
 declines, lowering the cost of using the market to contract
                                rule, 5m would fall and p shift to the right
 rules. For a particular legal
                            with two effects on the overall efficiency of legal
  (say to p') in Figure II,
                                                        substitute the market
 rules. First, it would now be cheaper for parties to
                                  liability in those instances where the legal
 for the legal assignment of
                                                                    and p'. Second,
                                  B with a probability between p
 rules assigned liability to
                                        parties to go to trial who would not have
 if p' >.5, the incentive of some
                                      (The reason is that the potential increase
 done so before would increase.
                                     since the parties have the option, if B wins,
  in joint future costs vanishes
                                                             p' > .5, the pre-
  of contracting around the more costly legal rule.) Since
                                                        future costs and in-
  cedents would shift gradually in A's favor, reducing
                                                          Put differently, there
  creasing the efficiency of the particular legal rule.
                                                                 greater the ef—
                                market and legal efficiency——the
   is a complementarity between
                                       the tendency for a subset of legal rules
   ficiency of the market, the greater

  to become more efficient.
                                                       limited to the case where the
                  analysis   of contracting has been
        (4) Our
                                   —65—



probability of B's being held liable is in the neighborhood of p0.91 If

instead the existing precedents generated a p significantly greater than

p, the market or contract alternative would not be relevant because the

future costs of this alternative would be substantially greater than that

of the legal liability rule. In this case the analysis would be identical

to the noncontractual model of subpart C. On the other hand, if the exist-

ing precedents yielded a p significantly lower than p, the legal rule would

not be a relevant alternative. In that case,         +   =   0, iT would be less
than 0, and the parties would settle out of court.


                      E. Litigation Expenditures

     Suppose each party determines his litigation expenditures ra and rb

by maximizing his net gain from going to trial (Ga and Gb), taking as given

the litigation expenditures of the other party. Rewriting the first—order

conditions yields
                         a
                             =   x + (S1b — b    .                 (18)
                                           S2)
                         b
                     ap/ar       x + (Sa— s1)
                                           a



In equilibrium, therefore, the ratio of A to B's marginal product of liti-
gation expenditures will be equal to the ratio of B to A's gain from winning




91. We say "neighborhood" because if p were slightly less than p it would
be possibig, if A went to trial and won, to move to the declining part of
the S + S curve in Figure II. Similarly, if p were slightly greater than
p, the movement, if A lost, would be to the S curve.
                                        —66—



the trial.92 Since A and B are able to purchase equivalent or equally effic-

ient inputs of legal services at similar costs, we assume that          p/ra and

p/rb are equal but of opposite sign when ra =            rb.   Thus, if A and B gain

equal amounts from winning the trial (e.g., no future costs and A gains x if

state 1 occurs while B does not lose [i.e., gains] x if state 2 occurs), (18)

will hold only if A and B's expenditures are equal. Moreover, this result is

independent of the extent to which precedents initially favor A relative to B.

Put differently, we expect parties with comparable stakes in the litigation
                                                          93   Alternatively, if A s
to spend similar amounts on the case in question.

savings in future costs from winning were greater than B's savings (i.e., S —

            —         (18) would hold only if ap,3ra <   _3p/Brb, which requires, from
S   >
        S       S),
the assumption of diminishing marginal products, that A spend more than B.

This implies that the probability of A's winning and B's being held liable

would be greater compared to our earlier analysis (parts C and D) where the




92. Note that ap/ra > 0 and p/rb < 0. We also assume that 2p,ra2 <
       > 0, and a2p/arrb = 0. The first two conditions assure that the
levels of r and r that satisfy the first—order conditions yield maximum
values of G and C respectively. The third condition simplifies the expo-
sition by eliminating the following type of behavior. A initially picks a
 level of ra assuming a particular value of rb. B's expenditures, however,
 differ from A's expectations. This leads A to adjust his expenditures, lead-
 ing B to adjust, leading A to adjust again, and so forth. By assuming that
 the cross—partial derivative is zero, A's marginal product depends only on
 A's expenditures and B's marginal physical product only on B's expenditures,
 and thus the optimal level of each party's expenditures is independent of
 the other's expenditures.

 93. Deviations from risk neutrality, however, would alter this result be-
 cause then the initial wealth levels of the parties would influence litiga-
 tion expenditures via the effect of wealth on the derivative of expected ut-
 ility with respect to litigation expenditures.
                                     —67—



litigation expenditures of the two parties were assumed to be equal.94

     The explicit introduction of litigation expenditures leads to some small

changes in our earlier analysis.

     1. Symmetrical Stakes. Assuming that B is the cheaper cost avoider and

that the parties have symmetrical and sufficient stakes in the future (i.e.,

their combined future costs move in the same direction as aggregate future

costs), a shift in liability towards B will produce greater future costs sav-

ings to A than losses to B (i.e., S —        S>       S —
                                                            S)95   so that the right—

hand—side of equation (18) will be less than one. In equilibrium, therefore,

ra > rb and the resulting p will be greater than that of the analysis in parts

C and D where ra was assumed to be equal to rb. Our earlier analysis also

showed that a necessary condition for a trial to occur was that p > .5 (i.e.,

that, on balance, the precedents favored the more efficient outcome of holding

B liable). This conclusion still holds but with a slight modification. Earlier
                                 a
we measured p at the point where r =        rb   .   Now, however, if p were slightly

less than .5 (assuming ra =   rb)   because the precedents were slightly in favor



94. This analysis ignores, of course, the strong incentive of the parties,
by cooperating, jointly to reduce their litigation expenses. For example, if
A and B are initially spending r and r, then by reducing their expenditures
to, say, .5r and .5r, p will be unchanged but both A and B will have a
greater expected wealth. A reduction in expenditures may result from an
agreement between the parties to limit the number of issues litigated, or
from a stipulation not to dispute certain facts relevant to the litigation.
These devices are in fact used, but not so frequently as to require us to
abandon the analysis in the text. A further point is that even if both par-
ties stipulate to certain facts or agree to limit the number of issues, ra and
rb may not fall if the parties concentrate greater litigation resources on the
remaining issues.

     From equation (15) we have S + S <S + S which implies S —                   S> S—
                                      —68—



of B, A's additional expenditures on litigation (holding B's constant) could

push the probability above .5. Thus, when litigation expenditures are en—

dogenous, some legal rules that initially favored an inefficient outcome (at

ra =   rb)   would now be litigated; and given that p >   .5 when parties are
spending optimally on litigation, we would observe a movement over time to-

wards the development of precedents favoring efficiency.

       2. Asymmetrical Stakes. When litigation expenditures are endogenous,

the tendency discussed earlier of inefficient legal rule to become even more

inefficient when B has the greater future stake is reinforced because B in-

vests more in litigation than in the earlier analysis, thereby increasing

his probability of winning the current trial and the likelihood that future

precedents will move in his favor.96

       Consider, for example, the case of railroad crossing accidents. Assume

that the railroad is both the cheaper cost avoider (B) and the party with

the greater future stakes. If p were somewhat greater than .5, the railroad

might by investing sufficient amounts in litigation be able to reduce it be-

low .5. In this event the railroad would be eager for a trial and over time

the precedents would tend to build up in its favor. On the other hand, if

the rules were highly efficient to begin with, so that the probability of the

railroad's being held liable were significantly greater than .5, optimal lit-

igation expenditures by the railroad would not be sufficient to lower the



96. Our prior analysis of a contractual relationship between the parties is
largely unaffected by treating litigation expenditures as a decision variable.
In the case of symmetrical stakes, p will rise in response to an increase in
litigation expenditures of A relative to B, which wilA ten to increase the
value of ir in equation (17) compared to the case of r =    .  r
                                                               This in turn
will increase the likelihood of a trial and the development of more efficient
legal rules. If B has the greater future stake, there would be no incentive
for B to expend litigation resources to shift the legal rule in B's favor
 (to the detriment of efficiency) because competition among B's would lead
the parties to assign liability in the cheapest way either by adhering to
the legal rule or by contracting arou!Id it.
                                    —69—



probability below .5. The railroad would choose to settle with the plaintiff

and the legal rule would remain highly efficient. To be sure, the railroad

would obtain better terms in the settlement by the implicit threat of out-

spending the plaintiff in a trial because the minimum amount the plaintiff

will accept to settle will decline as p falls. In sum, whether the legal rule

will evolve In favor of the dominant party will depend on the initial effic-

iency of the rule and on the responsiveness of the expected trial outcome to

the litigation expenditures of the party who has the greater future stakes.

       Since, insofar as judicial outcomes are influenced by the relative in-

vestments of the parties in litigating, and these investments in turn by the

relative stakes of the parties in the precedents created by those outcomes, the

tendency of the common law process to generate efficient rules Is weaker in

areas where the parties' stakes are asymmetrical than in areas where they are

symmetrical, an interesting empirical question is whether, for example, the

rules of tort law relating to railroad crossing accidents are less efficient

than those relating to collision between ships; we would predict a greater

tendency toward efficient rules in the latter area.97 As a parallel example,

consider a government agency like the Federal Trade Commission that has a

greater interest in precedent than most of its opponents. The optimal strat-

egy for the FTC might be to "pick on" small firms having relatively small pre-
sent (and perhaps no future) stakes in the litigation.98 The FTC's optimal
expenditure   of resources in such a case would be very high relative to the

defendant's, so that if the case should happen to be tried (obviously, the



97. A similar, though not explicitly economic, argument appears in Marc Gal—
anter, Why the "Haves" Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Limits of Legal Change,
8 Law & Soc. Rev. 96 (1974).

 98. See Richard A. Posner, The Behavior of Administrative Agencies, 1 J. Legal
 Studies 305, 311 (1972).
                                     —70—




probability of a trial rather than settlement would be small because of the

small stakes of the defendant) the chances of a favorable outcome for the FTC

would be enhanced. In this way, insofar as a systematic tendency for the FTC

to invest more heavily than its opponents would influence the evolution of

legal rules in its favor, we could hardly expect FTC law to be moving in the

direction of greater efficiency.

                             F. The Priest Model

       Both Rubin's analysis and our criticism and expansion of his analysis

assume that at least one of the parties has a significant interest in the pre—

cedential significance of the decision determining liability for the accident.

Professor Priest, in contrast, attempts to show that the common law will tend

to become more efficient over time even though neither party has an interest

in the precedential significance of the decision.

       In the absence of suc1 an interest, disputes go to trial only if the

parties have divergent estimates of the expected trial outcome, not identical

estimates as assumed in Rubin's and in our model. For example, assuming that

A and B agree on x (the damages) and that future stakes are zero, the parties

will go to trial if

                   =   x(pa — b) — (ra + rb) > 0                (19)

where a and b are A and B's estimates of the probability of B's liability

in the event of a trial. Mutual optimism (a > b) therefore, is a necessary

condition for rr > 0 and, thus, for a trial to take place. Observe that the

greater the current stakes (x) are, assuming a > b the more likely it is

that x(pa —   b)   will exceed the parties' combined litigation costs and hence

 the more likely a trial is.99 The positive relationship between the size of


99. This result must be qualified because litigation expendituresaareapOSitive
                                                                               = 0
ly related to x; for example, A's optimal expenditures require (ap /r )x — 1
which implies that as x increases so wfli r . We assume here that litigation ex-
penditures increase at a proportionately slower rate than x, so that IT will in-
crease as x increases.
                                  —71—




x and the incentive to go to trial is a critical component of Priest's analy-

sis. For example, consider the effect on x of an inefficient legal rule. Since

such a rule assigns liability to the higher—cost avoider, fever resources are

allocated to accident avoidance and there are more accidents and more damages

per accident.10° Hence the less efficient the legal rules is, the more likely

a trial is. Given this result and Priest's assumption that in each period the

judiciary announces a constant proportion (=a) of efficient urles, Priest shows

that the proportion of efficient rules will tend to rise over time and that the

equilibrium proportion will be greater, the greater the value of a and the

greater the difference in litigation rates between inefficient and efficient
               101
legal rules.

      Although Priest's analysis is formally correct, it contains, we believe,

a conceptual error. Decision according to precedent is ignored in Priest's

model. In each period, judges produce efficient and inefficient decisions in

the proportions of a and 1—a respectively, regardless of the type of cases be-

fore them and the degree to which the body of precedent built up from prior

cases favors an efficient or inefficient outcome. Thus, the probability that

an efficient rule will be announced in a particular case today is independent

of how similar cases were decided in earlier periods. Although one can speak

of a body of legal rules in the aggregate, the central feature of a legal sys-

tem that decides according to rules or precedents is missing from Priest's model:

in Priest's model, prior decisions provide no information or guide to the likely

outcome of the current dispute.

      We assume, instead, that the likely outcome (p) of a trial depends on the

extent to which precedents favor A relative to B (A in equation (1)) and on the



100. We assume that expenditures on accident avoidance reduce both the probabil-
ity of an accident and the severity of the accident If it occurs.

101. Priest's conclusion also requires the assumption that in the base period
the proportion of efficient legal rules is less than or equal to a.
                                       —72—



                                                       Ignoring the determination of
                          of the two parties.1°
litigation expenditures
                                  (assume that ra =        rb),   if the precedents favor
optimal litigation expenditures
                                               than .5 that B, the cheaper cost
B (i.e., X <   1) the probability will be less
                                                         the outcome of the
avoider, will be held liable and hence less than .5 that
                                   in the direction of greater efficiencY. Al-
trial will be a judicial opinion

ternatively, if the precedents favor A (i.e., X >
                                                           1),    the probability of B's

                                     and now the outcome of the trial will shift
liability will be greater than .5,

the precedents toward greater efficiency.
                                                                 of which may go
      Suppose there are a large number of current disputes, some

 to trial, categorizable into n classes (i =
                                                  1,   .   . ., n).    Assume that within

                                                                              and others in-
 each class there is a set of precedents, some favoring efficiency
                                              in that class, so that to each class of
 efficiency, applicable only to disputes
                                       Xj. Let the n classes now be separated into
 disputes we can assign a particular

 two subclasses, I and II.    In i precedents tend to favor an inefficient liabil-

                       for all classes of disputes in I. In II precedents tend
 ity rule; i.e., X < 1
                                                  for all classes in ii. Since
                              rule; i.e., Xj > 1
 to favor an efficient liability
                                  to trial will result in a victory for B, ineffic-
 most class I disputes that go
                                 accumulate relative to efficient ones in this class
  ient precedents will tend to
                                               class i activities will tend to become
  and hence the liability rules governing
                                                     class ii disputes will result
  even less efficient over time. On the other hand,
                                                                    affecting
  in more decisions for A than for B and thus the body of precedent
                                       efficient. However, because the trial rate
  class ii activities will become more
                                                              x in I), legal rules
  is higher in class I than II (because of the higher average

                                                                         a mechan-
                                         because we (like Priest) impose
  102. One might object to our analysis       follow precedent and do not have or
  ical decision rule on judges —— that judges          rules. But this objection
                          for efficient or inefficient
  express any preferences       precedent is consistent with judges having prefer-
  is superficial. Adherence to
                            provided that in the aggregate these preferences do
  ences and following them,
                                     over time. If this condition is satisfied,
  not change, or only change slowly,                 be a strong positive correla-
  as it generally is in our legal systemthere will
                                decisions and we will tend to observe adherence
  tion between past and current
   to precedent.
                                              —73—



       in class I will become more inefficient than the rules in II become efficient.

      As a consequence, the average efficiency of legal rules will tend to decline

      over time. This result is the opposite of Priest's conclusion that legal

       rules tend to become more efficient over time.

              Figure III illustrates our analysis. Suppose initially that we have a

      uniform frequency distribution of A's, ranging from 0 to 1, with a mean of .5.

      The mean A of class I disputes is .25 and the mean of class II disputes is .75.

      Over time the mean of class I will fall while the mean of class II will rise.

       This is illustrated by the new frequency




frequencies




                                          Figure III

       distribution in which the means are now .125 and .80 for class I and II disputes

       respectively. The new overall mean, however, is .46, indicating an overall re-

       duction in average efficiency of liability rules.

              It is implicit in our analysis (as Priest's conmients on a previous draft

       of this paper helped us to realize) that once the role of divergent estimates

       of the litigation outcome are incorporated into our model, the effect is to

       generate strong tendencies to push any A in the neighborhood of 1 (i.e., where
                                    —74—



the weight of precedent is equally balanced between the efficient and the in-

efficient rule) toward either infinity or zero. Intermediate points involve

uncertainty as to how a court applying the precedents will decide the current

case, and this uncertainty generates divergent estimates by the parties and

so increases the likelihood of litigation. Assuming (and admittedly we go

outside our model in doing so) that appellate courts have an incentive to re-

duce conflict among precedents and product a harmonious, consistent rule,103
the litigation resulting from uncertainty generated by inconsistent precedents

will tend to eliminate that inconsistency by overruling, limiting, reinterpre-

ting, or disregarding either the precedents favoring A or the precedents favor-

ing B. If the initial balance of precedents favors B (the inefficient result),

then chances are that the litigation process will eliminate the precedents fav-

oring A. The tendency of litigation to move an initially efficient rule in the

direction of A = will be less pronounced, because with lower damages (smaller

x) there will be less litigation. A challenge to future research is to build

a formal model incorporating this insight.

                                 CONCLUSION

     This paper has examined the question whether adjudication can be viewed as

a private good, i.e., one whose optimal level will be generated in a free market.

Part I focused on private courts, noting their limitations as institutions for

dispute resolution and rule creation but also stressing the important role that

the private court, in its various manifestations, has played both historically

and today. Part II discussed a recent literature which has argued that the rules

generated in the public court system, in areas of the law where the parties to


103. This incentive might be quite weak in a system where judges are paid out
of litigant fees, as suggested in Part I. However, in a system of salaried judges,
an incentive to produce a consistent rule can be derived from an influence—max-
imization model of judicial behavior that we have employed elsewhere (see William
M. Landes & Richard A. Posner, supra note 68, at 272—73), since the effect of a
rule in directing activity is clearly greater the greater the probability that
it, and not its opposite, will actually be applied in the event a dispute arises
and is litigated.
                                     —75—




litigation are private individuals or firms and the rules of law are judge—made,

are the efficient products of purely private inputs. Our analysis suggests that

this literature has overstated the tendency of a common law system to produce

efficient rules, although areas can be identif led where such a tendency can in-

deed be predicted on economic grounds.

     Viewed as a contribution to the emergent literature on the positive econo-

mic theory of law, our finding that the public courts do not automatically gen-

erate efficient rules is disappointing, since It leaves unexplained the mechan-

isms by which such rules emerge as they seem to have done in a number of the

areas of Anglo—American judge—made law.

     However, our other major finding, that the practices and law governing

private adjudication appear to be strongly influenced by economic considerations

and explicable in economic terms, is evidence that economic theory has a major

role to play in explaining fundamental features of the legal system.
