                 NBER Working Paper Series




           INTEREST RATE RISK AND THE REGULATION
                 OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS


            Jay B. Norrison* and David H. Pyle**




                   Working Paper No. 266




        National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
     204 Junipero Serra Boulevard, Stanford, CA 94305




                          July 1978




 This paper has not undergone the review accorded official
 NBER publications; in particular, it has not been submitted
 for approval by the Board of Directors.

This research was supported by a grant to NBER from NSF—RANN
(Grant No. APR76—025ll). The views expressed herein do not
necessarily reflect those of the National Science Foundation.
The authors are indebted to George Kaufman, Sherman Maisel,
J. Huston McCulloch, Barr Rosenberg, and William Sharpe for
comments on earlier drafts.

 *Wells Fargo Bank, San Francisco.
**University of California, Berkeley.
                                                             NBER Working Paper 266
                                                                   July 1978



    INTEREST RATE RISK AND THE REGULATION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

                   Jay B.   Morrison and David H. Pyle


                                  Abs tract



       A bank or other financial institution is potentially subject
to at least four types of risk:     (1) Credit risk——defaults or delays
in repayments. (2) Fraud——embezzlement or insider abuse.        (3) Liquidity
risk——or high cost of obtaining needed cash.           (4) Interest rate
risk——differential changes in the value of assets and liabilities as
interest rates shift. This paper reports a study of the interest—rate
elasticity of the net worth of a commercial bank. Most of the study
is devoted to the development of the necessary methodology to measure
the interest—rate elasticity (IRE) of a bank's asset/liability mix.
       The report is organized into four major sections. The first
summarizes the history of interest—rate elasticity models and points
out the problems in applying them to bank assets and liabilities. An
analytical framework is then developed to calculate the IRE of a
portfolio of assets and liabilities.
        The next three sections apply the framework to a simulated
bank. For simplicity, the bank is assumed to have only two classes of
assets (commercial loans and cash) and three classes of liabilities
(demand deposits, large denomination CD's, and capital). The second
section develops models of the cash flows associated with each of
the assets and liabilities. The third section quantifies the parameters
necessary to calculate the net worth and IRE measures, and the fourth
section details the design of a simulation and some simulation results
for the 1973—75 period.
        The report concludes with a discussion of the regulatory impli-
cations of the study.

                                              Jay B. Morrison
                                              Investment Division
                                              Wells Fargo Bank
                                              P.O. Box 44025
                                              San Francisco, CA 94111
                                              415/396—2828
     INTEREST RATE RISK AND THE REGULATION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

                   Jay B. Morrison and David H. Pyle



     In this study we are concerned with the market value of net worth in

a financial institution. The financial institution is presumed to hold

assets and to issue deposits with the difference in market values of assets

and deposits being the net worth of the institution. This study considers

the effects on net worth of changes in the level and structure of default—

free interest rates. As net worth approaches zero, depositors have no

buffer between the value of their deposits and fluctuations in asset values.

Also, regulators must know the potential for a given institution's net

worth falling to zero or below before the subsequent examination. This

suggests that a forecast of the proportional change in net worth over a

given time period is an important aspect of the examination process.

     There are many søurces of potential change in the net worth of a

financial institution over any time period, including such important fac—

tors as default risk and the chance that the institution's employees may

prove to be dishonest or incompetent. An implication of this study is that

regulator's concern regarding factors such as credit risk and managerial

competence may be more finely focused if the effects of interest rate risk

on net worth have been quantified.

     To this end, we shall begin by describing the basic model of interest

rate elasticity for fixed income securities. A discussion of the problems

of adapting this model to the portfolio of a financial institution will

follow. The next sections describe the results of a simulation of the

interest rate elasticity model for a wholesale bank) Pn important aspect

     1The simulation of the wholesale bank is based on a sub—sector of a
particular bank. The assets of this sub—sector are cash and commercial
loans and the liabilities are demand deposits, purchased funds (which can
also be thought of as the net position in securities), and equity capital.
                                          2


of this simulation is the attempt to account for the full cash flow effects

of changes in the level and structure of default—free interest rates. For

example, the effects of interest rates on cash flows due to loan commit-

ments are explicitly modeled. The final section contains our concluding

remarks.


Interest Rate Elasticity for Bonds

      It was Macaulay (1938) who first defined the concept of duration to

measure the time dimension of a bond. If we let:



      S1.          St   be payments received at times 1, ",   t;
            •..,        be the present value at time 0 of those payments;


then the duration (D) of the payment stream is defined as:


                                          t
                                               •1
(1)                                  D=_1
                                                1
                                         i=l

In this view, the duration is a weighted average of the payment dates,

with the weight for period i equal to the proportional contribution to the

present value made by S..

      Macaulay interpreted duration as the period of time that elapses

before the average dollar of present value is received. Under this inter-

pretation, he argued for the use of duration as a measure of how long a

dollar invested in a bond remained invested, and noted several advantages

in the use of duration rather than maturity. Hicks (1939) defined an

"average period" of a payment stream that is equivalent to Macaulay's

duration. Hicks, however, interpreted and used the measure as "an elastic-

ity (of capital value] with respect to a discount ratio." It may        therefore
                                        3



be useful to think of duration as a measure of an investment's interest—

rate elasticity which has a time dimension and interpretation.


A model of interest rate changes

        To see that duration does have an elasticity interpretation, it is

useful to specify a model for interest—rate changes. First, denote the

one—period interest rate expected to obtain during the period beginning

at time t—l by r. Under the expectations hypothesis with no liquidity

premium, the t—period spot rate would then be the geometric mean of the

product of 1+ the current one—period spot rate and 1+ each of the —l one—

period forward rates. If (l+Rt)t denotes the t—period discount factor,

then:


                                                       l/t

(2)                        1 +
                                 R
                                      L(i+rl)1
To simplify the notation, let           l+r and RFt =        (l+Rt)t.   Using this

notation, the present value of the certain payment stream, S1, ,             S,
can be written as:


                                        t     S.
(3)
                                       i=l Fi


Now, assume that shifts in interest rates can be described by some multi-

plicative function f(h,t), such that:


                              RFt =         • f(h,t)

                                 aRF —      f(h,t)
                                  Th _RFt      3h
                                          4


where h r1 =      1 plus the first period spot rate. This assumption allows

(3) to be rewritten as:




(3')                       PV =                    I
                                  i=l f(h,1)RF.




Interest rate elasticity with equal proportional effects on all one—period
rates

       This formulation provides a tractable means of expressing rate changes,

which allows for the possibility that some of the one—period rates change

more than others. For this example, however, it will be assumed that all

one—period rates (spot and forward) change by the same proportional amount,

which can be modeled with a shift function of the form,


(4)                             f(h,t) =          ht

This means that when shifts in the discount function occur, they do so In

such a way that the entire function is shifted up or down without distor-

tion. Under this specification, we can study the effect of rate shifts on

the present value of the stream S1, ",
                                                       S.   Using (4), we can express

the present value as:


                                          t
                              PvS =               S.o.
                                                   11
                                      .
                                      i=l


where


                                              1

                                   1 hR1

Taking the differential, we get:
                                      5



                                     t S.6.i
                            dPV =                  dh
                                    1=1


and dividing by PV gives:




                      _=                       .




                               (s.::)i
                                i=l

    By noting that S.6. is equal to P, the present value of the bond

payment S., it is clear that the term in brackets in equation (5) is, in

fact, Macaulay's duration. Since dPV5/PV is the percentage change in

present value, and dh/h is the percentage change in the discount factor,
            t          t
the ratio —    (S.S.)i/     S.6. is the interest—rate elasticity of net worth.
           i=l          i=l
It is important to note that duration and interest rate elasticity (IRE)

will be equivalent only for this particular specification of f(h,t), i.e.,

one in which unanticipated rate movements shift the entire yield curve up

or down by proportionately identical moments.


Interest rate elasticity with decreasing effects on forward rates

     The relationship for interest rate elasticity established by Macaulay

is simple and appealing. However, the interest rate change process which

underlies it is not very realistic. Observers of the behavior of default—

free interest rates suggest that a preferable model is one in which the

change in rates is largest for the near term one—period rates and smaller

for •later one—period rates (see Hodges (1975) and Yawitz, Hempel, and

Marshall (1975)).
                                                    6


       An alternative specification for the interest rate shift function is



(4')                           f(h,t) =    ht           0 <   a   . 1


With this shift function, we can derive the following relationship



                                           t

                            dPV                 (s.6.)iC
                                                  ii.
(5'1
                             PV
                                  s_—     i=1
                                                t
                                                                  dh
                                                                   h
                                  S

                                               i=l   ii
where the term in brackets is the interest rate elasticity (IRE). Coinpar—

ing equations (5) and (5'), it is clear that Macaulay's duration is the

upper limit (a = 1) on the interest rate elasticity of bond value for the

more general shift function.

       Using equation (5'), we can then generate the values of IRE as a

function of a for two hypothetical three—period loans, one with equal cash

flows in each period, and the other a 10% coupon bond paying three coupons

and repaying the face value. The example in Table 1 is for a particular

structure of default—free interest rates but the qualitative effect of

decreasing a would be the same for any structure of rates.


         Table 1. Interest Rate Elasticity (IRE) from Equation (5')
                         for 3 Period Debts when iO.9, 20.8, and
                           = 0.75

                                     IRE                                 IRE
                   a         Equal Payment Loan               10% Coupon Bond

               1                        —2.11                           —2.74
                   .75                  -1.76                           -2.12
                   .5                   —1.48                           —1.64
                   .25                  —1.26                           —1.28
                                       7



The effect of a decreasing impact on forward rates becomes apparent in

Table 1. For example, if there is no attenuation (i.e., a =        1),   a 1%

increase in one plus the first, second, and third period default—free rates

(which is a 110 basis point increase for a 10% spot or forward rate) would

produce a 2.74% decrease in the value of the hypothetical 10% bond. For

a =   .75,   a 1% increase in one plus the one—period rate would result in an

increase of about .7% in one plus the second period rate, and an increase

of about .6% in one plus the third period rate. This level of attenuation

in the interest rate change results in the decrease in value of the 10%

bond being 2.12%. In other words, the loss of value for a = .75 is about

77% of the loss of value for a = 1.        Similarly for the equal payment loan,

the loss of value of the loan resulting from a 1% increase in one plus the

first period rate is about 17% less if a = .75 rather than 1.


An empirical model of interest rate changes

      The example in the preceding Section of this paper serves to illus-

trate the effect on IRE of interest rate changes which diminish as one

considers forward rates for times ever more distant from the present.

This model is purely hypothetical. For the analysis of the IRE for bonds,

we need an empirically estimated model of the process by which default—free

rates change.

      Details of the model of interest rate changes which is used in the

simulations reported later in this study may be found in Morrison (1977).

Morrison developed a testable model of changes in the term structure of

default—free interest rates from a stochastic model of the term structure

by Vasicek (1976). Fundamental assumptions in the Vasicek model are (1)

the spot rate follows a continuous Markov process, (2) the price of a

discount bond maturing at time s is determined by the anticipated spot
                                    8



rate process from the present until time s, and (3) the bond market is

efficient. For our purposes, the importance (and perhaps the limitation)

of these assumptions is revealed by their implication that the value of

the spot rate is the only state variable determining the term structure

of interest rates.

      For empirical estimation, Morrison used Vasicek's term structure

equation to derive the effect of changes in the spot rate on yields to

maturity. Furthermore, Morrison decomposed changes in the spot rate into

a change in the ex—ante real component of that rate and a change in the

anticipated inflation component. While this decomposition is ad hoc in

terms of the Vasicek model, a considerable literature exists which suggests

that anticipated inflation is an important determinant of interest rates.

The variability of ex—ante real rates is a matter of some controversy (see

Fama (1975) and Nelson and Schwert (1976)). Morrison's estimating equation

allows for changes in the ex—ante real component of spot rates. If devia-

tions in the real component of spot rates are considered temporary, but

deviations in current inflation anticipations are correlated with changes

in inflation anticipations for future periods, we would expect these two

components to have different effects on forward rates. Consequently, the

estimating equation permits the impact of the real and the inflationary

effects of the 1—period spot rate on yields to maturity to be different.

      The form estimated was:


                     dr
                     —=    1e   1 k di —0 1
                        drr —Y0—y                —8   k
(6)
                     Rpk F1        +-j-ie
                                      1


where:
            rk
               = the k—period risk—free rate

           RFk = l+rk
                                             9



            rr1 =   real   one—period rate

                  = 1 +
           RRF1           rr1
                  = one—period inflationary expectation

             Ii = 1   + i1
           + i1 =
     rr1

The unit time period chosen to estimate equation (7) was one month. Term

structures for default—free securities were estimated for thirty months

from January 1973 through July 1975 using the tax—adjusted, cubic—spline

method developed by McCulloch (1975). The data used were Salomon Brothers

quotations for the last trading day of each month. This provided fifteen

independent sets of adjacent term structures to be used in computing pro-

portional rate changes for different maturities. Thirty maturities,

ranging from two months to ten years, were used for each term Structure,

for a total of 450 pooled observations.2

    The nominal spot rate obtained for each of the term structures was

decomposed into an ex—ante real component, and an inflationary anticipa-

tions component. Inflationary expectations were estimated by using the

methodology in the Nelson and Schwert (1976) article.

     Equation (6) was estimated by a two step process. First, the coeffi-

cients of the real component (y0 and y1) were estimated by ignoring the

inflation term, performing a log transform, and using linear regression.

The estimated coefficients were then used to form a set of residuals

(drk/RFk unexplained by drrl/RRF1). These residuals were then used to

estimate the inflationary coefficients
                                                 81). again using linear
regression on a log transform, this time ignoring the real term. The


     2Because of the estimation technique employed a few periods which
displayed no spot rate changes could not be used.
                                           10


results are shown in Table 2.        As the table shows, coefficients on each

term have the correct sign and are statistically significant. As a check,

the procedure was repeated with the coefficients estimated In the reverse

order. While the results were not identical, the sign and general magni-

tude of each coefficient remained unchanged. More important, the general

pattern of transmission discussed below remains the same with the alterna-

tive specification. This, combined with some preliminary results by other

researchers indicating that the IRE estimates are fairly insensitive to

the transmission process, indicated that the results as shown in Table 2

should be sufficient for use in the analysis which follows.


        Table 2. Regression of Nominal Rate Changes on Real Rate
                  Changes and Changes in Inflationary Expectations


                  —=
                  Lrk rr1        —y011k i1 —0—1k
                                 e
                   Fk       Fl                        1




         .41         .14                                     1.04   .13
        (.58)      (7.5)

                     .148                                    1.04   .12
                  (10.7)

                                     .41               .09   1.3    .04
                                 (4.6)               (3.9)




                                                l e419
The resulting empirical model of interest rate changes is



                drk =   drr1 e1481 +
                RFk Fl                          Ii
                                          11


Interest rate elasticity based on an empirical model of interest rates

       With the interest rate process described by equation (7), the expres-

sion for the proportional change in the present value of a bond may be

written as




                                                   + (_-)e                  i

(8)            =   -            [                                41..O9i]


                                     i=l 1 1




A given proportional change in one plus the spot rate will be distributed

between the proportional change in the real component and the proportional

change in the inflationary component. By examining equation (8), we can

see that the estimated IRE of a bond for a given spot rate change will be

a weighted average of one, the IRE due to the real component, and two, the

IRE due to the inflationary cotnponent,with the weights being the respective

contributions of those components to the proportional change in the spot

rate. These two IRE relationships are




                                    i=l(S.d.)
                                        1 1
                                                  i .   e18
(9)                    IRE(real) = __________________________
                                                 (s.6.)
                                                   11
                                           1=1




(9')
                                      -
                   IRE(inflation) = i=1
                                           (S.6.)       j.   e409'
                                                        (S.S.)
                                                 i= 1
                                    12


 In Table 3, we have reported some interest rate elasticities (proportional

 change in value per 1% change in the spot rate) based on equations (9) and

 (9'). Two of the loans considered in Table 3 are directly comparable to

the loans reported in Table 1. The more rapid fall—off in the effects of

changes in the real component of spot rates is apparent from the lower IRE

values for this case. The IRE was also calculated for a conventional 10%

coupon, 10 year bond using a flat (10%) term structure and also using the

estimated term structure for May 1975. In the least extreme case for this

longer term bond (change in inflationary expectations only), the IRE based

on the empirical model of interest rate changes is 3.53 which is just over

50% of the IRE of 6.76, obtained using Macaulay's duration.


 Table 3. Interest Rate Elasticities (IRE) from Equations (9) and (9')


                                                               May 1975
                             Flat Term Structure           Term Structure
                        IRE          IRE          IRE             IRE
                     Equal Pay— 10% Coupon, 10% Coupon,      10% Coupon,
                     ment Loan    3 yr Bond   10 yr Bond      10 yr Bond

  Change in real
  rate only            —1.61       —2.08        —2.43          —2.40

  Change in infla-
  tionary antici-
  pations only         —1.73       —2.31        —3.55          —3.53


     The method used to obtain the interest rate elasticities in Table 3

is directly applicable to the estimation of interest rate elasticities for

the securities in a financial institution's investment portfolio. As

noted earlier, this measure of the proportional change in net worth incor-

porates only the effects of changes in the level and structure of default—

free interest rates. For a security which is not issued by the federal

government, for example state and local government securities, there will
                                      13


be other sources of change in the security's value. To the extent that

these other sources of change can be incorporated into a model of interest

rate changes that can be estimated, the approach discussed here may be

broadened to provide a measure of the proportional change in security

value as a function of a vector of determinants of that change.

        Whether the somewhat restrictive default—free interest rate elastic-

ity, or a more comprehensive measure of the potential change in investment

portfolio value is used, the estimate of the price sensitivity of the

investment portfolio should be useful information for the regulators of

financial institutions. In the case of the IRE estimates given by equa-

tions (9) and (9'), this information is relatively easy to obtain. A

program exists for estimating the default—free term structure from U.S.

government bond data (see McCulloch (1975)). A periodic, perhaps weekly,

estimation of the term structure could be used to provide examiners with

timely estimates of the discount function (i.e., the cS. values). Equations

(9) and (9') may be programmed on a hand—held, programmable calculator.

By taking an appropriately designed sample of the securities in an invest-

ment portfolio, estimating their interest rate elasticities, and then

taking a weighted average of the sample elasticities using known portfolio

weights, the examiner could obtain an estimate of the sensitivity of that

investment portfolio to changes in the short—term, default—free interest

rate.

        There remain a number of open questions regarding the application of

interest rate elasticities (i.e., generalized duration concepts) in the

prediction of expected security price changes. In terms of the model used

by Morrison, one such question concerns the assumption that interest rate

changes are independent of the level of interest rates. Intuition and
                                        14


observation suggest that tax effects are likely to be related to the

extent to which securities are selling above or below par, and hence that

the current level of rates (relative to past levels) should be important.

Furthermore, there is evidence (see Nadauld (1978)) that the model used

by Morrison tends to underpredict changes in longer term rates. Perhaps

more importantly, recent research by Lanstein and Sharpe (1978) has shown

that very strong assumptions about the correlation of nonsystematic

changes in interest rates are necessary to theoretically justify the use

of (generalized) duration as a determinant of the ex—ante interest rate

risk of a security. However, they also give evidence that even a crude

measure of duration (i.e., Macaulay's definition) is significantly related

to components of security risk.


Interest Rate Elasticity of Financial Institutions

     Samuelson (1945) used duration to study the effects of interest rate

changes on financial institutions. To derive his result, let:


     PVA =   present value of the stream of payments deriving from asset
             holdings;

     PVL =   present value (cost) of the payments required for liability
             holdings, presumably negative;

        =    duration    of the asset holdings;

         =   duration    of the liability holdings.


Assuming that:

     1) spot and forward rates on all liabilities and all assets change

         by the same amount; and

     2) the amount of each asset and liability held by the bank remains

         unchanged when rates change,
                                           15


the above result can be applied directly to the asset and liability port-

folios of a bank giving:



                                  dPVA              dh
                                  PVA
                                            A h

for the asset portfolio, and



                                  dPVL =            dh
                                  PVL
                                            L       h

for the liabilities. Note that the above assumptions imply that the asset

portfolio is essentially a fixed—payment, fixed maturity bond, which the

bank has purchased, with the liability portfolio equivalent to a bond with

fixed payments and fixed maturity, which the bank has issued.

       Defining the capital or net worth of the bank by PVT =                           the
                                                                             PVA+PVL,
Samuelson result is:



              dPVT =   —
                           (QAPVA+QLPVL)             =   —
                                                              dh
                                                                     PV >0
(10)
                                                h            T h '    T
               PVT           PVA+PVL


Equation (10) says that the percentage change in capital is proportional

to the percentage change in interest rates, with the constant of propor-

tionality, T' being the negative of the duration of the bank as a whole.

The bank's duration is, in turn, a weighted average of the durations of

the asset and liability holdings, with the weights being the fractional

contributions to total present value.

       A major implication of (10) is that a necessary (but not sufficient)

condition for a bank to be made better off by a rate increase is that its

liabilities be of longer duration than its assets, i.e., that

Since the prevailing opinion appears to be that banks' borrowings are of
                                     16


shorter term than their lendings, it seems more likely that   A>L' from
which it follows that a bank would be made worse off by a rate increase.

The result, of course, is both intuitive and a result of the simplifying

assumptions on which the analysis is based. The "bank" is in fact equiva—

lent to an investor who simultaneously purchases a bond with duration of,

say, ten years and issues a bond of equal value with a duration of two

years. If rates subsequently rise, he must either finance the remaining

eight years of his investment at a higher cost or sell his investment at

a discount from his purchase price, both of which entail losses relative

to the earlier situation.

       As we have seen from our discussion of the interest rate elasticity

of bonds, an assumption implicit in the conventional duration formulation

is that forward rates change in the same proportion as spot rates. Empir-

ically this does not appear to be a warranted assumption. Clearly we can

proceed as we did in the case of bonds, using an empirically estimated

model of interest rate changes to formulate a generalized duration for a

financial institution. For financial institutions with assets that are

longer—lived than liabilities, the interest rate elasticities of net worth

will tend to be smaller when based on the interest rate process summarized

in equations (9) and (9') than if these net worth elasticities were based

on the conventional duration calculation.

       Adopting a generalized duration formulation does not solve all of the

problems encountered in calculating an interest rate elasticity for the

net worth of financial institutions. The major difficulties which remain

are:

       1. Not all of a bank's assets and liabilities have fixed payment

           streams and a well—defined maturity. Therefore, a method of
                                      17


         estimating the cash flows associated with these assets and liabil-

         ities must be developed.

     2. Many of a bank's assets and liabilities are not market instruments

         and do not have an observable market value. To study the sensi-

         tivity of the bank's net present value, these market values must

         be imputed from the anticipated cash flows.

     3. The cash flows are neither single—period nor risk—free, which

         complicates the discounting technique.

     In the analysis that follows, we have attempted to deal with most of

these problems. The approach taken is a simulation based on an analysis

of the impact of macroeconomic variables on bank cash flows using data

normally available to bank regulatory agencies. The selected sub—sector

of the bank is intended to reflect the most important characteristics of a

wholesale bank (i.e., a bank dealing mainly in corporate and commercial

lending supported by corporate and commercial demand and time deposits).

The asset categories modeled are commercial loans and cash. The liabili-

ties are demand deposits, purchased funds (negotiable certificates of

deposit, NCDs) and equity capital.3


Modeling Bank Cash Flows

     The bank to be considered has only one type of earning asset (commer-

cial loans) and one interest—bearing liability (NCDs). In addition, the

bank obtains some of its funding from demand deposit balances held by

business firms. Demand deposit balances and NCDs outstanding imply cash


     3These asset/liability categories are few even for a money center,
wholesale bank with the main omissions being real estate loans and the
investment portfolio. The contribution of the latter to net worth elas-
ticity is a straightforward application of the method discussed in the
previous section of this paper. An application of generalized duration
estimation for a real estate portfolio is contained in Nadauld (1978).
                                   18


balances in the form of required and excess reserves. In the simulations

described here, it is assumed that the ratio of total book assets to book

equity (capital ratio) is held constant through time and this assumption

completes the specification of the bank's balance sheet.

     To estimate the interest—rate elasticity of the bank's net worth, we

must estimate the payout stream to the bank's owners and the response of

that stream to changes in the level and structure of interest rates. The

payout stream consists of net income for each future time period, less the

change in equity capital implied by the constant capital ratio assumption.

Models of these cash flows are described in detail in Morrison (1977).

In summary, the structure of system estimated by Morrison is:

     (1) a model of future commercial loan commitments was developed,

     (2) a model of future commercial loan volume (in part dependent on

          commitments) was developed,

     (3) future demand deposit balances (in part dependent on loan volume

          and loan commitments) were modeled and used to project the cash

          assets for the bank,

     (4) the period by period estimates of future total assets (loan

          volume plus cash assets) times the assumed capital ratio pro-

          vided an estimate of equity capital and total assets less demand

          deposits and equity capital provided an estimate of the future

          volume of purchased funds,

     (5) models of the future yields on loans and the future NCD rates

          were estimated,

     (6) the periodic future net income was obtained by multiplying the

          estimated loan volumes by estimated loan yields and subtracting

          the estimated volume of purchased funds times the estimated NCD

          rates, and
                                    19


     (7) the periodic payout to bank owners was obtained by subtracting

          the estimated change in equity capita], for each period from the

          estimated net income for that period.


Commercial loan commitments

     Morrison's model of commercial loan commitments is based on a dis—

equilibrium credit market. Firms are assumed to face uncertainty regarding

the timing of future transactions. Each firm chooses between fixed matur—

ity borrowing and loan commitments by comparing the minimum expected cost

of a loan with the expected cost of a commitment. Given this description

of the loan choice problem it can be shown that the relative demand for

commitments (1) decreases as the rate charged for funds borrowed on commit—

ments increases, (2) increases as the uncertainty associated with future

transaction dates increases, (3) decreases as the loan size increases

(absolute commitment demand may increase), and (4) increases as the rate

on fixed maturity borrowing increases.

     The bank is assumed to set the commitment fee, the loan rate, and the

maximum commitment it is willing to make to any customer. The actual

commitment size is then the minimum of the firm's demand and the maximum

supply. For the bank to set rationally both the rate and a quantity

maximum, thereby introducing the possibility of. non—price rationing, it

must be that the bank can increase the expected value of the loan by

decreasing the loan size below the amount demanded at the rate that is

optimal for the bank. Briefly, this could be true for a pair of reasons:

     1) Banks potentially have some degree of monopoly power over at

         least some customers, but the degree of collusion necessary to

         maximize joint profits would be socially and legally unacceptable.

         An alternative is to classify customers into groups based on
                                   20


        riskiness, tie the rate for each class to the least risky rate,

        and engage in price—leadership behavior by making that rate (and

        changes in that rate) widely publicized. To the extent that

        riskier customers also have lower price elasticities of demand,

         this process can be successful in achieving some degree of price

        discrimination.

    2) Since it is probably not operationally feasible to have a great

        number of risk classes (traditionally, spreads over prime are

        quoted in half percent intervals), and the number of customers

        will exceed the number of classes, it will be necessary to charge

         similar but not identical customers the same rate. In such a

         situation, it may be optimal to ration the amount of credit

         extended to the riskiest customers in each class. The existence

         of usury ceilings strengthens this effect.

     In summary, the existence and rationality of non—price credit ration-

ing derives from both competitive and institutional factors.

    We assume that the loan officer of the bank is trying to maximize

expected profit on the coimnitment relative to an uncertain opportunity

cost over a single—period horizon. This optimization process leads to a

supply of commitments which is a function of a pair of loan rate parameters

(among other things). If the bank were able to set these parameters dif-

ferently for each borrower having a different riskiness, there would be no

rationing. However, if——as is assumed here——the bank charges the same

rate for a group of borrowers who are heterogeneous in terms of risk, the

commitment demand for the riskiest borrowers in the group may be greater

than the optimum conunitment supply. Therefore, actual commitments will be

the smaller of two numbers: the borrower's optimum commitment demand, or

the bank's maximum supply.
                                              21


       Given this description of the bank's optimization problem, it can be

shown that the supply schedule displays certain properties: (1) the maxi-

mum commitment supplied approaches zero as the loan rate or the commitment

fee gets arbitrarily large, (2) the maximum commitment supplied decreases

as the bank's opportunity cost increases, (3) under reasonable conditions,

the maximum supply decreases with increases in the uncertainty of the

opportunity rate, and (4) an increase in the loan rate increases the maxi-

mum commitment supply.


Estimation of commercial loan commitments

       The major problem in estimating disequilibrium models is that the

observed quantity may not satisfy both the supply and demand schedules.

The practical importance of the problem is demonstrated in recent studies

of the market for housing starts by Fair and Jaffee (1972) and of the

watermelon market by Goldfeld and Quandt (1975). In estimating the loan

commitment model, Morrison followed the so—called quantitative method

described by Fair and Jaf fee. Using this approach, the model derived

earlier for commitment supply and demand may be written as:


              Dt =        + n1I     + 02 Std(T) +            + o,CP +


(11)           St =       +                                         +
                               l't + 2 Std(I) + B3P + 4LEV

               Q   = Min(S,D)        '




where:
                   =   opportunity       rate during month t (secondary 3—month CD

                       rate)

          Std(T) = measure of economic uncertainty (12—month moving stand-
                       ard deviation of gross business sales)
                                              22


                        = prime rate

                  CP = commercial paper volume during month t (a measure of
                          external liquidity)

           Std(I) = measure of rate uncertainty (12—month moving standard
                          deviation of I)

                 LEVt =   leverage at t, defined as total assets/capital; capital
                          includes capital notes

                        = desired   volume of commitments
                   Q
        In estimating the disequilibrium equations, the following equation

for excess demand was used:



(12)                                   Dt —
                                              S   =X
where          is a measure of the bank's willingness to make loans.4

       The final specification is a lag adjustment in the actual volume of

commitments. This specification is justified on the basis of prenegotiated

contracts and other institutional factors which prevent immediate adjust-

ment to desired levels of commitments. Assuming that a stock—adjustment

process is appropriate, we have:


                                        =          —
                                            X(Q

where:
          =    actual   commitments outstanding during month t

         X =   coefficient   measuring the speed of adjustment



     4The bank involved participates in the Federal Reserve's Quarterly
Survey of Bank Lending Practices, a survey intended to measure the non—
price lending practices of commercial banks. X is set equal to the first
principal component of the survey responses in month t.
                                             23


Using monthly microeconomic data from a major bank and monthly macroeco—

notnic data from an aggregate macroeconomic model, the loan commitment

model was estimated over the period January 1974—May 1976. The result-

ing equations for forecasting loan commitments are given in Table 4•6


          Table 4. Forecasting Equations in Loan Commitments

                                 Commitment Demand

         =           +
                         a1I + 2Std(S) a3P + c4CP -                   xiv]
                                                                                 - AQi

                                                     '.OL4     —X/y          X


             1584        —24     2.2        21       .016       39          .51

             (1.9)        (—1)   (2.1)      (.6)     (1.1)     (.7)        (2.2)


             Durbin—Watson =       1.7,    Standard error = 64,       N      27




                                  Commitment Supply

                     + 8l1t + B2Std(I) + 3t + 4LEV -                       -X2t)
                                                                                     -


                                                                     A/y         A


              3216         —69     —70        74      —41        —73         .59
              (3.2) (—2.5)        (—.25)     (2.6)    (—2.1)    (—1.5)       (2)

              Durbin—Watson =      2.4,    Standard error = 59, N = 26


where: I, CP, Std(St), Std(I). and LEV are as defined earlier. X1
is the first stage regression estimate of the credit rationing proxy for


        major problem in doing empirical research at the bank level is the
lack of consistent data for the microeconomic variables. The data used by
Morrison were created by a management information system which began oper-
ating in January 1974.

     6The terms in parentheses below the coefficient estimates are t—sta—
tistics for the coefficient. The mean value of the dependent variable was
129. A two—stage regression with the prime rate and rationing proxy as
endogenous variables was used.
                                          24


periods of excess demand, X2 is the estimated credit rationing proxy for

periods of excess supply, and P is the first stage regression estimate of

the prime rate.7


Loan volume

    The loan volume for the bank is determined by the credit needs of its

customers, the rate differentials between loans and other sources of

credit, and the severity of commitment rationing. Essentially, once a

commitment is made, the bank's only influence over whether or not the line

is used is through variations in the prime rate. A model of loan demand

becomes a model of loans outstanding, except for periods of rationing.

     Building on previous studies (Goldfeld (1966) and Jaffee (1971)),

Morrison modeled loan demand as a function of borrowers' asset stocks with

the choice of loan financing instead of direct financing being influenced

by the spread between the rate paid on loans and the rates paid on direct

forms of financing. In the absence of non—price rationing, the specific

form of the loan volume equation would be:


(13) Lt = b0 + biKe +        b2T + b3Z +   b4[(rp_P)T]
                 +
                     b5[(r_P)T] — b6Ki — b7Ti — b8Z1 + (l_X)Li
where

        K = the        fixed investment of borrowers
         t
             = gross business sales (a proxy for transactions assets)
        Tt
             =   inventory   stocks held by borrowers

             =   the   commercial paper rate

        P =      the prime rate
        discussion of the estimation of the credit rationing proxies and
of the prime rate follows.
                                       25



       rA     the   WI corporate bond rate

       Lt =   loan   demand.


In the presence of rationing, the observed quantity of loans may differ

from the quantity demanded. A bank cannot ration loans directly except

in the case of a line of credit which is completely used. However, the

rationing of new commitments may cause customers with unused commitments

to seek financing elsewhere, or to defer expenditures rather than use up

existing commitments. For either case, the loan demand function will

overstate actual demand when commitments are being rationed. Letting R

be the reduction in loan demand due to commitment rationing, the observed

quantity of loans outstanding becomes:



                    L
                     r      L       if there is no rationing

                                    if there is rationing
                            Lt Rt

It is assumed that R is proportional to Xl (the positive values of the

first principal component of the FRB loan survey responses) and CP (the

change in the volume of commercial paper outstanding). The constant of

proportionality is assumed to depend on U1 (the lagged ratio of commit-

ment usage). Making these substitutions, the equation to be estimated for

loan volume prediction becomes:


                    IL                                  ifX <0
(14)
                                                        if X > 0
                        L— (a0+aiUi)(büX+biCP)
                                                26


Estimation of loan volume

     The desired specification of the loan volume equation calls for data

on the assets (fixed investment, inventory, and transactions assets) of

the bank's actual and potential customers. Since these data are not

available, it was assumed that the values for the bank's customers were

proportional to the aggregate figures. Furthermore, since consistent

aggregate series are not available for all variables in the loan volume

equation, the equation was estimated in first difference form. An exami-

nation of the results for the full model suggested that the lagged depend—

ent and the lagged customer asset variables were not contributing to the

explanation of loan volume in a significant manner. Consequently, for the

estimate which was used in subsequent simulations these terms and the

insignificant term for current fixed investment were dropped and the equa-

tion was estimated using the Hildreth—Lu (1960) transformation. The

resulting equation for forecasting loan volume for the bank is given in

Table 5.


                 Table 5. Forecasting Equation for Loan Volume

       L = b0 + b2Tt + b3Z +              b4[(rp_)K1        +
                                                                b5[(r_)K]
                -
                    c0X1
                           -
                               ciX1tU
                                           —
                                                cCPU
           b0        b2         b3        b4         b5   -C0      -C1
       —17.8        1.24       2.74      —.41    —.30     548     —1807   —.12
       (—1.2) (2.6)            (3.1)    (—2.8) (—1.1)     (5.2)   (—5.2) (—3.9)

      Durbin—Watson =          2.2,    Standard error = 30, N     26, p = —.67
                                                27


The rationing variable

        Since the first principal component of the response to the FR.B           loan
activity survey is a determinant of loan commitments and loan volumes .at

the bank, we must forecast this factor to carry out the simulation of the

bank's net worth elasticity. The specification used for estimating a

predicting equation is:


(15)                              =
                                      A[ + i(S_Q_i) — X1]
where:

        S = the       supply of commitments during month t

             = the quantity of commitments outstanding during month t.


        After   substituting for S, the resulting forecasting equation for the

change in the rationing proxy is as shown in Table 6.


  Table 6. Forecasting Equation for the Change in the Rationing Proxy

                                                                              —
         =
             A[d0
                    + diI + d2Std(I) +
                                               d3(_It) +      d4LEV -
                                                                         dsQi X1]
                                                                    -X      R2    D-W
       Ad0          Ad1     Ad2         Ad3      Ad4       —Ad5
  —4.85             .15     .63        —1.81         .80   —.004   —.67     .44   1.72

  (—.76)        (.40)      (.41)      (—1.9)     (.85)     (—.9)   (—1.5)




Loan interest rates

        The forecasting equations for loan commitments, loan volume, and the

rationing variable, require a foreca't of the prime rate. Furthermore, in

order to calculate the income from the loan portfolio, we need a period by

period forecast of the yield on the loan portfolio.
                                               28



         In the model we used, the change in the prime rate is determined by a

rate of adjustment factor times the difference between the desired prime

rate in the current period and the prime rate for the period just prior.

The desired prime rate is taken to be a function of the federal funds rate

 (rf), the bank's loan to deposit ratio (LNDP), and the bank's 1everage

ratio (LEV). The speed of adjustment is assumed to be determined by

lagged values of changes in the opportunity rate of interest for the bank

(EI). The resulting forecasting equation for the prime rate is given in

Table 78


                   Table 7. Forecasting Equation for the Prime Rate

           =
               A[e0
                      +
                          e1rf + e2LP + e3LEV +         e4(rfI) ÷ eS(rfIl)
               +
                   eS(rfI2)      —




   Xe0          Xe1        Xe2        Xe3
                                                                      —X     R2   D—W
                                            Xe4       Xe5    Xe6
   .037         .26       —.60       .025   .006     .021    .0005 —.27      .84 1.77

  (.19)        (5.64) (—.57) (1.13)         (.88)   (3.62)   (.1)   (—5.7)




     The loan yield will differ from the prime rate because (1) much of

the loan portfolio consists of non—prime borrowers, (2) only about half of

the loan portfolio floats with the prime rate, and (3) the composition of

the portfolio (maturity, percentage of floating loans, etc.) may vary sys-

tematically with the level of interest rates. In Morrison (1977), it is

shown that under a particular set of assumptions the steady—state



     8
      The estimation was by two—stage least squares because of the presumed
simultaneity between the prime rate and other micro variables for the bank.
For the subsequent simulations it was necessary to forecast the federal
funds rate. A linear regression of the federal funds rate on the 3 month
risk—free rate was used for these forecasts.
                                                      29


relationship for the loan yield may be written as a linear function of

lagged values of the prime rate. The estimation was based on this model

with control variables added to allow for a different relationship during

periods of rising rates. Additionally, the coefficients of the estimated

equation were constrained to reflect a priori knowledge regarding the

proportion of term loans in the portfolio. The estimation procedure used

the Hildreth—Lu transformation for serial correlation.

     The equation used for the loan yield forecasts is given in Table                             8.

                 Table 8. Forecasting Equation for Loan Yield

                =        +          +                + g3P       +               +
                                                                                     g5(FP)
                    g0        g1P                            2        g4P
                    +                    +
                         g6(F'r)_i)          g7(FP 2 + g8(FP3)

         g0             g1        g2          g3      g4         g5         g6        g7

        1.48            .43       .29         .08      .1    —.011       .002        .013 —.004

       (12.3)       (9.3)        (5.3)       (1.4)           (—1.4)      (.3) (1.6)

                              R2 = .89         D—W = 2.3               p =   .85




Demand deposit volume

     There are three major determinants of demand deposit volume:

     1) compensating balances, usually some percentage of conitments

         plus some percentage of outstandings (loans);

     2) active balances, for use in meeting a firmts required disburse-

         ments (payroll, taxes, etc.); and




     9Because of the a priori constraints, independent t—statistics are not
obtained for g4 and g8. F is a control variable which is 1 during periods
of increasing rates and 0 otherwise.
                                           30


        3) service balances, used to cover the activity charges associated

            with 2).

        If the different types of deposits were recorded separately, different

models could be developed for each type. Compensating balances could be

estimated as a function of loans and commitments, with active and service

balances depending on transactions volume and the level of interest rates.

Unfortunately, no distinction is made on the balance sheet among the dif—

ferent deposit types, so one model will have to suffice for all three.

The model which was estimated assumes that demand deposit volume is a

linear function of commitment volume (Q) and loan volume (L) with the

coefficients of these two factors being dependent on the current prime

rate.

        The demand deposit forecasting equation is given in Table 9.


          Table 9. Forecasting Equation for Demand Deposit Volume

                       D = hiQ + h2(QtP) + h3L + h4(LP)

                                                          R2    D—W
               h1          h2       h3           h4
              —.8          .11      .4          —   .05   .53   2.2

             (—1.9)       (2.0)    (3.2)        (—2.2)




NCD rate

        The final factor which must be forecast for the net worth simulations

is the rate paid on purchased funds which in this study was taken as the

3—month rate on Negotiable Certificates of Deposit. Since the basic rates

driving the simulation are the risk—free rates, an attempt was made to

find a stable relationship between the 3—month risk—free rate and the 3—

month NCD rate. Due to serial correlation in the residual of least squares
                                           31


estimates, the Hildreth—Lu transformation was used. The resulting equation

for forecasting the spread between the 3—month NCD rate and the 3—month

risk—free rate (SPRDt) is given in Table 10.10


              Table 10. Forecasting Equation for the NCD Rate

                           SPRD =      0 + j1r    +
                                                      2r
                                                      R2    D—W   p
                i0         j1
              —2.57        .03           .55          .37   1.6   .75

              (—2.6)       (.8)         (4.5)




A Model of Net Worth and Net Worth Elasticity

       In addition to the problem of predicting future cash flows to the

bank's owners, one must also specify a method for calculating the current

value of those cash flows and for predicting the effects of changes in

interest rates on that value. The approach we have taken is based on the

following valuation model developed by Rubinstein (1975):11



                             E(X t )   - [Cov(xti.
                     PV=                               mt   tnt
(16)
                                                RFt




       10
            is the 3—month risk—free rate.
     11The assumptions underlying Rubinstein's valuation equation are
(1) if two securities have the same payoff in all future states, they will
have the same current price, (2) investors maximize the expected utility
of compensation over their lifetimes and their utility functions are con-
cave, additive in consumption at each date, and never evidence satiation,
(3) financial markets are perfect, competitive, and Pareto—efficient, and
(4) there is weak aggregation and investors evidence constant proportional
risk aversion. While these assumptions are restrictive, they lead to a
simple, closed—form equation for valuing arbitrary cash flow streams in a
multiperiod setting.
                                              32



where

        PV =    the present value of the cash flow stream X

     Rpt = one plus the future value at time t of a dollar invested today

                in risk—free bonds

     Rt = one         plus the future value of a dollar invested today for t

                periods in the market portfolio

         E =    the   expected value operator

        COV =   the   covariance operator

         b =    the   level of proportional risk aversion.


        By making some simplifying assumptions, (16) can be used to derive

an interest—rate elasticity framework. First, suppose the (t—period spot

rate + 1) on risk—free bonds, Rut, is a function of both time and the

                              =               One interpretation of this is that the
short rate, i.e.,                 R.(t,r0).
major determinants of shifts in interest rates is the release of new data

containing information that affects relative returns. This assumption is

consistent with much of existing term—structure theory, which attempts to

explain the shape of the yield curve but takes the level (the value of the

short rate, for example) as exogenous (see Kane (1975), for example).

Next, we will assume that the probability distribution of the random cash

flows is a function of time and the t—period 1 + spot rate, i.e.:


                                  =                   =
                                      l(t,RF(t,rQ))       X(t,r0)

Similarly, assume the compound return on the market (+1) is a function of

time and the compound return (+1) on risky bonds, or:


                                                              =
                E(R) Rl(t,RFt) = R2(t,RF,(t,rO)t)                 E(R(t,r0)).
                                                     33


        Finally, assume that the covariance between the cash flows generated

by the project or security in question and the compound return (+1) on the

market portfolio raised to the —b power, COV(X,_R), is not a function

of interest rates for any t.12 With these assumptions, we can then

rewrite (16) as:



                                                  COV(X, _Rb)
                                                           mt
                            E(X(t,r0)) —                        —b

(17)            Pv=
                                                  E(R (t,r0)         )
                                                                         =
                                                                                      N
                                                                                          t
                                                     t
                  t1                     RF(t,rO)                             t=l RF(t,rO)


        Differentiating with respect to r0 and dividing by PV to obtain the

proportional change gives:


                                        dN                  N
         dPV
                   =          0   )_t         —      t          t                           1
                                                                              aRF(t,rO) ________
                                                                              _________
         dr                             dr0
                                                         RF(t,rO)t               r0           RF(t,rO)
(18)           =
                                                            N
                                                                t

                                                   t1 RF(t,rO)t


where



                        dN _  -                             -             t
                                                                              ,—R)
                                                                                mt
                                  dr0
                                         [E(x(tro))             E(R(t,r0)b)j


                                                  COV(X,
                                                           _R_b)
                                                            mt
                                                                 mO
(19)
                   dN   —   E(X(t,r0)         +
                                                                    E(R)2

            assumption restricts our analysis to the pure interest—rate
elasticity of net worth since it precludes any changes in the riskiness
of cash flows which are correlated with changes in the spot rate.
                                         34


Equation (18) is an analog to the generalized duration measured obtained

for bonds. Note however, that it has not been converted into elasticity

terms, but rather gives the proportional change in net worth for a given

absolute change in the spot rate. The values calculated using equation

(18) may be interpreted as the percentage change in net worth for the bank

per 100 basis point change in the spot rate. Another difference from the

generalized duration measure for bonds is that the proportional change in

net worth for the bank accounts for the effects of changes in interest

rates on the future cash flows received by the bank's owners.

     Given the forecasts of the periodic payout to the bank's owners which

may be obtained using the cash flow forecasting equations given in Tables

4 through 10 and a term structure of risk—free rates, one has the basic

data for estimating the current net worth of the bank, using equation (17).


Risk adjustment estimation

     For our estimates the proportional risk aversion factor, b, was taken

to be 1 (which implies logarithmic utility). The excess return on the

market was estimated as a linear function of the one month risk—free rate.

The resulting forecasting equation, based on monthly observations13 from

1965—75, is given in Table 11.


    Table 11.   Excess Market Return (EXt) vs the Risk—Free Rate (re)

                                 EX. =   a+br
                 .

                                                                 Std
         a               b                N      D—W            Error

       —.043            13               119     1.81           .037


      (—2.14)          (2.6)




     13Both Excess Market Return and the risk—free rate are expressed as
one—month returns, i.e., without conversion to an annually—compounded
equivalent.
                                             35


Finally, to estimate the covariance between the bank's cash flows and the

compound market return, it was assumed that (1) market returns are serially

uncorrelated, (2) bank cash flows are uncorrelated with lagged market

returns, (3) the variability of net interest income is a reasonable proxy

for the variability in the net cash flows to the bank's owners, (4) the

correlation between the net cash flows and the market return is not a

function of time or interest rates, and (5) the variance of the market

return is constant. With these simplifying assumptions, the sample corre—

lation between the bank's net interest income and the inverse of the

monthly market returns was estimated for the 1969—1975 period. The results

were:


                 Std(1/r )    = .06
                          m
                    Std(X) =    1.96 million      N = 69 months

                p(X,r) =        —.22


With Std(X) and E(r) permitted to depend on the funding strategy

employed and on interest rates, the entire risk adjustment term becomes:



         COV(Xt ,—R1)
                  mt  E(R1mt—i
                            ).22(.06)Std(X )                        E(R'
                                                                      m,tl   )

(20)                  =                           = .0132 Std(X )
            E(R)                      E(R)                          E(R')


Estimation of future spot rates

        McCulloch (1971) described a procedure for estimating the discount

function (i.e., the value today of a certain promise to pay $1 at time t

for all values of t) from observed prices. With the additions contained

in his later article (McCulloch (l975b)), this method was adapted for term

structure estimation in this study. Once the discount function is obtained
                                       36


by McCulloch's procedure, estimated forward rates for all future periods

may   be   calculated along with the current spot rate.

      The estimated forward rates will differ from estimated future spot

rates to the extent that the current term structure includes liquidity

premia. A number of studies of the liquidity premium have been made, and

although many of these studies agree that premia exist, there is consider-

able disagreement on the details of the liquidity premium structure.

Again we have adopted results obtained by McCulloch (1975a) to obtain the

mean liquidity premia as a function of the time period for which each

premium applies. The resulting estimates of liquidity premia were sub-

tracted from the forward rate estimates to obtain the estimates of future

spot rates period by period.

       The procedures just described provide two of the three characteristics

of risk—free interest rates needed for the simulations of proportional

changes in net worth. The estimated discount function is used directly in

the calculation of the estimated present value of net worth as shown in

equation (17). The estimated future spot rates are a major determinant of

the estimates of future cash flows for the bank. The third aspect of risk—

free interest rates needed for the simulations is the response of future

spot rates and the discount function to changes in the spot rate. This is

obtained from the empirical model of interest rate changes discussed

earlier and summarized in equation (7).


Simulation of the Interest—Rate Elasticities of Bank Net Worth

       The calculation of net worth elasticities for the hypothetical whole-

sale bank examined in this study begins with the selection of a time at

which the present value of net worth and its interest—rate sensitivity are

to be calculated. A basic interest rate forecast is obtained by the
                                   37


methods pioneered by McCulloch and discussed earlier. The term structure

is estimated for the base period, forward rates are calculated, and a

liquidity premium estimate subtracted from each to give estimates of

future one—month rates. The future spot rates are used to forecast prime

rates, NCD rates, and expected returns on the market portfolio. Prime

rates are used to calculate the loan yield series.

     Macroeconomic variable forecasts are taken from publications of the

producer of one of the aggregate macroeconomic forecasting services, again

as of the base period.14 The macro variable forecasts, along with the

interest rate forecasts, allow monthly loan volume and commitments to be

estimated. With loan volume and commitments forecasts, one can forecast

monthly deposit balances. When combined with an assumption about the

bank's capital structure, these various forecasts are sufficient to

generate cash flow forecasts for the payout stream to the owners of the

bank's equity. As noted earlier, the procedure used in this study is to

assume that the ratio of total book assets to book equity (capital ratio)

is held constant through time.15 Recalling that the balance sheet of the

simplified model of a wholesale bank includes loans and cash as assets and

demand deposits, purchased funds, and equity capital as liabilities, the

forecasts of demand deposit volume are used to forecast cash balances.

These cash balances plus the estimated loan volume provide a total asset

forecast which, when multiplied by the inverse of the assumed capital



          no forecasts were published during the base period, the most
recent forecasts are assumed to remain in effect. Linear approximations
are used if forecasts were other than monthly. When forecasts end before
the horizon, the remainder of the values are generated by using an average
growth rate based on the forecasts that are provided.
     15rhis assumption has the advantage of centering attention on a major
regulatory measure of capital adequacy but otherwise is arbitrary and used
for computation convenience.
                                   38


ratio, gives an estimate of book equity. Purchased fund balances are then

obtained as the difference between book total assets and the sum of demand

deposits plus book equity.

     In addition to the expected cash flow forecasts for each future time

period, the valuation method we have employed requires estimates of the

standard deviation of these cash flows. These estimates were obtained by

assuming that the growth rate in the cash flow is from a stationary distri-

bution and is serially uncorrelated. The mean growth rate and the variance

of the growth rate needed for these estimates are derived from historical

patterns in the bank's net interest income. Since those patterns resulted

from a capital ratio of about 22, an adjustment is made when other capital
                  16
ratios are assumed.

     The final problem to be solved before making the calculations is that

of choosing a horizon. A horizon of ten years is assumed largely because

it appears to be an upper limit for accurate forecasts of forward rates.

The end—point problem is solved by assuming that the risk—adjusted book

equity at the end of ten years is invested in one—month Treasury bills

forever.

     There is an added complication in calculating the interest—rate sensi-

tivity of net worth since one is required to calculate the derivative of

expected cash flows with respect to the spot rate. This derivative is

evaluated by numerical analysis, specifically by the technique of extrapo-

lation to the limit.


     Jsing this approach Std(Xt) increases with t and decreases with the
capital ratio. Morrison (1977) also made estimates for which Std(Xt) was
assumed constant for all t. The differences in results were slight and
only the results using the growth rate assumption are used here.

     '7The method is explained in detail in most elementary numerical
analysis texts (see, for example, Conte (1965), pp. l14-120).
                                      39


Simulation Results

        Simulations of the market value of net worth for the hypothetical

bank and of the interest-rate elasticity of the market net worth are

reported for three bases periods, January 1973, January 1974, and May 1975.

The estimated yield curves for these three dates are given in Table 12.

The January 1973 curve can be described as mildly upward sloping (173 basis

points from t = 0 to t = 10 yrs) while the May 1975 curve is sharply upward

sloping (330 basis points from t=0 to t=l0 yrs). In contrast, the

January 1974 curve has a "hump" which peaks at t=5 mo. and is slightly

downward sloping over most of the rest of its span. These three curves

encompass the main term structure shapes which existed during the period

for which the bank data is available.

        The estimates of market net worth and the interest—rate elasticities

of net worth for various book capital ratios are given in Tables 13 through

15. The market net worth values are the solutions to equation (17) given

the previously discussed estimates of the variables in that equation.

Clearly, as the ratio of total assets to book equity decreases, the quan-

tity of purchased funds decreases, and the market value accruing to the

owners of the equity increases.

        Four estimates of the interest—rate elasticities are given. Since

the empirical model of interest rate changes in equation (7) shows the

response of future spot rates to changes in the current spot rate to be

different for spot rate changes due to changes in the real component as

compared to changes in the inflation rate, it is possible to estimate the

percentage change in the market value of net worth for a 100 basis point

change in the real rate and for a 100 basis point change in the inflation

rate.    Ii   and IRE2 are based on a 100 basis point change in the real
                                        40




            Table 12. Tax—Adjusted Yield Curve on 1/73, 1/74, and 5/75



Maturity                   1/73                 1/74              5/75

 0                     4.77+— .16            7.21+—    .23    4.86+—    .58
 1 mo.                 4.89+— .05            7.23+—    .07    5.10+—    .17
 2 mo.                 5.03-4-— .03          7.36+—    .05    5.34+—    .08
 3 mo.                 5.19+—     .02        7.53+—    .03    5.57+—    .06
 4 mo.                 5.32+-     .02        7.62+—    .03    5.80+—    .09
 5 mo.                 5.43+—     .02        7.63+—    .03    6.02+—    .07
 6 mo.                 5.49+—     .02        7.60+—    .03    6.22+--   .07
 7 mo.                 5.53+—     .02        7.54+—    .03    6.39+—    .07
 8 mo.                 5.55+—     .02        7.47+—    .04    6.54+—    .07
 9 mo.                 5.56+—     .03        7.40+—    .04    6.68+—    .06
10 mo.                 5.58+-     .03        7.34+-    .05    6.80+-    .05
11 mo.                 5.61+-     .03        7.27+-    .05    6.91+-    .05
12 mc.                 5.63+—     .03        7.21+-    .05    7.01+—    .05
13 mo.                 5.66+—     .03        7.16+—    .05    7.10+—    .05
14 mc.                 5.70+— .03            7.11+—    .04    7.19+—    .05
15 mo.                 5.73+— .03            7.07+—    .04    7.27+—  .05
16 ma.                 5.76-4-—   .03        7.03+—    .04    7.35+—  .05
17 ma.                 5.79+—     .03        6.99+—    .04    7.42+—  .04
18 mo.                 5.82+—     .03        6.96+—    .04    7.48+—  .04
21 mo.                 5.91+—     .03        6.89+—    .04    7.65+—  .03
 2 yrs.                5.97+—     .03        6.86+—    .04    7.78+'- .04
30   inc.              6.07+—     .02        6.85+—    .02    7.96+— .04
 3 yrs.                6.13+—     .02        6.83+—    .03    8.07+— .05
 4 yrs.                6.18+—     .02        6.82+—    .03    8.17+—    .05
 5 yrs.        •       6.21+—     .02        6.77+—    .02    8.17+-  .04
 6 yrs.                6.27+—     .02        6.74+—    .02    8.15+—  .04
 7 yrs.                6.34+—     .02        6.74+-    .02    8.14+-  .06
 8 yrs.                6.42+—     .02        6.77+—    .02    8.14-1— .07
 9 yrs.                6.47+—     .02        6.82+—    .03    8.15+- .07
10 yrs.                6.50+—     .02        6.88+—    .03    8.16+— .07


All yields are annual internally compounded rates of return. Numbers
following the +— signs are standard errors.
                                   41


component of spot rates and IRE3 and IRE4 on a 100 basis point change in

the inflation rate. For a change in the nominal spot rate which is partly

due to real effects and partly due to inflation, a weighted average of the

real and inflationary IRE's would be calculated.'8

     The second distinction in IRE estimates involves the separation of

income and wealth effects in the equation for the proportional change in

net worth (equation (18)). The wealth effect results from the existing

cash flows being priced by a new discount factor. The income effect

involves the pricing of the changes in future cash flows resulting from

changes in future spot rates. It has been suggested that in an efficient

market and with all the components of risk adjustment correctly specified

andmeasured, therewouldbenoincomeeffect)9 IRE1 and IRE3 are estimates

of the percentage change in net worth including the full income effect,

while IRE2 and IRE4 only include the wealth effect. Thus, since the income

effect is positive, IRE1 and IRE3 are lower limits on the estimates of the

percentage change in net worth, and IRE2 and IRE4 are upper limits on these

e Stima   t e S.

     An examination of Tables 13—15 shows that the estimates of the sensi-

tivity of bank net worth to spot rate changes are all negative. Banks of

the sort modeled in this study are made worse off by interest rate

increases. However, the magnitude of the estimated net worth losses is

quite small especially in comparison with the elasticity estimates for

bonds reported in Table 3. For example, according to Table 3 a 100 basis


     '8We have placed the bar over the symbol for the percentage change in
bank net worth per 100 basis point change in interest rates to distinguish
this concept from the interest—rate elasticities for bonds which were
expressed as percentage changes in value for a 1% change in one plus the
spot interest rate.

     19This point was first brought to our attention by William Sharpe.
                                       42


Table 13. Market Values and Interest—Rate Elasticities for January 1973




                         Es tima ted                  IRE Estimates
Book Capital          Market Value of
   Ratio               Bank Net Worth          IRE1   IRE2    IRE3    IRE4

     30                       447.9            —.40   —.44   —.38     —.41

     20                       468.2            —.40   —.44   —.38     —.42

     10                       528.9           —.40    —.45   —.40     —.44

      2                      1014.8           —.40    —.47   —.44     —.50




IRE1 (IRE3) is the percentage change in bank net worth for a 100 basis

point change in the real spot rate (one—month inflation rate) assuming

both an income and a wealth effect.


IRE2 (IRE4) is the percentage change in bank net worth for a 100 basis

point change in the real spot rate (one—month inflation rate) assuming

there is no income effect.


Market values are in units of $1 million.
                                      43


Table 14. Market Values and Interest—Rate Elasticities for January 1974




                           Estimated                     IRE Estimates
Book Capital            Market Value of
   Ratio                 Bank Net Worth          IRE1     IRE2   IRE3    IRE4

     30                       464.4              — .23    —.26   —.22    —.25

     20                       489.5              —.23     —.26   —.22    —.25

     10                       564.9              — .23    —.27   —.23    —.26

      2                      1168.0              —.23     —.28   —.24    —.28




     (IRE) is the percentage change in bank net worth for a 100 basis

point change in the real spot rate (one—month inflation rate) assuming

both an income and a wealth effect.


               is the percentage change in bank net worth for a 100 basis
I2   (IRE4)
point change in the real spot rate (one—month inflation rate) assuming

there is no income effect.


Market values are in units of $1 million.
                                      44



 Table 15. Market Values and Interest—Rate Elasticities for May 1975




                        Estimated                  IRE Estimates
 Book Capital
     Ratio
                     Market Value of
                      Bank Net Worth           1
                                                   -  2       3       4


      30                      516.9         —.29    —.39   —.29    —.37

      20                      546.1         —.29    —.39   —.29    —.37

      10                      633.7         —.30    —.40   —.31    —.39

       2                     1134.8         —.32    —.45   —.35    —.45




l (IRE3) is the percentage change in bank net worth for a 100 basis

point change in the real spot rate (one—month inflation rate) assuming

both an income and a wealth effect.


IRE2 (IRE4) is the percentage change in bank net worth for a 100 basis

point change in the real spot rate (one—month inflation rate) assuming

there is no income effect.


Market values are in units of $1 million.
                                   45


point increase in the May 1975 spot rate would have resulted in a decrease

in the net worth of a 10%, 10 year coupon bond of between 2.3 and 3.4%.

From Table 15, we can see that the same spot rate change is estimated (at

most) to result in a change in the net worth of the hypothetical bank of

less than 0.5%.

     Another point of interest from Tables 13—15 is that the IRE estimates

for the bank are rather insensitive to whether the source of the spot rate

change is real rates or inflation. Again we can contrast this result with

the almost 50% greater sensitivity to inflation displayed by 10 year bonds

in Table 3.

     Both the small magnitude of the estimated net worth elasticities for

bank net worth and their insensitivity to the source of spot rate changes

can be attributed to the model bank's loan mix which is predominantly

floating rate loans and short—term notes. Even though loan renewals and

loan connuitments tend to make the effective maturity of loan portfolios

longer than their nominal maturities, the fact that they are largely

floating rate loans (or equivalently renegotiable on renewal) and are

supported to a significant degree by interest—sensitive borrowed funds

means that the hypothetical bank is quite close to being immunized from

nominal interest rate changes.

     These conclusions should be tempered somewhat by the realization that

the market value estimates are biased upward. The major reason for this

bias is that the estimated cash flows do not include non—interest expenses

for the hypothetical bank. Including non—interest rate expenses would

have involved arbitrary allocation of actual expense for the bank to the

asset and liability categories which were modeled in the hypothetical bank

and this was not attempted. However, it is clear that inclusion of such
                                   46


expenses would have reduced the measured income effect (assuming that non—

interest cash flows would tend to increase as spot rates increase) and to

reduce the market value of the bank's net worth. Both effects would tend

to. increase the sensitivity of the hypothetical bank's net worth to interest

rate changes but perhaps not much beyond the estimates that assume no income

effects (i.e., 2 and IRE4).

    Another notable result of the simulations is the insensitivity of the

IRE estimates to the book capital ratio. As we decrease the book capital

ratio, equity capital is substituted for purchased funds to support the

bank's assets. Since the asset structure is unchanged in the process,

this would appear to imply that the absolute values of IRE should fall as

the book capital ratio decreases. This line of reasoning ignores the

effects of reducing the amount of interest—sensitive purchased funds. As

rates increase, future income flows are reduced due to increases in the

rates paid on purchased funds, and as the amount of purchased funds de-

creases this negative income effect on the IRE estimates is weakened.

However, the relative insensitivity of IRE2 and IRE4 (i.e., the estimates

that do not include income effects) to changes in the assumed book capital

ratio suggest that this income effect is not important; on the whole pur-

chased funds are being purchased at market prices. On the other hand,

rate increases result in decreases in the market value of outstanding

liabilities and, of course, decreases in the market value of purchased

funds result in increases in the bank's net worth. As purchased funds

become a less important source of funds for the bank, this positive wealth

effect on IRE as the book capital ratio decreases completely offsets the

associated increase in the market value of the equity.
                                    47


     The level and structure of interest rates is seen to have some effect

 on IRE estimates. For the two upward sloping term structures (January 1973

 and May 1975), the difference in the IRE estimates is small especially when

we just consider wealth effects. However, the IRE estimates for the humped

 curve of January 1974 are consistently smaller than their counterparts for

 the other two term structures. This suggests that the level of interest

rate risk for banks of the sort described here is smaller when interest

rates are anticipated to be at or near a peak than it is when rates are

expected to rise. Given the importance of wealth effects in determining

the IRE estimates, this is a reasonable result.


Conclusions

     In this study we have demonstrated a method for estimating the market

value of net worth and the sensitivity of that net worth to changes in

interest rates for a hypothetical wholesale bank. The major conclusion

reached from our simulations is that interest rate risk is not a very

significant proposition for a bank similar to the bank in our model (or

for the loan portfolio of a more complex bank with a similar loan mix and

where it is assumed that loans are supported by demand deposits and pur-

chased funds). Decreasing the ratio of total assets to book capital was

shown to have little effect on the interest rate sensitivity in percentage

terms though of course the smaller asset to capital ratio implies a larger

buffer for depositors in absolute terms.

     While the results of this study suggest that there is little need for

regulatory attention to interest rate risk for loan portfolios of the sort

modeled here, it does not follow that the approach discussed here is useless

in other aspects of risk evaluation for banks. The results in Table 3

suggest that the interest rate risk for municipal bond portfolios may well
                                   48


be an important source of risk for banks. Application of generalized

duration concepts to bond portfolios is a relatively simple proposition

and could readily be incorporated into the examination process. Further—

more, except in money center banks, loan portfolios may be less well

immunized from interest rate changes than was true for the simplified bank

examined here.

     This is clearly the case for real estate portfolios. Acompanion

study to the one reported here was made by Nadauld (1978). He attempted

to measure market values of net worth and interest—rate elasticities of

net worth for savings and loan associations. The results in the Nadauld

study suggest that net worth losses from 36% to 71% (depending on the

association considered) are feasible for interest rate changes similar to

those that have occurred in the past. Clearly, the real estate portfolio

of commercial banks is another potential area of application by examiners

of the principles discussed in this study.
                                    49

                               References


Conte, S. D. 1965. Elementary Numerical Analysis. New York: McGraw—Hill.

Fair, R. C., and Jaffee, D. M. 1972. "Methods of Estimation for Markets
     in Disequilibrium." Econometrica (May): 497—514.

Fama, E. F. 1975. "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation."
     American Economic Review (June): 269—282.

Goldfeld, S. N. 1966. Commercial Bank Behavior and Economic Activity.
     Amsterdam: North—Holland Publishing Co.

Goldfeld, S. M., and Quandt, R. E. 1975. "Estimation in a Disequilibrium
     Market and the Value of Information." Journal of Econometrics
     (September): 325—348.

Hicks, J. R. 1939. Value and Capital. London: Oxford Press.

Hildreth, C., and Lu, J. Y. 1960. "Demand Relations with Autocorrelated
     Disturbances." Technical Bulletin 276 (November). Michigan State
     University Agricultural Experiment Station.

Hodges, S. 1975. "Some Thoughts on the Pricing of Default Free Bonds."
     Unpublished Working Paper, University of California, Berkeley
     (January).

Jaf'fee, D. M. 1971. Credit Rationing and the Commercial Loan Market.
     New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.

Kane, E. J. 1975. "Direct Cross—Section Tests of Alternative Term—
     Structure Theories." Unpublished Working Paper (October).

Lanstein, R. and Sharpe, W. F., "Duration and Security Risk." Research
     Paper #451, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University (May).

Macaulay, F. R. 1938. Some Theoretical Problems Suggested by the Movements
     of Interest Rates, Bond Yields, and Stock Prices in the United States
     Since 1856. National Bureau of Economic Research. New York:
     Columbia University Press.

McCulloch, J. H. 1971. "Measuring the Term Structure of Interest Rates."
     Journal of Business (January): 19—31.

              1975a. "An Estimate of the Liquidity Premium." Journal of
    Political Economy (January—February): 95—119.

              1975b. "The Tax—Adjusted Yield Curve." Journal of Finance
     (June): 811—830.
                                   50


Morrison, J. B. 1977. Interest Rate Risk in Commercial Banking: Some
     Implications for Capital Adequacy. Unpublished dissertation,
     University of California, Berkeley (May).

Nadauld, S. J. 1978. The Interest Rate Elasticity of Networth in Savings
     Institutions. Unpublished dissertation, University of California,
     Berkeley (May).

Nelson, C. R., and Schwert, W. C. 1976. "On Testing the Hypothesis That
     the Real Rate of Interest is Constant." Unpublished Working Paper
     (April).

Rubinstein, N. E. 1975. "The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and
     the Pricing of Options." Research Program in Finance, Working Paper
     No. 37. Berkeley: Institute of Business and Economic Research,
     University of California (August).

Samuelson, P. A. 1945. "The Effects of Interest Rate Increases on the
     Banking System.' American Economic Review (March): 16—41.

Vasicek, 0. A. 1976. "The Term Structure of Interest Rates." Unpublished
     Working Paper (July).

Yawitz, J. W., Hempel, G. H., and Marshall, W. J. 1975. "Average Maturity
     as a Risk Proxy in Investment Decisions." Journal of Finance (May):
     325—333.
