     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  INFLATION AND mm sroCK MARKEr




        Martin Feldstein




      Working Paper No.       276




                [NT OF ECONOMICS!
       UNlVERSlTY. Oi.;; M1NNESO-TA -




NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMrC BESEARCH
     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
        Cambridge MA 02138
            August 1978
                                              Working Paper 276
                                                    August 1978


                         Summary



             Inflation and the Stock Market

                      Martin Feldstein



        This paper explains why the nominal level of share
prices has failed to rise during a decade of substantial
inflation.  The key to the explanation is  the features of the
current U.S. tax laws, especially historic cost depreciation
and the taxation of nominal capital gains, that cause the
effective rate of tax or corporate source income to rise
when there is a higher rate of inflation.

        The current analysis shows that  to understand the
structural relation between.inflation and share prices  it
is crucial to note that a high 9on~tant rate of inflation
leaves the price-earnings ratio unchanged while an increase
in the rate of inflation depresses the price-earnings ratio.

        The higher nominal interest rates that accompany
inflation actually represent lower real net-of-tax yields on
alternative assets for most investors.  The current analysis
takes this into account in determining the share price.

        The main focus of the paper uses a stock valuation
model to derive the share demands of investors in different
tax situations and then calculates the share value that achieves
a market equilibrium.  Numerical calculations illustrate the
analysis with a representative individual and a representative
tax~exempt institutional investor.




Martin S.Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

(617) 868-3905
                          Inflation and the Stock Market

                               Martin Feldstein*


     This paper explains why the level of share prices has failed to rise

during a decade of substantial inflation.       Instead, the share value per

dollar of real pretax earnings fell from      10.82'   in 1967 to 6.65
           1
in 1976.       The analysis here shows that the inverse relation between higher

inflation and lower share prices during the past decade was not due to

chance or to other unrelated economic events.       On the contrary, the adverse

effect of increased inflation on share prices results from basic features

of the current U.S. tax     la~,   particularly historic cost depreciation and
                                  .    2
the taxation of nominal capital galns.

     The current analysis shows that in order to understand the structural

relation between inflation and share prices, it is crucial to distinguish



     *President, the National Bureau of Economic Research and Professor of
Economics, Harvard University. This study is part of the NBER program of
research on Business Taxation and Finance. I am grateful to participants
in the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments and to the NBER and the
National Science Foundation for financial support. The views expressed in
this paper are my own and not those of the NBER or Harvard University.

     lThese price-earnings ratios are based on real earnings in each year,
i.e., earnings based on real depreciation and with the inventory valuation
adjustment. See Feldstein and Summers (1978b) for the description of the
method by which these pretax real price-earpin~s ratios are constructed.
The traditional Standard and Poors post-t~x price-earnings ratio, based on
book profits (including inventory profits) fall from (17.45) to (9.02 ).
An alternate measure of share price performance, the ratio of the share
price to the underlying real capital at replacement cost, fell from 1.214
in 1967 to     0.788 in 1977. For further evidence of the adverse effect
of inflation on real share prices, see Nelson (1978) and Lintner (1973,1975).

     21 emphasize that these are tax rules in the United States. Other
countries that do not tax capital gains and that permit extremely rapid
tax-depreciation of investments may respond very differently to inflation.
The relation between share prices and inflation in other countries is there-
fore of little relevance to the United States.
                                             - 2 -
                                                       ,   ,


between the effect of a high constant rate of inflation and the effect of

an increase in the rate of inflation expected for the future.                  When the

steady-state rate of inflation is higher, share prices increase at a faster

rate.       More specifically, when the inflation rate is steady, share prices

rise in proportion to the price level to maintain a constant ratio of share

prices to real earnings.          In contrast, an increase in the expected future

rate of inflation causes a concurrent fall in the ratio of share prices to

current earnings.         Although share prices then rise from this lower level at

the higher rate of inflation, the ratio of share prices to real earnings is

permanently lower.         This permanent reduction in the price-earnings ratio

occurs because, under prevailing tax rules, inflation raises the effective

tax rate on corporate source income.

           This process is illustrated in figure 1.            The top part of the figure

shows the inflation rate.         Until time t , the inflation rate is constant at
                                                 o
'IT    •
      0'
           it then rises to a higher steady state level, TIl.           This increase is

immediately and correctly perceived.            The middle part of the figure shows

that until t          the price per share rises at a constant rate equal to the
                  o
rate of growth of nominal earnings per share.                  At time t , the share price
                                                                        o
drops to a level consistent with the higher rate of inflation and then

grows at the new higher rate of growth of earnings per share.                  Finally, the

lower part of the figure shows that the price-earnings ratio falls when the

inflation rate increases        b~t   remains constant as long as the inflation rate

is constant.

           The starting point for this analysis is the way in which inflation

raises the effective         ~ax rat~   on corporate source income.        This is in sharp

contrast to the common popular argument that share prices are depressed

because inflation raises the rate of interest that can be earned by investing
                                          - 3 -



in bonds.       It is clear that this argument should be rejected since the

higher nominal rate of interest generally corresponds to an unchanged real
             .         1
rate   0   f lnterest.     Indeed, since the entire nominal interest is subject to

the personal income tax, the real rate of interest net of the personal

income tax actually falls.        The analysis of section 1 shows that, with

existing tax rules, inflation is likely to depress the real net rate of

interest by less than it lowers the real net return to equity investment.

The simple valuation model that calculates the share value by discounting

the real net rate of interest leads to the conclusion that, with current

tax laws, an increase in inflation reduces the price that individuals are

willing to pay for shares.

       Although this discounted earnings moqel pf      ~hare   valuation is a useful

heuristic device, it has the serious deficiency that it implies a different

share value for individuals in each tax situation.         It is therefore incon-

sistent with the observation that the same stocks are held by individuals

who face very different tax rates.         The maip f9cUS of the current paper

therefore uses a more general stock valuation model to derive the shares

demanded by investors in different tax situations--and then calculates the

share value that achieves a market equilibrium.

       Numerical calculations with the market equilibrium model show how

inflation can substantially depress the equilibrium share value because of

our current tax rules.        The model is however very simple.     It should be

regarded as an aid to understanding and not as a device for making precise



     -lThe conclusion that inflation       raises the nominal interest rate while
leaving the real rate unchanged has        been supported by evidence since Irving
Fisher's (193~ classic study. For          more recent evidence, see Feldstein and
Eckstein (1970), Yohe and Karnovsky        (1969), and Feldstein and Summers (1978a).
                  Figure 1


 Inflation
   Rate




                              to              t
Rate of
Share Price
Increase
                             •            I




              I




Ratio of                      to              t
Share Price
to Pretax
Earnings


                                      .




                                 to               ---c.

                             T:i.me
                                    - 4 -


calculations.   The final section of the paper discusses some of the impor-

tant ways in which the current analysis could be extended.
                                          - 5 -




1.   The Effect of Inflation on the Demand Price of Shares


         Consider first an economy in which there is no inflation.     Each share

of stock represents the ownership claim to a single unit of capital and the

net earnings that it produces.       There is no corporate debt and all earnings

are paid out as dividends.       The marginal product of capital (net of depre-

ciation), P, is subject to a corporate income tax at rate T.         The earnings

per share that are distributed to the individual investor are therefore

(l-T)p.      Since there are no retained earnings, the earnings per share do

not grow over time and there is no change in the value per share.         The

individual pays personal tax at rate 8 on the earnings that he receives.

The individual's net earnings per share are thus (1-8)(1-T)p.

         A simple model of share valuation implies that the price that the

individual would be willing to pay per share would make the net earnings

per dollar of equity equal to the net interest that he would receive per
                                                  1
dollar invested in government bonds, (l-8)r.          More realistically, indivi-

duals may require a higher yield on the riskier equity investment;         if this

risk differential is denoted by 8, the investor's indifference condition

becomes

              (1-8) (l-T)p
(1.1)                        (1-8)r + 8
                   q

The individual's demand price per share is thus

                  (1-8) (l-T)p
(1. 2)        q
                  (1-8)r+8




     lSee, e.g., King (1977). He also treats the more general case in which
retained earnings cause share prices to rise.
                                        - 6 -



     What happens when the rate of inflation increases from zero to a posi-

tive rate TI?   For simplicity, the analysis will assume an instantaneous and

unanticipated increase to TI which is then expected to persist forever.            To

evaluate the new demand price per share, it is necessary to recalculate

both the net earnings per share and the real net rate of interest.

     Under U.S. tax law, taxable profits are calculated by subtracting a

value for depreciation from other net operating income.          This value of

depreciation is based on the original or "historic" cost of the asset

rather than on its current value.       When prices rise, this historic cost

method of depreciation causes the real value of depreciation to fall and
                                          l
real taxable profits to be increased.           As a result, real profits net of
                .
t h e corporate ~ncome          .
                       tax vary ~nversely '
                                          w~t
                                              h ~n
                                                . fl at~on.
                                                       .    2     A linear approxi-

mation that each percentage point of inflation reduces net corporate profits

per unit of capital by A implies that net corporate earnings per share of
                          3
capital are (l-T)p-ATI.       After personal income tax at rate    e,   the individual

receives (I-e) [(1-T)p-ATI].4



     lWhen there is no inflation, the various methods of "accelerated
depreciation" that are allowed for tax purposes may cause tax depreciation
to exceed the economic depreciation for some assets. This is subsumed in
the effective corporate tax rate T. Accelerated depreciation does not
change the conclusion that inflation reduces the real value of depreciation.

     2For a more complete discussion of this see Feldstein and Summers
(1978b) and Feldstein, Green and Sheshinski (1978), especially the appendix
by Auerbach. Hop.g (1977), Motley (1969), c,md Van Horne and Glassmire (1971)
discuss the effects of his~oric cost depreciatipn and the implication for
the effects of historic cost depreciation ~nd the implication for the effect
of inflation and share values; they assume a single investor whose discount
rate is unchanged by inflation.

     3With an exponental depreciation rate of 15 percent and a growth rate of
3 percent;a.seven percent inflation rate reduces net profits -per unit of'
capital by 0.021; this implies A=0.35.
      4This assumes that inflation does not affect the pretax profitability
 of capital. The calculation also ignores the transitional effect of a lower
present value of the future depreciation allowable on past investments; as reality
this may be approximately offset by the shareholders' gain at the expense of bond-
holders.
                                          - 7 -



       Inflation reduces these net earnings even further by imposing an addi-

tional tax on nominal capital gains.         More specifically, even though the

real share price remains constant at the new equilibrium value q, inflation
                                                          I
causes nominal capital gains at the rate of         ~q.         Capital gains are taxed

at a lower rate than ordinary income and only when the stock is sold;                      the

equivalent tax rate on accrued capital gains will be denoted c.                      The extra

burden caused by taxing nominal capital gains is thus                 c~q.     The real net

earnings per share are therefore (1-8)        [(l-T)p-\~]      -    c~q.     Note that a small

increase in the rate of inflation calculated at               ~=O   reduces these real net

earnings by (1-8)\+cq.2

       The effect of infIat ion on the real net rate of interest,                 (1-8)r-~,


depends on the response of the nominal        int~rest        rate to the rate of inflation.

As noted above, the      U.s.   experience has been. that      dr/d~=l.       Thus

d   [(1-8)r-~] /d~=-8.

       For reasonable values of the tax parameters, the decrease in net

earnings per dollar of equity [(1-8)\+cq)/q] exceeds the decrease in the

real net interest yield on bonds [8].         For example, with a personal tax

rate of 8=0.3, a depreciation effect of \=0.35 an effective capital gains

tax rate of c=0.15 and an initial share value per unit of capital of q=l,

each one percent of inflation reduces the real net yield on equity by 0.40

percent and reduces the real net yield on debt by 0.30.                    If the risk

premium (0) is unchanged, this implies that the share price calculated as

the discounted value of earnings per share will fall.


       I
      These nominal capital gains are stated in constant dollars. If the
price level at time t is e~t, the nominal capital gain at that time is ~qe~t.

       2This is also true for ~>O if the change in q is ignored.
                                            - 8 -



         More specifically, the simple valuation model that calculates the

individual's demand price per share by equating the real net yield per

dollar of equity to the sum of the real net interest rate and the risk

premium implies

              (1-8) [(l-T)g-ATI]
(1. 3)                             - CTI = (1-8)r-TI+o
                    q


or

                  (l-8) [(l-T)p-ATI]
(1. 4)
              q = (l-8)r-(l-c)TI+o

Differentiating q with respect to TI with the condition that dr/dTI=l implies:


(1. 5)
              dq    -(l-8)A+q(8-c)
              dTI = (l-e)r- (l-c)TI+o

Since the denominator is positive,l dq/dTI is negative if


(1. 6)        q(8-c) < (1-8)A


         Several things about this condition should be noted.    First, realistic

values of the tax parameters satisfy the inequality and imply dq/dTI<O.          The

example of 8=0.3, c=0.15 and A=0.35 implies dq/dTI<O even at q=l.      Second,

the inequality is satisfied more easily for investors with low individual

tax rates.      In the important extreme case of a tax-exempt institution, 8=c=0

and the inequality is satisfied for any value of A>O.        Finally, for some

individuals with high tax rates the inequality will not be satisfied and

dq/dTI>O.

         This diversity of responses of q to the rate of inflation reinforces

the implication of equation 1.4 that the demand price per share differs

among investors according to their tax situation.        An analysis of the



         lThis is a necessary condition for a finite value of q.
                                     - 9 -



effect of inflation on the market price of stock requires a portfo1io.mode1

of investor equilibrium.    In such a model, the risk premium (0) is both

implicit and endogenous.    The risk differential changes as the investor

reallocates his portfolio until a market equilibrium is achieved in which

the same market value of stock is consistent with each investor's own port-

folio equilibrium.   The specification of such a model is the subject of

the next section;    section 3 then analyzes how the equilibrium responds to

a change in the rate of inflation.
                                                               - 10 -



3.   A Market Equilibrium Model of , Share Valuation


        The market equilibrium model builds directly on the analysis of the

previous section.                       The economy is assumed to have two assets (risky equity

shares and riskless government bonds) and two types of portfolio investors

(tax exempt institutions and taxable individuals).                                The analysis begins by

specifying the investors' portfolio equilibrium equations.                                   When these are

combined with the asset supply constraint, they implicitly define the market

value per share of equity.                             This equilibrium model is then used in section 3

to calculate the effect of changing from an equilibrium with a zero rate of

inflation to a new equilibrium with a                             posi~ive   constant rate of inflation.

        The household's investment problem is to divide its initial wealth

between bonds and stocks.                              Equation 1.1 showed that, in the absence of

inflation, the portfolio equilibrium of the households can be written


(2.1)        ~(_l-_e...:..)--,-(_l-_T...:..)-,-p   =
                         qo

where the share price and interest rate carry a subscript zero to distinguish

these initial pre-inflation values from the                              valu~s   of these variables when

there is inflation.                           The risk premium,    ~o'   haq subscripts to indicate that

it refers to the household in the initial equilibrium.

        The risk premium that a household requires to hold a marginal share of

equity should be an increasing function of the amount of risk that the

household is already bearing.                             More explicitly, I shall assume that & is really
                                                                                               no

proportional to the standard deviation of the return on the household's

portfolio.         The source of this uncertainty is the variability of the pretax

equity return;                 the variance of p will be written                J.
                                                                                p
                                                                                     The after-tax vari-

ance per dollar of equity investment is thus (1_e)2(1_T)2 a 2/ q 2.                               If the
                                                                                         p    0
                                                                    - 11 -



household has sho shares in the initial equilibrium, the dollar value of

its equity investment is sh q •                                    Since bonds are riskless, the variance of
                           o 0
                                          2
the return on the household portfolio is sh (l_8)2(1_T)2a 2.                                   If the risk
                                            o             p

premium is proportional to the standard deviation of the portfolio return,


(2.2)        0h
                     o
                          = 0h sho            (l-8) (l-T)a
                                                               P

where 0 is a constant.

        Substituting 2.2 into 2.1 and rearranging terms yields the share price

that is consistent with the household's chosen share ownership in the

absence of inflation:


(2.3)        q           = ~(.,-l-_8-,,)-,(,---1_-T--,),-,-p_~--:--:----:-_
                 o           (1-8)r +ohsh (1-8)(1-T)a
                                   o     0            P

Note that this household demand price for shares varies inversely with the

quantity of shares that it holds.

        For tax-exempt institutions, the relevant value of 8 is zero.                                 The

portfolio equilibrium of the institution can therefore be written


(2.4)                                 r
                                          o
                                              + o.10

where the institution's risk premium satisfies


(2.5)        O.               O.s. (l-T)a
                 10               1   10               P


Combining these two equations yields the i!]-s}=iJ:l!t:ton's demand price per
         l
share:


(2.6)
                            r +6.8. (l-T)a
                              o       1       10           P


     lNote that, since (1-8) can be eliminated from equation 2.3, the house-
hold and institution demand price equation differ in the absence ofinflatioQ
only'because of differences in 0i.
                  Figure 2




                              -s

Price
per
Unit
of
Capital




          s*.~o s*he               Number of Shares




                       •k :
                                                        - 12 -



        The total number of shares outstanding, s, constrains the combined

holdings of the institution and the household investors:


(2.7)        s           sio + sho

        This supply constraint and the two demand equations (2.3 and 2.6) are

sufficient to determine the equilibrium share price and the allocation of

the shares between the two types of investors.                               The nature of this solu-

tion is illustrated in figure 2.                        The equilibrium relation of equation 2.3

is drawn as the household's demand curve for shares, sh (q).                                    Similarly
                                                                                    .0     0

2.6 is drawn as tpe institution's demand Curve sio(q).                                   These are added

horizontally to get total share demand as a function of share price s (q ).
                                                                     o 0
The intersection of this market demand curve with the supply constraint

line    s determines         the equilibrium price q
                                                                 o
                                                                     *   and the corresponding share
                 *
holdings (s hand s . ).
                                 ,,<
                     o                 10

        To use this model to study the impacf                        o~    inflation on share prices, it

is necessary to evaluate the parameters 0hop and 0hop'                                   Although these

parameters cannot be observed, their values can be inferred from the equil-

ibrium conditions in the absence of inflation.                               Thus equation 2.3 implies

                            (l-T)p-q r
                                            o       0
(2.8)
                            q o (l-T)sh0

and 2. 6 imp lies

                            (l-T)o"""q r
                                            o       0
(2.9)        0.0
                 1   P      q (l-T)si
                             o                  0


For these illustrative calculations, the pretax return to capital will be

taken to be P=O.ll, the effective corporate tax rateT=0.4 and the interest

rate in the absence of inflation r =0,03.                                In 1970, households held $700
                                                        o
billion of equities while institutions (including private pension plans,
                                                - 13 -



foundations, educational endowments, and insurance companies) held $135

billion;        I will therefore set q sh =700 and q si =135.             Together these
                                           o    0              0   0

assumptions imply:

                                                3
(2.10)                = (0.157-.07lq )10-
                                    o

and

                                               -3
(2.11)                     (0.8l5-.370q )10
                                       o

        It is common to assume that the corporate capital stock               (a~d   therefore)

P and     s)   will adjust until in equilibrium q equals one.              An alternative

view is that, with the corporate financial behavior that is pptimal under

existing tax laws, this arbitrage will not be fully achieved and the equil-
                                                         1
ibrium value of q          will be less than one.            The next section shows how,
                       o
under either assumption, the introduction of a moderate rate of inflation

can cause a substantial fall in the share value.




      1
      See Auerbach (1978), Bradford (1977), and King (1977) for statements
of this view.
                                           - 14 -



3.   Inflation and the Market Equilibrium Share Value


        This section examines the effect of our unanticipated increase in the

steady state rate of inflation.          The analysis assumes that the corporate

capital stock remains constant;          this implies that the total number of
                                                                            l
shares (8) and the average pretax profitability (p) remain constant.

        Inflation changes the net yields on stocks and bonds in the way

described in section 1.         For households, the real net yield on equity

becomes (1-8) [(l-T)P-ATI]/ql-CTI and the real net return on bonds becomes

(1-8)r -TI.     Since the nominal interest rises by the rate of inflation,2
      l
r1=ro+TI and the real net return on bonds is (1-8)r -8TI.        The new portfolio
                                                   o
equilibrium therefore satisfies:

              (1-8) [(l-T)p-ATI]
(3.1)                            - cTI
                     ql

where


(3.2)         olh   = 0 (1-8)(1-T)cr
                       h             p

        The household's demand price for shares therefore satisfies


(3.3)


Similarly, the institution's demand price for shares (with 8=c=O) can be



     lThe assumption of a fixed corporate capital stock causes the calcula-
tion to overstate the change in the share price. If q falls, capital will
leave the corporate sector, raising p and thereby q. Since this would be
anticipated by investors, the immediate fall would be less than that calcu-
lated here. A satisfactory solution to this problem requires a dynamic
model with endogenous corporate investment decisions.
        2
      See footnote 1 page 3 above for ev~den~e that this has been the
historical experience in the United States.
                                                                       - 15 -



written as


             q        ~(,.:::l_-T.:,.,)~p:....-...:..:A~1T_-:--_
                     =-
(3.4)
                 1        r o+o.sil(l-T)cr
                               1.          p

Since the number of shares has not changed, it is still true that


(3.5)


These three equations determine the new equilibrium share price and the

corresponding allocation of shares.

        Before calculating the new equilibrium explicitly, it is useful to

discuss the change with the help of a diagram.                                           Figure 3 combines the

no-inflation demand equations originally shown in figure 2 with the corres-

ponding demand              equations of 3.3 and 3.4 in the presence of inflation.                                The

dashed lines (sh (q) and s. (q »                                       show the no-inflation share demands and
                            o      0                  1.0          0

s o , the horizontal
              .      sum of these demand curves, gives the market demand.

Comparing equation 3.4 and 2.6 shows that the                                        inst~tutions'   demand price is

lower at every value of sil but also tends to zero as sil tends to infinity;

the curve si1 (ql) is drawn in this way.                                        Comparing equations 3.3 and 2.3

shows that the shift of the household demand curve is ambiguous since the

numerator is reduced by -(1-8)A1T while the denominator is reduced by

-(8-C)1T.    To emphasize the possibility of a lower equilibrium price even

when the household demand price rises, the household demand curve is drawn

with the demand price at the initial value of sh1=O greater than its

previous level.

        The new market demand curve sl(ql) coincides with the household demand

curve until the plrice at which institutioI}s                                      an~   willing to hold some stock.

Thereafter, the market demand curve is the sum of the two demands.                                           The new

equilibrium price occurs at a value of ql that is below the old equilibrium.
1
I
I
I
!                      Figure 3
I




    Price
     Per
    Share




            %t-"lt---~-:~~~:'..l
            ql t---»t--~_~~~~ ""-
                                     ,
                                    ..


                                         "   ,so (%).
                                              si (ql)




                                                    Number of Shares
                                                     - 16 -



Institutions reduce their shareholdings and individuals increase their

shareholdings.

        Equations 3.3 to 3.5 can be used to calculate explicitly the values of

ql and of the separate shareholdings.                      Combining 3.3 and 3.4 and using

s-shl for sil yields an equation for the new shareholding by households:

                     0.0 (1-T)s+(8-c)TI
(3.6)        shl =   -:-,,-J.,-,,-p~_-:-::----:-_ _:--,----:-
                     0hOp (1-8) (l-T)+oiOp(l-T)

Consider first the new equilibrium when q                           was equal to 1.   Using the values
                                                                o
of chop and 0iop implies by equations 2.10 and 2.11 and with the effective

capital gain tax of c=0.15, equation 3.6 implies that shl=770, i.e., infla-

tion causes households to increase their sharehold from 700 shares to 770

shares.     Substituting this value into equation 3.3 and setting the historic
                                                   . .1
cost depreciation penalty at A=0.35 yields ql=0.758.                           The share price per

unit of capital falls from one dollar to 75.8 cents.                           Note that the value

of household shares is reduced by the inflation from $700 billion to                           $58~


billion even though they hold an increased number of shares.

        A lower initial value per share does not change the conclusion that

the share price falls but does reduce the relative magnitude of the fall.
                                        2
More specifically, if qo=.8,                equations 2.10, 2.11 and 3.6 imply that shl=765.

Substituting into 3.3 yields ql=0.681 or 85.f percent of the initial price.




        lSee footnot~ 3 page 6 above.

     2Auerbach (1978) and King (1977) show that under certain conditions
the share price without inflation will be q =(1-8)kl-c) if the only share-
holders are individuals with these tax rate~. With our current tax values,
this implies 0.82.
                                      - 17 -



4.   Conclusion


     The simple model developed in this paper conveys the basic reason why

a higher rate of inflation causes a substantial reduction in the ratio of

share prices to real earnings.     The higher effective rate of tax on corporate

income caused by historic cost depreciation ahd the tax on the artificial

capital gains caused by inflation both reduce the real net yield that inves-

tors receive per unit of capital.     Altbough the real net yield on bonds is

also reduced, for most shareowners this is outweighed by the fall in the

equity yields.

      The market equilibrium analysis examined the impact of inflation when

both stocks and bonds are held by risk averse investors in quite different

tax situations.     It also showed how the equilibrium ratio of share prices to

real earnings can fall even if the demand price per share for some indivi-

duals is actually increased by inflation.

      Of course, the increase in the effective tax rate caused by inflation

has not been the only adverse influence on the level of share prices during

the last decade.     The slowdown in productivity growth, the higher cost of

energy and the increased international. competition have all reduced pretax

profitability.     Although there is no clear evidence of a permanent fall in

profitability (Feldstein and Summers, 1977), the transitory reduction may

have caused some investors to project lower long-term pretax profitability.

The higher tax rates on capital gains for high income investors since 1969

further reduced after-tax profitability.       An increase in uncertainty has

also had an adverse effect on price-earnings ratios.       One source of this

greater uncertainty is the increasing ratio of debt to equity on corporate

balance sheets.     In addition, after a period of steady growth and low
                                      - 18 -



inflation, the events of the past decade have added uncertainty to any

evaluation of the future.     Finally, in considering the changes in the level

of share prices overthe past    decade~   it is important to recognize that the

adverse effect of inflation has been perceived only slowly and imperfectly.

Some investors have undoubtedly concluded incorrectly that even a steady

rate of inflation would cause a continuing decline in the ratio of share

prices to earnings.     The share price level may therefore have overshot its

equilibrium level •.

     A full understanding of the equilibrium relation between share prices

and inflation requires extending the current analysis in a number of ways.

The role of corporate debt and retained earnings should be included.       The

possibility of individual investment in other assets like real estate

should be recognized.    A more explicit portfolio model could derive asset

demand equations from expected utility maximization and could recognize that

some institutional holdings are really indirect ways for individuals to

hold assets in a tax-favored way:     Finally, the simplification that the

capital stock remains constant should be replaced by a more dynamic model

that recognizes the effect of inflation-induced accumulation.
                                     -19-


                                  Bibliography


Auerbach, Alan, "Share Valuation and Corporate Equity Policy", NBER WOrking
     Paper No. 255, 1978.

Bradford, David, "The Incidence and Allocative Effects of a Tax on Corporate
     Distributions," Mimeo, 1977.

Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Sumners, "Is the Rate of Profit Falling"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1977, pp. 211-227.

Feldstein, Martin, Jerry Green and Sheshinski (1978), "Inflation and Taxes
     in a Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance, Joumal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 86, No.2, pp. S53-S70.

Feldstein, Martin and Otto Eckstein, "The Fur1darcEntal Determinants of the
     Interest Rate", Rev. of Economics and Statistics Vol. 52 (Nov. 1970)
     pp. 363-75.

Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence S'l.lI1"Irers (1978a), "Inflation, Tax Rules and the
    long-Te:r:m Interest Rate" ,Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1978
    pp. 61-99.

Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Surrmers (1978b), "Inflation, Depreciation and
    Corporate Profits", forthcoming.

Fisher, Irving, The Theory of Interest (MacMillan) r 1930.

Hong, Hai, "Inflation and the Market Value of the Fi:r:m:Theory and Tests,
    The Jouxnal of Finance, Vol. XXXII, No.4, Sept. 1977.

King, Mervyn, Public Policy and the Corporation, 1977 - Chapm:m and Hall,
    london.

Linter, J., "Inflation and Carrm::>n Stock Prices in a Cyclical Context," 53rd
    Armual Report, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc., 1973.       --

Linter, John, "Inflation and Security Returns", Journal of Finance, May 1975,
    pp. 259-280.

M::>Uey, Brian, "Inflation and COrrnon Stock Values: Comrrent", Journal of Finance,
     June 1969.

Nelson, Charles L., "Inflation and Rates of Return on Carnnon Stocks," The Journal
    of Finance, Vol. XXXI, No. 2 May, 1976, pp. 471-487.

Van Home, Janes C. q.nd William F. Glassmi.r~, Jr., "Tq.e :rnpact of Unanticipated
    Changes in Inflation on the Value of cqmop ptocks", The Journal of Finance.
                  ,   ,                     'I"                       .


Yohe, William P. and Denis S. Kamowsky, "In~est Rates and Price Level Changes,
    1952-69" Federal Reserve Bank St. louis Rev. 51 (December 1969) •
