                    NBER WORKING PAPER TRIES




               A FIXED EFFECT LOGIT MODEL OF IHE
                  IMPACT OF UNIONISM ON (JITS



                      Richard B. Freeman




                     Working Paper No. 280




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                        September 1978


The research reported here is part of the NBER' s research program
in labor studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Gary
Chamberlain provided invaluable advice on this project. Eric
Seller and Laura Nelson perforned the computer progranining.
                                                     NBER Working Paper 280
                                                             September 1978

                   A Fixed Effect Logit Model of the

                       Impact of Unionism on Quits


                               ABSTRACT




     There are two possible reasons for unionized workers to have lower

quit rates than otherwise comparable nonunion workers: unions could

organize employees with innately lower propensities to quit or they could

reduce propensities by offering disgruntled workers alternatives to

quitting in the form of grievance arbitration and related industrial

jurisprudence systems. This paper uses a fixed effect logit model based

on the conditional likelihood function to disentangle these two effects.

     The paper finds that the observed union—quit tradeoff is due largely

to the impact of unionism on worker behavior rather than to the propensity

of stable workers to be organized, supporting the notion that unions have

important nonwage effects along the lines suggested by the "exit—voice"

model of union activity.




                                             Richard B. Freeman
                                             National Bureau of Economic
                                                Research
                                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             (617) 868—3915
     With wages and other characteristics hold fixed, unionized workers

have been found to have significantly lower quit and permanent separation

rates and greater job tenure than nonunion workers) Why?

     There are two possible explanations for the observed inverse relation

between unionism and quit or exit behavior. One possibility is that the

trade union institution reduces the propensity to leave an enterprise by

providing disgruntled workers with alternatives to quitting such as

grievance/arbitration and regular contract negotiations, and by providing

especially desirable nonwage work conditions. Another very different

possibility is that the union—quit relation reflects selectivity in

union membership, with organized employees differing from nonorganized

workers in unobserved characteristics that lead to lower quit rates.

Whether the inverse relation between unionism and exit is due to the effect

of unionism on behavior or to selectivity is central to understanding

the "exit—voice trade6ff" in the labor market and what unions do in an

industrial economy.

     This paper seeks to disentangle the two possible causes of the lower

quit rate2 of union workers using G. Chamberlaints fixed effect logit

model that is based on the conditional likelihood function. The fixed

effect logit eliminates selectivity bias by comparing the likelihood

of quitting by the same worker in union and nonunion settings, thereby

isolating the behavioral impact of the institution. Maximizing the

likelihood function conditional on the number of quits has desirable

asymptotic and computational properties that make the model a valuable

research tool.

     The paper finds that the observed union—quit tradeoff is due largely

to the impact of unionism on worker behavior rather than to the propensity

of stable workers to be organized, supporting the notion that unions have

important nonwage effects along the lines suggested by the "exit—voice"

model of union activity.3
                                                                    2




    The paper is divided into four sections. The first sets out the

reasons   for expecting unionism to reduce quits. The second describes the

methodology of the empirical analyses. The thirdpresents the empirical

results. The paper concludes with a brief evaluation of the economic

consequences of the union—induced decrease in exit and of the implications

for further analysis of trade unionism.



I. Unionism and Exit Behavior

     With wages and other measured characteristics of workers held fixed,

the quit propensities of union and nonunion employees can be expected

to differ for two basic types of reasons.

     First, unionism is likely to reduce quits through its functioning

as a "voice" institution that offers workers a substitute mode of

protesting and potentially changing work conditions to classical exit

behavior. Perhaps the most important aspect of unionism likely to have

significant effects on quit behavior is the ievance/arbitration system,

which enables workers who feel themselves unfairly treated or who believe

their supervisors erred in interpreting work rules to seek a resolution

through the formal grievance procedure. Ninety—nine percent of major U.S.

collective bargaining contracts contain grievance clauses and 95% contain

arbitration clauses (U.S. Department of Labor, 1977, p. 92), while by

contrast, in the nonunion sector, at most 30% of large firms have formal

grievance procedures and only 11% allow for outside arbitration

(Bureau of National Affairs, 1968, p. 2). The likely impact of a grievance

system on quits is clear: disgruntled workers will generally raise a

grievance before invoking the more drastic quit remedy; if successful they

will stay with the firm;   even   if unsuccessful the delay in quits will reduce
                                                                  3



the overall level of exit.4 The regular process of collective bargaining

can also be expected to reduce exit by providing the possibility of changing

contractual arrangements through negotiation rather than mobility. If,

as seems reasonable, unions are especially effective in altering conditions

and rules that are 'public' to the enterprise, where standard public

goods arguments suggest that considerable mobility would be needed for

firms to obtain information about preferences, the bargaining process

might substantively reduce the quits needed for provision of the desired

conditions. Finally, unionism may reduce exit by creating particular work

rules and conditions of employment that are desired by workers, including

the industrial jurisprudence method of setting rules. If, with pay and

other pecuniary benefits held fixed, union work places are more desirable

to employees, compensating differential analysis suggests that unionists

will quit less.

     The second possible reason for the observed reduction in quits under

unionism is that unions tend to organize workers with lower quit propensities.

Such selectivity is to be expected if unionism can be viewed as an investment

with longterin returns, which will attract relatively stable workers

likely to be more willing to invest in organizing than are short—term

workers, especially given the long delays in obtaining NLRB representation

elections in recent years. The selectivity effect differs fundamentally

from the behavioral effect in that it implies that unions have no real

impact on behavior but merely serve to sort out more and less stable

workers. Since the reduction In exit under unionism has been .heralded

as one of the major nonwage effects of the institution, with considerable

cost—saving advantages due to the cost of turnover, it is important to

control for the potential impact of selectivity bias on the results.
                                                                                  4


II.    The Econometric Model

       Longitudinal data on the quit behavior of the same person over time

provides a means of differentiating between the effects of unionism as an

institution that influences behavior and of selectivity in the union—exit

relation. The use of longitudinal data to control for unobserved personal

factors can be most readily demonstrated with a linear probability model.

Let          0—1 dummy variable which measures whether the ith person quits
in    period t; UN1 =           0—1      dummy variable for whether or not the person is
a   union member, h.             unobserved personal characteristics which raises the

propensity to quit; and                      be a residual uncorrelated with unionism.

For simplicity, the effect of other variables will be Ignored, implying

that the coefficients and error terms are partial with respect to other

variables. Then, the linear probability representation of the quit decision

is:


       (1)   Q.it   = —aUN.           + h. + e.
                                it       1    it
If E(h. UN.)             0, the regression of                 Nit will yield a biased

estimate of a. When, as seems reasonable, union workers are innately more

stable, E(UN.           h.) <    0       so that the bias is downward, the effect of unionism
on quits will be overstated. With data on several time periods, however, the

effect of h1 can be eliminated by including individual con-

 stants in the regressions. In the linear model this Is equivalent to taking

deviations from means for all the variables. With data on two periods, the

analysis simplifies to a simple difference equation

       (2)          —
                         It—l
                                     =
                                         _a(UNi
                                                  —
                                                      it—l   + e. —
                                                                      e.i
Since the h1 terms have been eliminated from (2), there is no problem

in estimating a by least squares.
                                                                            5



        As is well—known, however, the linear probability model is not entirely

appropriate: it fails to bound the probabilities between 0 and 1 and has

non—normal error terms. A widely used alternative is the logistic,

which makes the probability (P) a nonlinear function of the explanatory

variables.
                                   exp(_aUN. + h1)
                 =             =
        (3)
                     Pr(Q=l)       1   +
                                           exp(_aUNj + h1)
where    dP/dUN. < 0.   The logistic is bounded between 0 and 1 and can be

estimated by maximum likelihood. When the model is expanded to include

fixed person effects, however, the resultant estimates are not consistent,

essentially because the number of individual parameters estimated in

the nonlinear form rises as the sample increases, so that increasing

the sample size does not produce desired asymptotic properties. While

additional time periods on an Individual will yield consistent estimates,

standard data sets provide only limited longitudinal information,

generally on large numbers of persons.

        Chamberlain's fixed effects logit model provides an alternative pro-

cedure using a conditional likelihood function. The basic idea is that the

number of quits provides a sufficient statistic for the omitted person

factor h1.5 Holding fixed the number of quits, hi drops from the likelihood

function, producing a nonlinear relation comparable to the linear robabilitv

fixed effects model. Since people who quit in every period or who never
quit provide no information about the effect of unionism or other explanatory

variables, the analysis focuses on persons who quit in one (or more)

periods and who stay on a job for one (or more) periods. In the case of

 two periods, there are two possibilities: quit in period 1 EQ1 = 1 and

Q2= 0] or quit in period 2 [Q1 = 0 and Q2 =           1].    The conditional probability

 for the event 10 (i.e. Q1 = 1 and Q2            0) is:
                                                                         6




        (4)        P1(l.-P2)    _____
                           P2(1—P1)

where P1 =      logistic   probability for quitting in period 1 and P2        logistic

probability for quitting in period 2. Substituting for the P's with the

logistic (3) yields

                                  exp[a(UN12 — UN11)]
        (5)   Prob(l0) =       1 + exp[a(UN.2 —
                                                  UN11)]

from which the h. has been eliminated. Since there are only two              events
(10) and (01), this is a simple binary logit with explanatory variables

in difference      form, for which consistent estimates of a can be obtained

using standard maximum likelihood packages.

        The way in which the conditional logit model provides information on

the effects of unionism on the quit behavior of individuals can be
readily ascertained from (5). For a person who switches, say, from

union status in period 1 to nonunion status in period 2, the explanatory

variable UN.
           i2 —UN.  takes on the value —1. This implies that the
                 ii

probability of the event quit/no quit is increased——a sensible pattern

if unionism reduces the probability of quitting, since then moving from union

to nonunion, status should lower the conditional probability of quitting in the

first period relative to the second period.

       When there    are more than 2 periods the Chamberlain fixed effect
logit   yields a multinomial model, with several possible outcomes.

In the case of 3 periods, for example, there are six cases (001, 010, 100,

101, 011 and 110). This model can be estimated with standard inultinomial

packages. The Manski—McFadden conditional logit program provides an

especially      useful package for estimation, as it permits simultaneous
estimation      of the effect of variables conditional on one, two, three, or
more   quits.
     The consistency of the estimates in the fixed effects logit and the

properties of the information matrix are discussed in detail by Chamberlain.

What is important for our purposes is that the model provides the appropriate

statistical tool for dealing with the unobserved personal factor h1

in the union quit problem.


 III. Empirical Results

           The effect of unionism on quit behavior using fixed effects models

 has been estimated with longitudinal data for the period 1968—72 from the

 Michigan   Panel Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID).    Records on the Michigan

 tape    were   organized into a file giving wages and other characteristics of

 workers and unionism in a given year and quits in the ensuing year. Persons

 who left the labor force were excluded from the sample in order to focus

 on quits involving changes inemployers as opposed to retirement or other

 movements out of the labor market. There were 4058 persons in the five

 year sample with information on 20,290 quit/no quit decisions.

          As a first step in evaluating the effect of unionism on quit behavior

 and the importance of unobserved person factors, a linear probability model

 was estimated treating each of the 20,290 decisions as a separate dependent

 observation. The results of the linear analysis are given in table 1.
 Column 1   gives the mean and standard    deviation of the key variables.

 Column   2 records the results of regressing the 0—1 dummy variable for     a quit
 on unionism, hourly wages.and year dummies, while column 3 adds various
 other   control variables, such as education, age, and occupation. Column 4

 replaces the control variables with individual constants to control for the

 omitted   person factor h1.
           The calculations reveal a sizeable inverse union—quit relation, which

  is not seriously affected by the omitted person factor. In the first regression,

  the coefficient on unionism is —.029, with a standard error of .004,
                                                                                      8

             Table 1: Linear Probability Model Estimates of the Effect
                     of Unionism and Wages on Quit Behavior



                             mean &
                          standard deviation       Coefficient       and        Standard Error
                                (1)                 (2)              ()                   (4)
Dependent Variable

 Quit                        .083(.276)

 Independent Vari-
   ables

 Unionism                    .276(.447)            —.029(.004)       —.036(.005)          —.029(.0c8)

 Hourly Wages                3.40(2.50)            —.   006(.0008)   —.005(.0009) —.002(.0Ol)

 Individual Constants


 Other Controls

    Year dummies                                           4                4                     4

    Education                                                               /

    Age                                                                     /

    Occupation Dummies                                                      8

    Area Wage                                                               /

    Area Unemployment                                                       I

    Shortage of Workers                                                     /
        in Area   Dummy

    Industry Dummies                                                        5

    Sex                                                                     /
    Race

    Constant                                                                /

 Summary Statistics

    S.E.E.                                               .275              .272                 .263

    F                                                   23.5               26.3                 i.,5

    N                                                   20290              20290                20290


Source: Clculatcd from ician ?anci Survey on Income Pynamico
Note: The SEE and F in column 4 relate to the full equation, adjusted for the
degrees of freedom due to the individual constants. The F for the addition of
the explanatory variables is 8.2.
                                                                 9




implying that trade unionism is associated with a quit rate 35% below the

average. The coefficient on wages is also highly significant negative

but of more modest magnitude: to reduce quits by 35% would require a wage

increase of $4.83 or142% above the average. Addition of diverse person,

job, and area characteristics to the regression in column (2) modifies

these findings modestly, raising the absolute value of the union coefficient

and reducing that of the coefficient on wages. The impact of unionism is

increased by addition of controls because organized workers are concentrated

in blue collar occupations, where quit rates tend to be expecially high.

When individual constants are added to the regression

(coinputationany, by taking each variable as deviation from its mean value),

the. coefficient on the union variable is—. 029, which is identical

to that in the first regression, while the
                                             coefficient on hourly wages declines
in magnitude. The continued effect of unionism with the individual

constants implies that in the linear model, at least, the bulk of the

union effect is not the result of unions selecting more stable workers but

rather of unions reducing the likelihood of quits by individual workers.

       Table 2 turns to Chamberlain's fixed effects logit model, concentra.—

ing on the union and wage variables. Since persons who remained in their

job over the whole period or who quit in each period are eliminated, the

sample drops to 1232, consisting of 877 cases of a single quit, 276 cases

of 2 quits, 67 cases of 3 quits, and 12 cases of 4 quits. Columns 1 and 2

record the estimated logistic parameter coefficients on unionism and wages

in calculations which first exclude and then include the same set of controls

used in the previous table. Without the controls the probability of a quit in

the sample is significantly reduced by trade unionism, with a logistic parameter

'of —.39. At the mean level of quits in the sample this implies a drop in
                                                                               10


                         Table 2: Logistic Probability Model Estimates of the

                             Effects of Unionism and Wages on Quit Behavior



                                              Coefficient and Standard Error

                                        Lpglstic_Model —               Fixed Effect Logit
                                        Ignoring Person                        Single & Multiple
                                           Effects            Single Quits          Quits
Independert Variables
                                  (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)
   Unionism                       —.386(.065) — .464(.070)    —.378(.174)      —.   4E2(.15l)

   Hourly Wage1                   —.lll(.014) —.105(.019)     —. 032(.116)     .128(.104)
   Individual Constant                                           I                  /
Other Controls
   Year Dummies                          4             4

    Education

    Age                                               /
    Occupation Dummies                                8

    Area Wage                                         /
    Area Unemployment                                 /
    Shortage of Workers in                            ,1
      Area Dummy

    Industry Dummies

    Sex                                               I
    Race

    Constant                             /            /          /                  I
Summary Statistics

    N                              20290             20290       877           1232




1iourly wage taken relative to the average in a year to allow for changes in wages over time.
                                                                   11



 the probability of quitting of .029 points due to unionism, identical to

 the value obtained from the linear model. Consistent with

 the preceding results, moreover, addition of the control raises the impact

 of unionism noticeably. Columns 3 and 4 give maximum likelihood est:iinates

f the fixed effect conditional logit model. In 3 the calculations are

 conditional on a single quit while in 4 multiple quits are also taken into

 account. As with the linear probability calculations, the results are

 clear cut: the trade union effect is only modestly affected by correcting

 for the omitted person factor while by contrast, the coefficient on wages

 is significantly reduced by the correction. The differential effect of the

 individual constants on the union and wage coefficients may reflect the

 fact that wages are more person related than unionism, which is much more

 of a social phenomenon. As far as can be told by these calculations, the

 reduction of quits associated with unionism is due largely to the effect of

 the institution on individual behavior rather than union selectivity of

 persons with initially low quit propensities.



IV. Conclusion

    This study has used the Chamberlain fixed effect logit model to

eliminate unobserved person factors from the union quit equation. It has

found that   most of the observed union—exit tradeoff is due to the impact of
the institution on quit decisions, as opposed to selectivity of more

stable workers and thus lends general support to the view that trade

unionism has significant nonwage effects on the behavior of workers,

roughly in accord with the "exit—voice" model of unionism. Since

reductions in quits lower turnover costs and raise the payoff to investments

in specific human capital, the impact of unionism on quit behavior should

raise productivity, contributing to the observed positive effect of unions on
                                                                 12


productivity   in some sectors (Brown—Medoff). In this case
at   least the impact of unionism does not masque an omitted selectivity

factor but rather appears to reflect a true social effect.
                                                                           13


                                      Footnotes



'See Freeman, Brown—Medoff, Viscusi, Kahn, among others.

2While the paper concentrates on the quit rate, the analysis could

 easily be extended to total separations. Unionism appears to lower

 quits but to have little impact on other permanent separations, so that

 the quit relation captures the principal impact of the institution.

3For   discussion of the "exit—voice" approach see Hirschman, Freeman,
 Nelson, }lirschman    (1976)   and Freeman and Medoff.

 4There are two conditions for the delay effect to operate. First, there
 must   be some nonzero probability of redressing the grievance, so that the

 worker   is willing to try the option. Second, the length of employment

 must be finite, for otherwise delays will not affect the steady state

 solution. If, on average, the length of employment were initially, say

 10 years, then a delay in quitting for, say 1/2 year, would reduce the

 quit rate from 10% to about 9 1/2%, a non—negligible though by no means

 large effect.


5See Chamberlain, pp. 8—14. The basic idea is that the person effect

predisposes an individual to quit a certain number of times but does not

affect the timing of quits. The explanatory variables affect the timing.

    obtain (5), substitute for P1 and P2 to get


                      exp—aUN                             exp—aUN     exp—aUN
   1 + exp—aUN2 1 +                     1 + exp—aUN2   1+
                           exp—aUN1                         exp—aUN1 1—exp—aUN2 1 + exp—aUN1


 which reduces   to        expja(UN2—uN1)]
                       1   + expfa(UN2-45N1)]
                                                                   14



                                 References



Brown, C, and J. Medoff. "Trade Unions in the Production Process,"

     Journal of Political Economy, June 1978.

Bureau of National Affairs, Personnel Policies for Unorganized Employees

     (Survey No. 84 of Personnel Policies Forum), 1968

Chamberlain, C. "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data" prelininary

     version, Harvard University, 1978.

Freeman, R. B. "The Exit—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market: Unionism,

     Job Tenure, Quits, and Separations," NBER Working Paper No. 242,

     April, 1978.

Freeman, R. B. "Industrial Mobility and Union Voice in the Labor Market,"

     American Economic Review, Vol. 66, No. 2, May 1976, 36l—368.

Freeman, R. B. and J. Medoff. What Do Unions Do? (Basic Books, forthcoming).

Hirschman, A., Exit, Voice and Loyalty (Harvard 1970).

Hirschman, A., "Some Uses of the Eixt—Voice Approach——Discussion,"

     American Economic Review, Vol. 66, No. 2, May 1976, 386—89.

Kahn, L. N "Union Impact: A Reduced Form Approach," Review of Economics and

     Statistics, November 1977   ,   503—507.

Nelson, R. C., "Some Uses of the Exit—Voice Approach——Discussion,"

     American Economic Review, Vol. 66, No. 2, May 1976, 389—391.

Viscusi, W. K.: Employment Hazards: An Investigation of Market Performances

     (Harvard UniversityPress, 1976)

U. S. Department of Labor, Characteristics of Major Collective Bargaining

     Agreements, July 1, 1975, Bulletin 1957, 1977
