     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF INFLATION ON THE PRICES
          OF LAND AND GOLD



         Martin Feldstein




       Working Paper No.             296




          DE..F;'j"RT:M Ef"~T OF
           nii'JTI\iFT"~.rrv   Of, fl/i\NNESOTfl




 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
          Cambridge MA 02138

            November 1978
                                                               Working Paper 296
                                                                   November 1978



                                    Summary

           The Effect of Inflation on the Prices of Land and Gold

                               Martin Feldstein


         Traditional theory implies that the relative price of consumer goods

and of such real assets as land and gold should not be permanently affected

by the rate of inflation.     A change in the general rate of inflation should,

in equilibrium, cause an equal change in the rate of inflation for each asset

price.   The experience of the past decade has been very different from the

predictions of this theory:     the prices of land, gold and other such stores

of value have increased by substantially more than the general price level.

The present paper presents a simple theoretical model that explains the posi-

tive relation between the rate of inflation and the relative price of such

real assets.   More specifically, in an economy with an income tax, an increase

in the expected rate of inflation causes an immediate increase in the relative

price of such "store of value" real assets.     The behavior of real asset prices

discussed in this paper is thus a further example of the non-neutral response

of capital markets to inflation in an economy with income taxes.




                                           National Bureau of Economic Research
                                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, Mass. 02138
                                           (617) 868-3905
           The Effect of Inflation on the Prices of Land and Gold

                               Martin Feldstein*


     Traditional theory implies that the relative price of consumer goods

and of such real assets as land and gold should not be permanently affected

by the rate of inflation.     A change in the general rate of inflation should,

in equilibrium, cause an equal change in the rate of inflation for each asset

price.   The experience of the past decade has been very different from the

predictions of this theory:     the prices of land, gold and other such stores
                                                                                 1
of value have increased by substantially more than the general price level.

The present paper presents a simple theoretical model that explains the posi-

tive relation between the rate of inflation and the relative price of such

real assets.

     More specifically, the analysis here shows that, in an economy with an

income tax, an increase in the expected rate of inflation causes an immediate

increase in the relative price of such "store of value" real    assets~   What we

have observed in the past decade can thus be understood as both (1) a series

of transitions to higher relative asset prices whenever there was an increase

in expected inflation, and (2) the traditional rise in these asset prices in



     *Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This
paper is part of the NBER study of capital formation and the project on the
changing role of debt and equity finance. I am grateful to the NBER and the
National Science Foundation for financial support.
     1
      From 1968 to 1977, the consumer price level rose 74    percent. During
the same period, the price of gold rose from $ 39 an ounce to more than $ 147
an ounce, an increase of 250 percent.    According to Salomon Brothers (1978),
the investment bankers, the price of farmland rose 150 percent while the price
of housing rose 110 percent.
                                       - 2 -



proportion to the general price level while the expected inflation rate
                     1
remained constant.

     The behavior of real asset prices discussed in this paper is thus a

further example of the non-Fisherian response to inflation of capital markets
                                   2
in an economy with income taxes.       In earlier papers, I showed how the tradi-

tional theory of interest rates and share prices must also be changed because
                                                                     3
of the important role that income taxes now play in our economy.         More gener-

ally, these studies show the substantial non-neutrality of inflation in our

economy.

     The paper begins in section 1 with a simple model of the price of land

and its relation to inflation. . This model assumes that land and bonds are

perfect substitutes in investors' portfolios.       The real net yields on both

types of assets must therefore be equal.       The second section presents a more

general portfolio equilibrium model in which assets are not assumed to be

perfect substitutes.     The effect of inflation on the prices of both gold and

land is investigated.




     1
      The observed increase in the relative price of these assets may also
reflect the increased uncertainty of future inflation rates as well as purely
speculative movements that cause relative prices to depart from their long-run
equilibrium. The current model ignores these issues.
     2
      Fisher's analyses of the effects of inflation (1930) were of
course written when income taxes were much less important than they are today.
     3
      On interest rates, see Feldstein (1976) and Feldstein, Green and
Sheshinski (1978); see also Darby (1975). On the negative relation between
expected inflation and the ~evel of share prices, see Feldstein (1978b).
                                                 - 3 -



1.       The Price of Land:       A First Approximation


          Consider first a simple stationary economy with no inflation.         There is

a single produced good that can be either consumed or used in production.

The population and the capital stock remain constant and there is no technical
              1
progress.         The lack of inflation implies that the nominal stock of money

remains unchanged.          The quantity of land is of course also fixed.

          If land and real capital are perfect substitutes in investors' portfolios,

the relative price of a unit of land (pr) and of the produced good (p) must
                                         2
equate their relative yields.                If the marginal product of a unit of land in

terms of the produced good is pF , the pretax return on land is pFL/PL.               If
                                L
this return is subject to personal tax at rate e, the net return on land is
                  3
(l-e)pFL/PL.          Similarly, the net return on real capital is (l-e)pFk/p where

pF       is the marginal product of capital in terms of the produced good.
                                                                                  4 The
     k
equality of the net returns on land and real capital

                            (l-e)F
(1.1)                                k
                        =     p


obviously implies that the price of land relative to the price of the produced



     II assume a stationary economy to avoid the extra complexity of valueing
land as it becomes continually scarcer relative to the labor force and the
capital stock. In a growing economy, the value of land depends on the form
of technical progress. Note that the assumption of a fixed capital stock
precludes the effect of land value on real capital accumulation discussed in
Feldstein (1977).
     2              .
       Since we are currently examining an equilibrium at a point in time, the
notation could be simplified by using the produced good as numeraire. It is
however natural to use money as the numeraire since the analysis will soon
deal with a changing price level.
          3
      If there is a separate property tax based on the value of land, this
would be reduced by a constant. Allowing for such a tax would not alter any
of the conclusions of this paper.

     4Note that the price of the capital good is the same as the price of
consumer goods.
                                           - 4 -


good is just equal to the ratio of their marginal products:



(1. 2)



         Consider what happens if the government suddenly adopts a policy of

increasing the money supply at rate        TI.   For simplicity, assume that the new

rate of inflation is expected to continue indefinitely.           In the new equili-

brium, the prices of both the produced good and land will increase at this

rate:


              p
(1. 3)
              p



But before this equilibrium is established, the relative prices of land and

of the produced good must change in order to preserve the equality of the

net-of-tax real yields.      Since inflation does not alter the pretax real yields,

the relative prices of the two assets in the new equilibrium depends on the

extent to which inflation changes real tax rates.

         In the u.S. economy, there are three important ways in which inflation

changes effective tax rates.      First,    increas~s   in the nominal value of assets

are taxed as capital gains when the assets are sold;           the letter c will be

used to denote the equivalent accrual rate of tax on such nominal gains.

Note that the assumption of a stationary economy implies that there are no

real. capital gains.     The net of tax nominal rate of capital gain is thus

(I-chi for both assets.      Second, depreciation of capital for tax purposes is

based on the original cost of the asset rather than the cost of replacement.

With even moderate rates of inflation, this causes a substantial reduction in

the net of tax return;      this will be approximated linearly by writing the

real return net of income tax (but not net of capital gains tax) as
                                            - 5 -

                    1
(1-8) (F -A1T).         Third, firms are permitted to deduct nominal interest payments
        k
in calculating taxable profits while individuals are taxed on nominal interest

income;         since bonds have not yet been introduced in the model, I will begin

by ignoring this third aspect but will return to it later in this section.

        The net nominal rate of return on land is thus (1-8)pF /PL + (l-c)1T and
                                                              L
the corresponding net real return is (1-8)pFL/PL-c1T.         For real capital, the

real net return is (1-8) (F -A1T)-C1T.       The equality of these two real net
                           k
returns thus implies:


(1.4)



Because depreciation for tax purposes understates true depreciation, the real

net yield on capital is reduced and the price of land rises relative to the

price of reproducible capital.          Only after this adjustment in relative prices

has occurred will both assets increase in price at the same rate 1T, as indi-

cated in equation 1.3.

        It is useful to introduce bonds and to restate this analysis for an

investor who equates the real net yield on land with the real net yield on
            2
bonds.          The key distinction between bonds and either capital or land is

the absence of a nominal capital gain.          Instead, the interest rate paid on

these bonds rises with inflation.          It is important, however, that this

interest premium is subject to the ordinary rate of income tax while the

nominal capital gain on land is taxed at the lower capital gains tax rate.


        1
      This linear form is an approximation since A itself depends on both the
rate of inflation and the rate of depreciation. For a discussion of this
approximation in the more general context of an economy with a corporate
income tax as well as a personal income tax, see the appendix by Alan Auerbach
in Feldstein, Green and Sheshinski (1978)~
        2
      Although the maturity of the bond is irrelevant for discussing the
steady state equilibrium, the transition is easier to consider if these bonds
are assumed to have very short maturities like Treasury bills.
                                               - 6 -



Thus, if r is the nominal rate of interest, the net nominal yield on bonds is

(1-8)r and the net real yield is (1-8)r-TI.

         Equality of the net real yields on land and bonds


(1. 5)
                             - CTI = (1-8)r - TI


implies


(1. 6)       PL        (1-8)FL
             -     =   --,~--,.'="-,...---
              p        [ (1-8)r-(1-c)TI]


Since F remains constant, the value of PL/ P depends on how the nominal
       L
interest rate responds to inflation.               Equation 1.6 implies that PL/ P increases

with inflation if

              dr       l-c
(1. 7)       -    <
             d'IT      1-8

In the United States, it has long been true that the nominal interest rate

rises by approximately the rate of inflation, i.e., that dr/dTI=l provides a
                                                          1
close approximation to historical experience.                 Thus, since the effective

capital gains tax rate is less than the ordinary income rate (c<8), the

inequality in 1.7 has been satisfied and inflation causes PL to rise relative

to p.

         Although this simple model is able to capture the essential reason why

the relative price of land varies inversely with the expected inflation rate,

it 1s easy to show that this model is not sufficient to determine the effect

of inflation on the price of gold and other "pure" stores of real value.                  For



     1This empirical result has been supported by evidence since Irving Fisher's
(1930) classic study. For more recent evidence, see Yohe and Karnovsky (1969),
Feldstein and Eckstein (1970) and Feldstein and Summers (1978). This behavior
of the interest rate reflects both tax rules and monetary policy; see
Feldstein (1978a).
                                                 - 7 -



the current purpose, the basic difference between land and gold is that gold

has no real marginal product.               The equilibrium net return on gold is simply

the nominal gain caused by general inflation,                (l-c)~.    The corresponding real

return is thus          -c~;    gold has a negative real return to the extent that a

capital gains tax must be paid on the              nom~nal   gain.     Since the net real

return on bonds is             (1-0)r-~,   the equality of real net returns requires


(1. 8)          (l-ch = (l-e)r


Even if condition 1.8 holds, it does not imply anything about the price of

gold.        Moreover, this condition would hold for different values of             ~   only if

dr/d~=(l-c)/(l-e).             Since this condition has not in fact been true, this

model of investor equilibrium implies complete specialization by investors in
                    1
gold or bonds.           What is clearly needed is a more general model of portfolio

behavior.        This next section presents such a model and examines its implica-

tions for the prices of gold and land .




...._._.__._._----_.
         1
                           __._._---
      In a more general model with more than one class of investor, differ-
ences in tax situations will cause complete specialization of asset holdings
if investors disregard risk and will not hold any asset when a higher
yielding alternative is available.
                                           - 8 -



2.   A Portfolio Equilibrium Model of the Prices of Gold and Land


        The simplest of all models of portfolio equilibrium is the condition

that real net asset yields must be equal.              Although this model, which

implicitly assumes that the assets are perfect substitutes, may be useful for

some purposes, it-is clearly inadequate for analyzing the effect of inflation

on the price of gold.       The risks associated with holding bonds and gold are

clearly different.     The current section therefore presents a slightly more

general model of portfolio equilibrium.               After discussing the implied effect

of inflation on the equilibrium relative price of gold, the model is used to

extend the previous analysis of the price of land.

        In place of the assumption of perfect substitutability, the current

section states that the demand for gold relative to the demand for bonds is a

linear function of the difference between the expected real net yields.               If

the fixed physical amount of gold is G, and its price is PG' the nominal value
                                                  I
of gold in investors portfolios is PGG.               To simplify the analysis further, I

will assume a fixed real quantity of debt, B;               the nominal value of the debt

is thus pB.     Since the real net yield on gold is -C'IT and the real net yield

on bonds is (l-O)r-'lT, the portfolio equation will be written:



(2.1)             = Yo +   Yl [(I-c)'IT-(I-e)rl



Since the demand for gold is an increasing function of the expected yield

differential, yl>O;     as Y tends to infinity, this model tends to the earlier
                            1
model of equal yields as a condition for equilibrium.              With Y >0, there is a
                                                                          o


        1
      Treating the amount of gold as fixed implicitly assumes a closed
economy. More generally, the world price of gold will depend on the demands
of investors in different countries and therefore on their inflation notes
and tax policies.
                                        - 9 -



positive demand for gold even when the expected real net yield on gold is less

than the corresponding yield on bonds.

        Since G and B are constant, equation 2.1 implies that the relative price

of gold is an increasing function of inflation if


             dr     l-c
(2.2)             < --
             d'IT   I-a


This is the same condition as inequality 1.7.      As I noted there, this condition

has been true empirically in the United States for a long time.       The simple

model of portfolio equilibrium thus implies that an increase in the expected

equilibrium rate of inflation raises the relative price of gold.       In the new

equilibrium, of course, the relative price of gold remains unchanged.

        More generally, the effect of an increase in the expected rate of inflation

is to reduce the real yield on gold by c·d'IT while it reduces the real yield

on bonds by d'IT-(l-a)dr.    With the empirical approximation that dr/d'IT=l, this

implies that the yield on gold is reduced less than the yield on bonds if

c<G, 1. e., i f the capital gains tax rate is less than the ordinary income tax

rate.     Since this is satisfied for all taxable investors, inflation shifts the

yield differential in favor of gold.      For quite a wide range of plausible

assumptions, this change in demand can be expected to increase the relative

price of gold.      Note finally that in a simpler economy with no taxes on

capital income (a=c=O), inflation has no effect on the relative price of gold

i f dr/d'IT=l.

        Applying the same portfolio model to land is only slightly more complex.

Since the real net yield on land is (1-8)pFL/PL-C'IT, the portfolio equilibrium
                                              - 10 -


                                                       1
equation analogous to equation 2.1 becomes



(2.3)                   o·t(l-e)PF
                                .. L +
                          1       PL


Totally differentiating this equation yields


                                      dr
(2.4)                  o1 [(l-c)-(l-e)--]
                                      d1T
                                        2    -2
                       1+01 (l-e)FLP PL


Since the denominator is unambiguously positive, the sign of the derivative

depends on the sign of the numerator.             It is    e~sy   to see that this is posi-

tive if the inequality of 2.2 is satisfied.                Thus, if dr/d1T«l-c)/(l-e),

the simple portfolio behavior considered here implies that the relative price

of land is positively related to the expected rate of inflation.

        It is not possible to evaluate the magnitude of the relative price change

without knowing the value of 01.            An indication of the possible magnitude can

be obtained however for the special case in which the real net yields on land

and bonds are either equal or differ only by a constant.                 The portfolio

equilibrium condition



(2.5)                 - C1T   =   (l-e)r - 1T + S



where S is an arbitrary constant yield differential implies


        1
      It would clearly be desirable to have a more general model in which
the demand for each kind of asset depends on the relative yields of all
assets. The current pairwise comparison with the yield on debt is obviously
a strong simplification. It is sufficient however to provide an interesting
generalization of the even simpler model of the previous section.
                                           - 11 -


                        dr      l-c
(2.6)                 =----
                       d'IT 1-8


With the approximation that dr/d1T=l, this implies that



(2.7)
                        -- (~=:)
Reasonable values of the tax parameters for individual investors may be taken

as 0=0.4 and c=0.15.         These imply that the pretax real yield on land falls by

0.4 times the change in inflation.        An inflation rate of 'IT=0.06 thus reduces

the real   preta~   yield by 0.024.     If the initial real pretax yield is 0.08, a

six percent inflation reduces the yield by 30 percent.         Since the physical

marginal product of capital (F ) is constant, a 30 percent reduction in
                              L
pfL/PL implies that P/PL falls by 30 percent;         thus the relative price of

land rises by 43 percent.         Similarly, a 10 percent rate of inflation would

reduce pfL/PL from 0.08 to 0.04, implying a doubling of the relative price of

land.   While these calculations are very crude and are likely to overstate

the response of the land price that would be implied by a more general port-

folio model, they do suggest that even a relatively small increase in the rate

of inflation can have a very substantia.l effect on the price of land.        Since

gold lacks any real marginal product, its relative price is likely to be more

sensitive to the expected rate of inflation.
                                     ~   12 -



3.   Concluding Comments


     This paper has presented a simple analysis of the relation between the

expected rate of inflation and the prices of land, gold and other non-depre-

ciating real stores of value.   In contrast to the traditional theoretical

conclusion that relative prices are unaffected by the rate of inflation, the

current analysis shows that, because of unindexed taxes on capital income,

a higher expected rate of inflation raises the prices of land and gold rela-

tive to the general price level of produced goods.   More generally, as I have

noted in earlier papers, a change in the expected equilibrium rate of inflation

alters the real net rate of interest, the stock market value of real capital, and

the real net marginal product of investment.    In an economy with capital income

taxes, inflation is far from neutral.

      The very rapid rise in the relative prices of land, gold and other such

assets during the recent decade of rising inflation rates is, of course,

consistent with the view presented in this paper.    The actual course of these

prices may also have reflected such things as an increased attention to

inflation, a belief that future inflation rates have become more uncertain,

increased speculative demand, and changes in statutory tax rules.    But even

without these transitional or disequilibrium elements, the current analysis

shows that changes in expected inflation can have powerful effects on the

relative prices of such investment assets.

      It would clearly be desirable to extend the current model by developing

an explicit theory of portfolio equilibrium for investors who hold land, gold,

bonds and equity shares.   The real yields on these assets would be linked

because they are all dependent on future changes in expected inflation.      As a

further step, the analysis should recognize that the effect of inflation on
                                     ~   13 -



each individual's demand for each asset depends on that individual's own tax

situation.   The equilibrium market price can then be derived as the market
                                                                         1
clearing solution to the individuals' separate asset demand equations.




     1
       Feldstein (1978b) derives such a solution to the problem of va1ueing
equity shares when these are two classes of investors in very different tax
situations.
   - 14 -


References
