NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR SUPPLY ESTIMATES
FOR PUBLIC POLICY EVALUATION*

George J.

Borjas

James J. Heckman

Working Paper No. 299

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
November 1978

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in labor studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBR Working Paper 299
November 1978
LABOR SUPPLY ESTIMATES FOR PUBLIC POLICY EVALUATION
Abstract

In recent years, the study of labor supply has occupied the attention

of a large number of economists. With

the growth in interest in the topic

and with the inevitable diversity of economic models and statistical
methods proposed by new entrants in the field, the literature has developed

its own folklore. The principal legend is that the empirical estimates
of the same parameters obtained from the set of available studies display
such diversity that they are of little use to policy makers. This paper

disputes the folklore. We claim that there is more agreement than
disagreement once a few reasonable criteria based on recent theoretical
work are used to eliminate certain studies from

consideration, and once

we are careful about posing the question we seek the estimates to
address.

George J. Borjas
University of California
Department of Economics
Santa Barbara, California 93106
(805) 961—2753

James J. Heckman
Center for Advanced Studies in the
Behavioral Sciences
202 Junipero Serra Blvd.
Stanford, California 94305
(415) 321—2052

LABOR SUPPLY ESTIMATES FOR PUBLIC PdLICY EVALUATION
George J. Borjas and James J. Hecktnan*

In recent years, the study of labor supply has occupied the attention of a

great number of economists. Both the availability of new sources of data, and the
recurring desire of policy makers to be able to estimate the labor supply response
to alternative programs of welfare reform have combined to stimulate an immense
volume of theoretical and empirical work on the topic. Elaborate "experiments" have
been conducted in order to provide estimates of responses to social programs.
With the growth in interest in the topic and with the inevitable diversity of
economic models and statistical methods proposed by new entrants In the field, the

literature has developea its own tolkiore. Inc principal legend is that the
empirical estimates of the same parameters obtained from the set of available studies

display such diversity that they are of little use to policy makers. This argument
was advanced in defense of the enormous cost of collecting "experimental" data to
resolve the apparent ambiguity in the empirical evidence on labor supply behavior.
The fact that analyses of experimental data have produced a range of estimates
comparable in width to those produced by more traditional data sources apparently
only serves to strengthen the original observation.

This paper disputes the folklore. We claim that there is more agreement than
disagreement once a few reasonable criteria based on recent theoretical work are
used to eliminate certain studies from consideration, and once we are careful about
posing the question we seek the estimates to address.

I. The Use of Labor Supply Functions in Policy Analysis
The needs of policy analysis are very specific. The goal of the policy evaluator
is to estimate the response to programs that have been proposed but have never been

observed in operation. To make such estimates, it is necessary to adopt a model——
either explicitly or implicitly——in order to predict likely policy impacts.
Oie way to justify the widespread appeal of the negative income tax experiments

was that they offered a "model free" approach to the evaluation of policy. If an
"experiment" could be conducted that closely resembled a proposed program, no model

building was required in order to assess the impact of the program. As is evident
from the literature this hope was iflusory.1 It is now clear, especially in the
work of Hausman and Wise2, that experimental data require as much and possibly more
care in their analysis than traditional data, in large part because of initial
administrative decisions used to create samples and because of self—selection decisions

by experimental participants. It is now widely recognized that the experiments did
not and could not directly estimate the likely impact of a widespread long duration
negative income tax.
Like it or not, we are stuck with the need for a model to interpret data and to

make policy forecasts. However, no single model can be said to be universally accepted
by economists who work on labor supply. Nonetheless, the theoretical model that underlies most interpretations of data in this field is the neoclassical theory of consumer

choice under certainty. Most workers in the field adopt it as the starting point,
and indeed, it seems that every paper now written on the subject demonstrates to the
reader the point——already apparent to Hicks3——that the economics of time is a special

case of the theory of consumer choice. This is not to say that the basic model has
not been extended; indeed, there is a considerable volume of activity associated with

such extensions. However, we stick to the old model——on which considerable empirical
evidence has been accumulated——and do not shift to each new model that comes along
until evidence is accumulated that a new model is a genuine empirical improvement on
the old.

The working assumptions in the neoclassical model as conventionally applied in
practice are (1) that consumers face an exogenous gross wage rate (thus, tax rates,
equalizing differentials payments, and the like are ignored); (2) the appropriate
theoretical time dimension for the analysis is (conveniently) the one at the analyst's
disposal, e.g., annual hours of work, participation in a week, etc. (thus, life cycle

3

considerations

are ignored, as are interrelationships among different dimensions of

labor force activity); (3) labor supply behavior can be characterized by the classical
theory of consumer choice, complete with its optimality conditions that set marginal
benefits equal to marginal cost (thus, fixed costs, nonlinear budget sets, corner
solutions, and the like are ignored, and unemployment and uncertainty are neglected).
All of these assumptions have been challenged in new papers in the literature.
But because much of this work is so new, little consensus on empirical estimates from
the new models has emerged. In: our view, this lack of agreement is only a transitional

phenomenon. Unknown to most practitioners in the field, a consensus in fact exists in
the studies based on the conventional analysis.

It is by now well known that estimates from the neoclassical model can be used
to predict the labor supply response to social programs. For example, Masters and
Garfinkle4 and Ashenfelter5 demonstrate how estimates of the standard labor supply
function can be used to predict (a) participation in a negative income tax program,

and (b) the reduction in hours worked by participants. In view of this work, we
spare the reader a restatement of this point. Instead we ask the question "which of the
available

estimates should be used in such simulations?" In this regard, it is

helpful to focus attention on a few studies for prime age males enshrined in a survey

by Cain and Watts6 that are based on the traditional model. The labor

supply response

of prime age males is of central concern to policy makers and has received the most

attention in the empirical literature. For these reasons, as well as for the sake of
brevity, we focus attention on this group. The Cain—Watts estimates are presented in
Table 1. All of these studies share the following features in common: (a) they are
based on cross section survey data; (b) they are for prime age males (the Fleisher,
Parsons and Porter study is based on older. males 45—59, while the other studies are

more broadly based); (c) "cross effects" of wife's labor force activity on husband's
hours of work are ignored; (d) all studies focus on an annual measure of labor supply.

The diversity in the estimates is enormous. But how many of these estimates would

TABLE 1

LABOR SUPPLY ELASTICITIES FOR "PRINE AGE" MALESa

Author

1.

Ashenfe1ter—Hecknan
(in Cain—Watts)

Uncompensated
Wage Elasticity

—.15

Compensated Sub—
Etitution Elasticity

Total Incomeb
Elasticity

.12

.27

:—.07

.10

—.17

.

.

2.

Boskin

3.

Fleisher—Parsons—
Porterc

—.19

.04

—.23

4.

Greenberg—Kosters

—.09

.20

—.29

5.

Hall

—.18 to —.45

.06

6.

Hill

—.21 to —.34

.47 to

.52

—.68 to —.86

.55

.86 to

.96

—.31 to —.33

—.04 to .06

-.06 to -.12

.14

—.41

7. Kalachek—Raines

8. Masters_Garfinkled
9.

Rosen_Weiche

.01 to —.11
— .27

—.24 to —.51

aAdapted from Cain and Watts, Table 9.1, pp. 332—333. For references and descriptions
of the papers see Cain and Watts.

bThis is defined as W.(Th/Y) where W is the wage rate, (Dh/Y) is the effect of
a change in unearnod income on hours worked. See Cain and Watts.
CThese estimates (reported by Cain and Watts) are only one
reported in this study.

of

the many estimates

dmis study replaces Garfinkle's analysis in the Cain and Watts volume with
Garfinkle's latest estimate of these effects reported in Masters and Garfinkle, Table
5.7, p. 95.
is the estimate for urban workers using hourly wage rates and annual hours
worked (Table 1, Col. 1 of Rosen and Welch), rather thani the estimate reported by
Cain and Watts which was based on a regression of annual hours on weekly earnings.
As Rosen and Welch point out, this latter procedure leads to an upward bias in the
estimated wage effect.

we judge to be of interest in the light of recent work? To answer this question we
first introduce some new results from the literature.

II. A Summary of Recent Results
The neoclassical theory establishes a relationship between hours of work (h),

wage rates (W) and unearned income (Y). This relationship can be written for a
consumer who equates marginal benefits to marginal costs as:
h =

(1)

where

a0

+ a1W + ct2Y +E,

is a portmanteau variable of unobservables. Estimates of the parameters in

this function are required to perform the policy simulations mentioned earlier. All
of the studies listed in Table 1 purport to estimate
a1 and ct2.

It is Our contention

that for three reasons not all studies, in fact, estimate these parameters.
(a) Sample Inclusion Criteria and the Choice of the Dependent Variable
All of the studies listed in Table 1 claim that

is uncorrelated with W and Y.

But in many studies this claim is untenable. Consider, for example, the study by
Kalachek and Raines. In this study, households with income greater than twice the
Social Security Administration's low cost budget income level were excluded. The
rationale for this exclusion is that the authors seek to explore the labor supply

behavior of poor people. The implicit notion behind this restriction is a "culture of
poverty" concept——that poor people have different labor supply behavior than others,

and that poverty is a static concept.7 The work of McCall8 belies the second argument——
there is a lot of turnover in and out of poverty. The first argument may be correct,
but the authors run the risk of manufacturing selection bias by using only a sample of

poor men on which to estimate their functions.
To illustrate, suppose

is a random variable with mean zero in a random sample

of data. Restricting an empirical analysis to poverty samples, we select from a random
sample of men with identical values of W and Y those men with a lower than average value

of .

This is so since poverty is defined by total income I,

Holding W fixed and increasing Y, the average value of

must decrease for the selected

sample if consumption is a normal good. Moving across groups with the same Y, but
higher values of W, implies that the average value of

must decrease provided that

certain empirically plausible conditions hold.9 To summarize, a regression fit on

a selected sample may be written as
(2)

h =

+ ct1W + ct2Y + E(Iselectjon rule) + V

where "E(Elselection rule)" is the expected value of the unobservables for the selected

sample. This term decreases with Y and with W suggesting that estimates based on
"poverty samples" will tend to produce downward biased estimates of

a1 and a2 since

the analyst ignores how the sample is generated and hence omits the term "E( selection
rule)" from his equation. "VI' is uncorrelated with the other right—hand side
variables by construction.

The papers numbered [3], [4], [6], [7], and [9] in Table 1 present labor supply
estimates based on low income samples, and hence suffer from this bias.

Given the very

high income cut off employed in studies [3] and [4] we feel that the income truncation

problem is less pronounced in these studies. One cannot, a priori, say that there is
no merit in stratifying samples. People who are poor have different labor supply

behavior than others. Studies by Heckman1° and Burtless and Hausman reveal considerable
dispersion in preferences for work. However, inducing selection bias can manufacture
apparent differences in estimated labor supply parameters between rich and poor.
There is a related inclusion bias that affects the analysis in some of the other

papers: the choice. of dependent variable used in the empirical work. For example,

Hall seeks to explain the labor supply of all workers. If a worker does not work any
hours, he receives a zero in the Hall analysis and is pooled in the sample with
workers. As noted by Lewis'2, Ben—Porath13, and others, the

Participation function

differs structurally from that of the hours of work decision. The probability that
someone participates is P(W, Y). The effect of a change in W and Y on P is not the
same as the effect of a change in W and Y on h given in equation (l)J4 The hours of
work fUnction for workers is given by equation (2) with the selection rule being "some

work in the survey period."
The Hall paper essentially estimates a regression approximation to

+

h = P(W,

(3)

=

Hall's

+

estimates of

lw +

+

+ E(j"some work") + V)

+ v*

and 2 do not correspond to

and a2, respectively. His

estimates confound parameters of the participation function with the parameters of the

true structural hours of work Lunction. It is the latter that are required for policy
analysis.

15

Superficially, it would seem that this consideration is more important for the

labor supply of secondary workers than it is for the labor supply of prime age males
who have high participation rates. However, DaVanzo, DeTray and Greenberg16 demonstrate
that in their sample of prime age males, adding in "zero hours worked" observations
into the sample raises the estimated value of the wage effect on labor supply. Their
evidence is consistent with the notion that participation probabilities are related
to wage rates.

To summarize, there are two sources of bias: (a) "zero hours of work" observations
do not lie on the structural labor supply function, and (b) restricting estimates to
subsamples of individuals with positive hours of work may result in selection bias.
The

method proposed by Hall of pooling "zeros" with continuous observations has no

analytical justification,

and the evidence in DâVanzo et al suggests that estimates

based on his procedure overstate the true value of the structural wage elasticity.
A related point about sample inclusion bias can also be made about other definitions

of labor supply used in the literature. For example, the Masters and Garfinkle estimates
reported in Table 1 are based on a labor supply measure obtained by adding hours worked
to hours unemployed (or on strike) for labor force participants. This is an appropriate
measure only if individuals are surprised by involuntary unemployment (or strikes). An
alternative view of unemployment advanced by Lucas and Rapping17 views unemployment time
as another form of leisure activity so that only measured hours of work are relevant in

estimating labor supply functions. A third view of unemployment as search activity

advanced byBurdett and Mortensen18 suggests a separate equation for unemployment time.
There is no convincing evidence on which of these three views is correct.19
If, in fact, the behavioral function that characterizes unemployment differs from
that of hours worked, the Masters—Garfinkle estimates are a weighted average of the two

functions. This combined function is of little structural interest and certainly is not
a

basis for providing estimates of equation (1). This point highlights a glaring

omission in

the theoretical model currently used to evaluate policy——it ignores

unemployment. The model of Burdett and Mortensen provides the first step towards a
framework that accommodates labor supply and turnover behavior.

There is another source of sample selection that is somewhat more subtle. Studies
[4], [7], and [9] defined annual labor supply as annual weeks worked (or in the labor
force),

times hours worked in the week preceding the survey. As noted by DaVanzo et al

(pp. 95—96), if a worker did not work in the week preceding
are

estimated to be zero. If higher wage

survey

the survey his annual hours

workers are more likely to have worked in

the

week, this source of measurement error——or selection bias——results in an upward

biased estimate of the effect of wages on labor supply. DaVanzo et al present evidence
that this point is empirically relevant.20
(b) Use of Work Related Transfers as Unearned Income
Since the original observation by Mincer, economists have been warned against using
transfer payments and income transfers that are a result of labor supply choices as a

determinant of those choices. Such a procedure builds a spurious negative relationship

between income (as measured) and labor supply. Studies [6] and [9] include welfare
and unemployment payments in Y and

not

surprisingly estimate large negative income effects.

The remaining studies are not entirely clean on this point either. Since measured unearned
income is largely a consequence of past work effort, it is likely that it is correlated

with error "s" in equation (1). To purge this bias, Greenberg and Kosters (study [4])
and Ashenfelter and Heckman (study [1]) use instrumental variables in an attempt to
correct for any bias that results from this source.

(c) Measurement Error in W and Y

Survey data are ridden with error. It is well known that data on unearned income

is measured with error. Unless instrumental variable methods are used (or the measurement
error is somehow corrected) as in studies [1] and [4], the estimated value of the
income term is biased toward zero.
Studies [6], [7], [8], and [9] define the wage rate as the ratio of earnings (in

a time unit, usually a year) to labor supply. If labor suply is measured with error,
the effect of the use of this measure is to bias the estimate of

a, downward.

Other studies ([1], [2], [4], [5]) based on the Survey of Economic Opportunity

(SEO) data are not entirely free of measurement error either. The wage measure used
in these studies is constructed by dividing "normal" weekly earnings by actual hours

worked in the survey week. Apart from the fact that this variable is not available
for workers who supply no hours during the survey week, error is induced by transitory
fluctuations in hours of work in the survey week, biasing a1 toward zero.

In order to circumvent themeasurement error bias in wage rates, and to predict
missing values of the wage, some studies ([2], [5]) predict wages by running a
regression on the sample of workers for whom wage data are available to predict a wage
for observatiojis with missing values and for the balance of the sample as well. This

procedure seems attractive because it appears to solve two problems at once:

missing data problem, and (b) an error in variables problem.

(a) a

However, this claim is

quite misleading. For two reasons, such "instrumental" variable estimates mary, in fact,
be an important source of error. First, the wage data are missing nonrandomly. Low
wage individuals are the ones more likely to be missing from wage samples and hence the
imputation procedure overstates the missing wage. If hours of work are correctly measured,
the imputation procedure biases the estimate wage effect downward. Second, if the imputed
wage is divided into the earnings to estimate labor supply (as in [2] and [5]), any error
in measuring wages is transmitted to the dependent variable and hence the
coefficient has an additional downward bias.21

estimated

wage

III. Our Choice of Estimates: Uncertainty Reduced

In

our judgment, the evidence is sufficiently clear that studies [6] and [9]

should be eliminated from consideration as a source of estimates for policy analysis.
Both studies are based on "poverty samples" with the income inclusion criterion much

more stringent than that used in the other studies. Moreover, they both define wage
rates by dividing earnings by labor supply and hence induce a negative bias in the

estimated wage effect. Finally, both also include work determined transfers in the
measure of unearned income.

The study by Kalachek and Raines is unusual for its high estimated substitution

elasticity. This elasticity is based on a definition of labor supply that combines
the wage effect of participation with the wage effect on hours. For

reasons discussed

earlier, this estimate is of little interest in policy evaluation. Nonetheless, it is
much higher than that estimated by Boskin who also presents an estimated substitution

elasticity that combines the participation and hours decision. In our judgment, this
difference arises, in large part, from the stringent low income criterion employed by

Kalachek and Raines (and not employed by Boskin). Their criterion results in a sample
with a lower than average participation rate. Since much evidence suggests that the
participation—wage relationship is nonlinear (becoming virtually flat at very high
wage rates), it is not surprising to find a much greater estimated wage—participation

relationship in their analysis than in that of Boskin. These arguments lead us to drop
the Kalachek—Rajnes estimates from further consideration.
Eliminating these three studies greatly reduces the range in the estimates. The
study by Hall [6] appears discrepant. The most surprising comparison is the contrast
between his estimates and those presented by Boskin [2] which are based on almost

exactly the same data set. We believe this discrepancy arises from the manner in which

Cain and Watts chose to summarize the Hall study. They represent an evaluation of wage
effects for a given level of ("whole") income and family composition. The Boskin
estimates should be interpreted as a simple summary of Hall's estimates for the full

sample, in a format comparable to the other studies in the table. This observation
further narrows the range of uncertainty.

The Boskin study is based on a pooled sample of workers and non—workers. Thus
it estimates an equation like (3), combining participation and structural parameters.
However, in view of his virtually inelastic participation function, it is not surprising
to find that his estimates are closely in accord with the estimates for studies [1],

[3], and [4] that are essentially based on samples of participants. As expected,
his estimated wage effect is slightly more positive than that found in the three studies

just cited, but the difference is too slight to be taken seriously.
The only truly discrepant study remaining in the table is that of Masters and

Garfinkle. Their estimates are derived from two data sources: the SEC and the Panel
Survey of Income Dynamics (PSID). The estimates based on the PSID are dominated by

one extreme observation which when removed from the sample leads to agreement in the
estimates from the two samples. The SEQ based estimated income elasticity (— .06) and
uncompensated wage elasticity (.01) are larger than the remaining estimates in the table.
Much of this discrepancy can be traced to Masters and Garfinkle's definition of labor
supply as the product of weeks in the labor force times 40 if the observation normally
works "full time" or would like to work full time, or 20 if the individual voluntarily

works part time. This treatment of hours worked per week flattens the estimated
relationship between hours per week and wage rates——a relationship known to be negative
for the wage measures used by Masters and Garfinkle (see DaVanzo et al)—--and.hence

results in an upward bias in their estimated wage effect. Further, their measure gives
greater play to the weeks—wage relationship which is known to be positive. Similarly,
if unearned income reduces hours worked per week——as the theory predicts——their rather
unusual treatment of hours worked per week leads to an understatement of the wealth effect.
For these reasons, we drop the Masters—Garfinkle results from further consideration.
When this is done, the agreement in estimated elasticities is much closer than

is assumed to be the case. The range in uncompensated wage elasticities is from —.19

to —.07. The range for income elasticities is —.29 to —.17. These estimates imply
that the effect of a negative income tax of a $2400 income (1966 dollars) guarantee
and a 50 percent tax rate on covered male labor supply would be to reduce male labor
supply by 8 to 15 percent in covered families.

IV. Summary, Conclusions and Qualifications
This paper has demonstrated that independent estimates of prime age male labor
supply functions based on cross—section data display less diversity in the estimated

coefficients than is commonly assumed to be the case once a few reasonable criteria
are applied to evaluate existing studies.

We have focused our attention on the labor supply behavior of the group most

frequently analyzed——prime age males——and have deliberately kept tc he traditional
model most often utilized to interpret labor supply behavior. In choosing this
demographic group, and the most elementary model of labor supply, we have abstracted

from a host of problems discussed extensively elsewhere.22
Nonetheless, e find that the agreement among the reasonable estimate3 recorded
in Table 1 is remarkable especially in view of different samples used, treatment of

taxes, and control variables employed in the surviving studies. In our judgment, the
range of admissible estimates could be and will be further eliminated as the data,
theory, and empirical technique improve.

However, it is important to note that each study in our table can be faulted.
We have pointed out these flaws, and have eliminated the most flagrantly biased

estimates. We have not used all the criteria outlined in Section II to eliminate the
studies under consideration. The agreement in the remaining studies may arise either
from the lack of practical importance of the potential defects we have mentioned, or
because. of a happy coincidence of offsetting errors.

FOOT NOTES

*University of California, Santa Barbara; and University of Chicago and National

Bureau of Economic Research, respectively. In preparing this paper we have benefitted
greatly from three references: (a) the excl1ent general discussion by C. Cain and H.
Watts, Chapter 9; (b) an unpublished simulation study by J. DaVanzo, D. DeTray and D.
Greenberg; (c) a forthcoming survey by M. Killingsworth (references to each of these
studies is given in the text).
-

to

This research was supported by a NSF Grant SOC 77—27136

the National Bureau of Economic Research.
1. See J. Pechman and M. Timpane, Work Incentives and Income Guarantees

(Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1975).

2. J.

Ilausman and D. Wise, "Stratification on

Endogerious Variables and Estimation:

The Gary Income Maintenance Experiment" (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1977).
3. J. Hicks, Value and Capital, (Cambridge: Oxford University Press, 1939), p. 313.
4. S. Masters and I. Garfinkle, Estimating the Labor Supply Effects of Income—

Maintenance Experiments (New York: Academic Press, 1977), p. 217 ff.
5. 0. Ashenfelter,, "The Labor Supply Response of Male Wage Earners in the Rural
Negative Income Tax Experiment," in Welfare in Rural Areas, eds. J. Palmer and J. Pechman,

(Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1978).
6.

G. Cain and

H. Watts, Income Maiitenance and Labor Suppy (Chicago: Rand McNally,

1973), Chapter 9.

7. Ibid, p. 341.

8. J. McCall,

(Lexington,
9.

Income Mobility, Racial Discrimination and Economic Growth

Mass.: Lexington—Heath, 1973).

More precisely it is required that
< (C—Y)/W

—

a0

—

—

a1W

a2Y

where C is the cut off on earnings, C—Y >

for most observations. f a1 >0, the
statement in the text is correct. Otherwise, t need not be. For the studies considered
in this paper, the statement is plausibly correct. In the Kalachek—Raines study, C $8500
0

Is as small as —250 (a very small number in view
and mean Y is less than $1000. If
text is valid for wafle rates
of the estimates presented in Table 1) the statement in tile
high wage in the 1966 sample used by them. For wage

up to (roughly) $5.50 per hour——a
rates in excess of this amount,
value of

the effect of an in crease in W is to increaS. the mean

in the selected sample.

10. J. Heckman, "Effects of Child

Political

Econom

Care Pro'ramS
on Women's Work Effort," Journal of
0

(March/Apti11974) pp. Si36S163.
"The Effect of Taxation on Labor Supply: Evaluating

11. G. BurtlesS and J. Hausrlan,

the Gary Negative Income Tax

Experiment" (MassachusetsS Institute

12. H.G. Lewis, "On Income and

of TechnolOgY, 1977).

Substitution Effects in Labor Force Participation,"

(University of Chicago, 1967).

13. Y. Ben—Porath, "Labor Force

Participation Rates and the Supply of Labor,"

Journal of Political Economy, (June 1973), pp. 697—704.
14. J. Mincer, "Labor Force

Participation of Married Women:

A Study of Labor Supply,"

University Press,
in Aspects of Labor Economics, ed. H. G. Lewis (Princeton: Princeton
for P are the same
1962), has derived a model in which the wage and income parameters
assumptions. For a more
as for h. However, his model requires unacceptably strong
"A Partial Survey of Recent Research on the Labor
detailed discussion, see J. Heckman,

Supply of Women," American

Economic Review (May 1978), pp. 200—212.

15. Boskin estimates equation (2) and P(W, Y) separately. His

first

suffers from selection bias. The second does not yield policy parameters

equation thus

an his

Ashenfelter
combined estimates are of little structural (and hence policy) interest.
who iork and thus
of labor supply for individuals
and Heckman only report estimates
commit the same error as Boskin.

16. J. DaVanzo, D. DeTray and D.

Greenberg, "Estimating Labor Supply Response:

R—l3720EO, December 1973).
A SensitivitY Analysis," (Rand Corporation,
Inflation," in The
17. R. Lucas and L. Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment and
If1ation Theo, ed. E. Phelps (New York: Nortcr, 1969).
MicrofoundatiOflS of Employment and

18. K. Burdett and D. Mortensen, "Labor Supply Under Uncertaicity,"
(Northwestern University, 1977).
19.

Function

Recent work by F. Kalachek, W. Mellow and F. Raines, "The

Male Labor Supply

Reconsidered," Industrial and Labor Relation,3 Review (March 1978) presents

some preliminary tests between the first two models arid offers evidence in support of
both.

20. Some additional discussion of this problem is available in S. Sandell and
P. Koenig, "Measurement Error and Its Conseqtiences: The Case of Annual Hours of Work,"
(Ohio State University, 1978).

21. The labor supply function literature provides some of the best examples of the

misuse of the instrumental variables method available. It is alleged to be "ego tu
absolvo" of all error and empirical sin. As Cain and Watts note, application of the
method requires that certain variables that determine wage rates do not determine labor

supply. Often the exclusion criterion is quite arbitrary. Certain studies ([2], [5]),
exclude education from the supply function in order to use it as an instrument for wage

rates. One of the main findirgs in th DaVanzo et al analysis is that excluding
education from the hours of work function and using it as an instrument to predict wage
rates leads to an upward revision in the estimated wage coefficient.

22. M. Killingsworth, "Labor Supply: A Survey," (Princeton University, 1978).

