Capital Taxation and Accumulation
in a Life Cycle Growth Model
By LAWRENCE H. SLJMMERS*

Almost all of the serious economic work
on savings decisions within the past decade
has relied on some variant of the life cycle
hypothesis in which savings arise out of individual choices of an optimum lifetime consumption path. This paper reexamines the
incidence and welfare consequences of capital

income taxes within a realistic life cycle
model. The results suggest that the elimination of capital income taxation would have
very substantial economic effects. For example, a complete shift to consumption taxation
might raise steady-state output by as much
as 18 percent, and consumption by 16 percent. The long-run welfare gain from such a
shift would for plausible parameter values
exceed $150 billion annually. Stated somewhat differently, shifting to consumption
taxation would raise the lifetime utility of the
representative consumer by the equivalent of
about six years' income in the new steady
state. These estimates dwarf estimates of the
static welfare cost of taxation, and significantly exceed even extreme previous estimates of the dynamic loss.
This study departs from earlier analyses of

the effects of taxes on capital income in
several respects. Probably the most im-

savings are very interest elastic. This implies
that shifting away from capital income taxation would significantly increase capital formation, making possible long-run increases
in consumption.

Many studies of the welfare effects of
capital income taxation have ignored the
general equilibrium effects of increased
capital formation. In an economy with life
cycle savings, there is no presumption that
the undistorted growth path corresponds to

any sort of social optimum. As Peter
Diamond has shown, life cycle savings can
lead to a steady-state capital intensity either
greater or less than the Golden Rule level.
More generally, it is clear that there is no
reason to believe that a life cycle economy
will maximize any particular intertemporal
social welfare function. A fundamental tenet
of welfare evaluation is that preexisting distortions must be considered in evaluating the
consequences of tax changes. The results presented in this paper take explicit account of
the nonoptimal character of the no-tax steady
state. This explains in large part why such a

sizeable welfare effect of capital taxes is
found. In an economy far from the Golden

Rule level of capital intensity, there are sub-

portant difference between this treatment and
most preceding ones lies in the assumptions

stantial gains in steady-state consumption
achievable through increased capital forma-

about the interest elasticity of saving. It is
shown below that the common two-period
formulation of saving decisions yields quite

tion.

Section I of the paper examines the aggregate savings function in a continuous-time

misleading results. A more realistic model of

life cycle framework. The second section
clarifies the differences between wage and

life cycle savings demonstrates that, for a
wide variety of plausible parameter values,

consumption taxes. An aggregate production
function is added to complete the model in

the third section. The effects of changes in
capital taxes on both steady-state incidence
and welfare are considered within a general
equilibrium framework. The final section of
the paper discusses some implications of the
results and suggests areas which appear to
warrant further study.

Assistant professor of economics, Massachusetts In-

stitute of Technology, and research analyst, National
Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Alan
Auerbach, Martin Feldstein, Laurence Kotlikoff, to the
participants in the NBER Workshop on Business Taxation, and to the Harvard Public Finance Seminar for
useful discussions. James Poterba and James Buchal
performed the numencal calculations.
533

534

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

SEPTEMBER 198

I. The Aggregate Savings Function

implies a negative savings response. In thc
knife-edge Cobb-Douglas case where thi

In all studies of the effects of capital income taxation, the interest elasticity of the

elasticity of substitution is one, savingt

aggregate savings rate emerges as a key

parameter. This parameter is also central to
questions ranging from the potency of monetary policy to the appropriate discount rate
on public investments projects.' Both empirical and theoretical considerations have led
most economists to conclude that the interest
sensitivity of aggregate savings is likely to be

quite small. This section examines the implications of the well-known life cycle hypothesis for the interest elasticity of aggre-

gate savings. It is shown that the theory
when formulated realistically implies interest
elasticities well in excess of unity.
Most commonly, the impact of capital in-

come taxes has been considered within a
two-period framework, in which all income is
received within the first period.2 That is, the
representative individual is assumed to maxi-

mize an mtertemporal utility function of the
form U(C1, C2) subject to a lifetime budget
constraint:

(1)

C, +

= W,

where W1 represents labor income in the first

period. It can be shown3 that the interest
elasticity of savings depends on the elasticity

of substitution between present and future
consumption. If the elasticity is greater than
one, savings respond positively to the interest rate, while an elasticity less than one

are independent of the interest rate. Sinct
the last case seems reasonable, and theor)
does not offer an unambiguous verdict or

the sign of the interest effect, it is frequenti)

held that savings are likely to be interest

insensitive. This notion is supported by verba

reference to conflicting substitution and in
come effects. Martin Feldstein (1978) ha
shown that in a two-period setting, savingt
may be usefully viewed as expenditure or
future consumption. The case where saving

are insensitive to the interest rate occurt
when the price elasticity of demand for fu
ture consumption is one.

The usual two-period formulation of thi
savings decision obscures two importani
aspects of reality. In all modem theories,
saving is carried on to provide for futur
consumption. All savings are eventually dis

saved. Net positive savings arise only be

cause the young who save are more afflueni
and numerous than retired dissavers. In ordei

to realistically model the determination o

net savings, it is necessary to take account ol
the dissaving of older generations. This is not
usually done in two-period formulations ol
the problem which treat the savings decisior
as equivalent to the choice of C,.
The second difficulty with the usual two

period formulation is that it obscures thi

role of future labor income. In a multiperioc

setting, the endowment W, in equation (l
represents the present value of future laboi
income. When the interest rate rises, thi

endowment declines as future income is mort
'Michael Boskin discusses the implications of the

heavily discounted. Even in the Cobb-

interest elasticity of savings for several aspects of capital

Douglas case where the consumption pro
pensity out of wealth is independent of tht
interest rate, consumption will fall as tht
interest rate rises through what might bc

accumulation. He finds that even an elasticity of .4 can
have an important impact. The analysis below suggests
.4 is likely to be a significant underestimate of the true
elasticity.

2ptions include David Levhari and Eytan

Sheshinski, and Robert Hall. Levhari and Sheshinski's
analysis is confined to a partial equilibrium framework.

Hall's study parallels this one in many respects but

called a human wealth effect.4 With income

constant, an increase in savings is implied
Since savings represent only a small fractior

reaches radically different conclusions about the welfare
consequences of capital taxes. Using a life cycle model

without retirement, he does conclude that aggregate
savings are likely to be quite interest elastic on grounds
quite similar to those considered here.
3The two-period consumption savings decision is extensively discussed in Martin Feldstein and S. C. Tsiang.

4lhis terminology may be somewhat misleading. In
creases in the interest rate to reduce the value of con
sumers' endowment measured in terms of first-perio
consumption. However, in general, they broaden the se
of feasible consumption paths and raise welfare.

VOL. 71 NO.4

SUMMERS: CAPITAL TA IA TIONAND ACCUMULA liON

of income, even a small effect on consumption can translate into a large effect on savings.

In order to realistically take account of

problem becomes

(3)

human wealth and the difficulties of aggregation, it is necessary to formulate a model in

JTC7 _8tth_A[fTC,etdt

fTwe(_r)1dt] if 1o

which many generations coexist at any instant. This is most easily done in continuous
time. Models of.the type outlined below have
been used by James Tobin, Hall, M. J. Farrell and Laurence Kotlikoff to explore vanous aspects of life cycle savings. Let us first
consider individual and then aggregate savings.

Individuals choose a consumption plan to
maximize an intertemporal utility function,
subject to a lifetime budget constraint.

max ITU(c)_atd

(2)
subject to

fTc_rid fTW -rid,
where T represents the certain date of death,5

—St

fTlogCte

order to render the problem tractable, I adopt

a constant elasticity utility function,6 and
assume that at any instant all workers receive

the same wage which rises exponentially at

rate g.7 With these assumptions the Lagrangian for the individual maximization
51n this paper, perfect certainty is assumed
throughout. Robert Merton has demonstrated in a continuous-time framework that allowing for uncertainty
does not alter the character of the optimal intertemporal
consumption plan. However, it might importantly affect
the analysis of tax changes, which alters both the return
and risk from savings.
6The constant elasticity utility function with a con-

stant discount rate is capable of generating smooth
consumption paths with any slope. It is not clear that
the additional range of behavior admitted by more
general utility functions is very plausible. In any event a

"dt

1T Woe(S_')tdt] if y=O

where y is the elasticity of the marginal
utility function. The expression l/(l —y)
corresponds to the intertemporal elasticity Of
substitution in consumption. Solving the individual maximization problem (3) yields the
conditions:

(4a) C1 = Coel(r_S)/(I ))1
(4b) C0 =

T' the age of retirement, 8 is a discount
factor, and W represents labor income. In

d:_X[JTC,e

—14 ( f:!.

) —r]

(er_a)/_)_1.)T_ l)(g—r)

It is clear from (4) that the slope of the
age-consumption profile rises with the interest rate, with the sensitivity depending on y.
In order to find aggregate consumption, it is
necessary to aggregate over the consumption
of all persons alive at a point in time. Using
equations (4) the consumption of persons of

each age can be calculated as a function of
their initial wage. The relative number of
persons of each age depends on the population growth rate n. The larger is n, the greater
the fraction of the population which is young.

By adding up consumption at each age,
weighted by relative population size, and initial wage W0, total consumption of the population may be calculated.
From aggregate consumption, it is possible

to calculate the savings rate out of labor

"smooth" consumption stream is a central assumption
of all life cycle theories of savings.
'It would be desirable to explicitly incorporate an

income using the steady-state assumption.

instantaneous age earnings profile. However, Alan
Blinder argues that because the profile rises and then

(5)

declines after about age 50, the approximation adopted
here is not likely to be too inaccurate.

where n is the rate of population growth.

Steady-state growth implies that

(n+g)KwL+rK—c=s

536

SEPTEMBER 1981

THEAMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

Solving equation (5) it is apparent that

TABLE 1— THE INTEREST ELASTICITY
OF ADGEEGATE SAVINGS

IC
'6'
" /

WL

Substituting

Valueofr

r—n—g

,

for C/WL in (6) yields the ag-

S/WL

7=0
si.,

S/WL

__=(.r_.-_r'(e(g_r)T'_l
WL
l—y /'
x (e

)—a—n)T_ l)(n)(n+g)

7=—.5

s,

S/WL
y=—I

,

S/WL

.08

3.71
.121

2.26
.274

2.44

3.36
.068

1.89

1.87

3.09
.049

1.71

2.87
.038

1.59

2.38
.028

1.45

.048

.122
.063

S/ WL

.741

1.09
.019

1.18
.025

7= —5

({__n_g](g_r)(eE_1)T_l)

.142
.096
.073

= —2

s,

÷

.06

7=.5

gregate savings function:

(7)

.04

I,

S/WL

.014

•

.451

.210
1.54
.135
1.37
.099

Note: The calculation assumes n = .015, g .02, T' = 50,

x(1_e_NT')(r_n_g) — n+g

T=40, and 8=03. The savings rate is measured as a
fraction of labor income.

r—n—g

It is noteworthy that (7) shows that the life
cycle hypothesis gives rise to a steady-state
aggregate savings function which may be
represented by a variable propensity to save
out of labor income, and a zero-savings propensity out of capital income. The life cycle
hypothesis thus gives rise to a savings func-

The results universally support a high interest elasticity. In the plausible logarithmic
utility case, the interest elasticity of the savings rate varies from 3.36 at 4 percent to 1.87

at 8 percent. This case also generates the

most reasonable values for the aggregate sav-

ings rate. The table demonstrates the unimportance of the elasticity of substitution

tion which is quite different than that usually
assumed in growth models which allow dif-

between present and future consumption. For
example, at an interest rate of .06, the elastic-

ferent savings propensities out of different

ity of saving varies only from 2.26 when

types of income.

y= 1/2 to 1.09 when y= —5. The insensitivity of the elasticity to the level of y reflects
the fact that the "reduction in human wealth"
effect is much more important that the substitution effect of interest changes. The basic

It is clear from (7) that the relationship
between savings and the interest rate is complex and depends on all of the other parameters in the model. In Table 1 the savings rate,
defined as S/ WL, and interest elasticity of
aggregate savings 17r' evaluated at various

conclusion, a significant long-run interest

elasticity of aggregate savings, is quite robust

plausible parameter values. It is assumed that

to changes in all of the parameter values.
While very low values of y could generate

population grows at a 1.5 percent per an-

low or even negative savings elasticities, they

values of the interest rate, are reported for
num, productivity increases by 2 percent per

would also give rise to unrealistic savings

annum, and that individuals live fifty-year
economic lives with retirement at age 40.
Somewhat arbitrarily, a 3 percent utility dis-

propensities, unless the other parameter values are set to implausible levels. Almost any
plausible life cycle formulation is likely to

count factor was chosen.

imply a high long-run elasticity of savings

VOL. 71 NO.4

SUMMERS: CAPITAL TAXATIONANDACCUMUL4TJON

with respect to the interest rate. It seems fair
to conclude that two-period analyses of the
effects of capital taxes are likely to be quite
misleading. Efforts to use empirical savings
elasticities to estimate elasticities of substitution between present and future consumption are very misguided, unless the "human
wealth effect" is explicitly considered.
So far it has been assumed that saving is
motivated only by the desire to provide for
retirement consumption. This assumption has

been challenged by Kotlikoff and myself

537

specification error,9 there is an important
reason to expect interest rate effects in usual
empirical specifications to differ from those
calculated here. At issue here is the change in

the savings rate out of income when the
interest rate changes. Usually, in empirical
work, wealth is held constant. Since interest
rate changes exert their effect in part through
changes in wealth, this procedure is likely to

obscure the impact of interest rates. The
importance of this question is apparent in
Boskin's careful study of the interest elasticity of savings. Its results imply a direct sav-

(1979). We suggested that the life cycle hypothesis could account for only a relatively
small fraction of total savings. Our results
indicate that a significant fraction of capital
formation is motivated by a desire to leave
bequests. Assuming that consumers bequeath

ings elasticity of about .4, with respect to
interest rate changes, and about 2.8 with
respect to changes in wealth. Thus, if the
interest elasticity of wealth is .5, the "full
effect" interest elasticity of savings is 1.9,

would not have any important impact on the

which is within the range suggested here.
The discussion in this section establishes a

a constant proportion of lifetime income

results. Robert Barro has shown that if bequests arise from maximization of a utility
function in which the utility of future generations appears as an argument, the intertemporal decision problem is radically altered.
Essentially, this case is equivalent to treating
each consumer as if he had an infinite horizon, since he internalizes the welfare of fu-

prima facie theoretical case for a high interest elasticity of savings. This conclusion ap-

ture generations. Miguel Sidrauski has shown
that, in this case, the long-run savings rate is
infinitely interest elastic as the capital stock
is always driven to a "modified Golden Rule"
level. Thus allowing for such bequests would
strengthen the conclusions reached here.

tively on the interest rate, which yields pathological results in many models, can legitimately be ruled out. A high interest elasticity
of savings has important implications for
almost all questions bearing on capital accu-

Interest elasticities of savings as high as

those reported in Table 1 appear at first
blush to be flatly contradicted by the available empirical studies which have found only
small interest rate effects. Beyond the standard problems of errors in variables,8 an

pears to follow almost ineluctably from a
realistic life cycle

' This implies
that the frequent assumption of a constant
savings rate in analyses of economic growth

may be quite inaccurate. It also indicates
that the case w'here savings depend nega-

9Life cycle theories imply that the age structure of
the population, the rate of growth of output, life expectancy, and expected retirement age all affect the
savings rate. None of these variables has been included
in time-series savings equations.
'°If all wealth were held in the form of consols, the
elasticity would be one; if it were all held in short assets,

it would be zero. Common stock fluctuations which
"Typically, studies have used the nominal interest
rate as a measure of the return on savings. Only Boskin
has used the more appropriate real after-tax rate. Even
this series is flawed because the long-term interest rate
accurately reflects the return on only a small part of
savings. Satisfactory measures of the expected return on
equity, homes, and durable goods are nonexistent. Since

the interest rate has been fairly highly correlated with
income and wealth over the past forty years, even small
errors in interest rate measures could cause very significant underestimation of interest rate effects.

account for most of the variation in wealth are known to
be caused by interest rate changes. The simplest valuation model in which the P-E ratio is set equal to the
interest rate would imply an elasticity of one. Of course,
with changes in taxes, and pretax profitability the actual
situation is much more complex. The assumption of a .5
elasticity seems conservative.
"A fuller effort to reconcile the theoretical calculations with the empirical evidence may be found in my
earlier paper which treats issues surrounding the short-

run response of savings to both transitory and permanent changes in the interest rate.

531

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

mulation. Its impact on estimates of the incidence and welfare consequences of capital
taxation are examined in some detail in succeeding sections of this paper.
IL Mtematlves to Capital Taxation

It is widely believed that taxation of labor
income is equivalent to consumption taxation as long as there are no bequests. This
section demonstrates the extremely restricted

SEPTEMBER1981

match the path of income. Since the timing
of tax collection is very different under wage
and consumption taxes, they have very different effects on savings. Savings at an instant t are the difference between income
and consumption. Hence with consumption
taxation savings may be written as

(10)

S,=W+rA1—

--

sense in which this proposition is correct,
and shows that wage and consumption taxa-

while under wage taxation savings are

tion in a general equilibrium setting have
different effects in both the short and long
run.'2 It follows that even if consumption
taxation is optimal, replacing capital taxes
with taxes on labor income may not be de-

(11)

sirable.
The sense in which consumption and labor
income taxation are equivalent is easily dem-

onstrated by specifying the individual's
budget constraint in each case. With wage
taxation the budget constraint is

(8) fTC_rid frw(lt)_rtdto
The budget constraint with consumption
taxation takes the form

(9)

frce_rtdrfTwe_rtdt=0
0
0

where t is the ad valorem tax rate on consumption. It is apparent that if t =1L' the
two tax regimes offer consumers equivalent

choice sets, and, in a present value sense,
raise equal revenues. Since consumers have
the same opportunity set, they will choose
the same optimal consumption path under
each regime. It is in this restricted sense that
wage and consumption taxes may be said to
be equivalent.
In a life cycle setting, savings arise because

S=(1—tL)+rA,—C,

Quite clearly there is no reason why these
expressions need be equal period by period.
Consumption taxation extracts revenue later
in the individual's lifetime than does wage
taxation and so causes more savings in the
younger years. The difference in the aggregate savings rate between the two types of
taxes depends on the age structure of the
population. But it is clear from (10) and (11)

that there is no a priori reason to expect
equal savings rates.

Equations (9) and (10) illustrate an im-

portant property of consumption taxation. It
is completely neutral with respect to the sav-

ings rate. It is clear from (9) that for any

t

homothetic utility function along the optimal
path Ce/I — will be the same for any value
of t. This implies, using (10), that savings at
all ages and hence aggregate savings are also

unaffected by the tax rate. Equation (11)
shows that this property does not hold for
taxes on wage income, since the time path of
savings is altered. In fact, as the results in the
next section demonstrate, wage taxation significantly reduces capital intensity relative to
consumption taxation.

the desired consumption stream does not

A second important difference between
wage and consumption taxation lies in the
government budget constraint. The usual
argument demonstrating the equivalence of

'2FeIein (l9lSb) has examined the transition away
from capital taxation. His analysis underscores the importance of compensating the older generation in shifting to consumption taxation, but does not emphasize the
different effects of consumption and wage taxation in
the long run.

wage and consumption taxation assumes that
the government raises the same present value
of re ienue from each individual under both
regimes. A somewhat plausible requirement
is that in each period the government raises

VOL. 71 NO.4

SUMMERS: CAPITAL TAXA TIONAND ACCUMULATION

the same amount of revenue from the total
population under each tax.'3 If G is the government's revenue requirement, the budget
constraint under wage taxation is

539

run to regard consumption and labor income
taxation as equivalent even in the absence of

bequests. Since they give rise to different
age-savings patterns, they do not have the
same effect on steady-state capital intensity,

(12)

fT_nsw(1)dsG

Of equal importance, the rates which are
necessary to meet a constant government
budget constraint will differ between the two

taxes. In the next section, both wage and
while under consumption taxation the constrarnt is

fCj-ds=G
equations do not imply that tr =
The reason for this is straightforward. The
These

individual is discounting at rate r in calculating the present value of taxes paid at different ages. On the other hand, the government
in steady states implicitly discounts at n, the

rate of population growth. As long as r>n,
the government can meet its budget constraint, and reduce the present value of the
taxes each individual must pay by postponing the extraction of taxes. As noted above,
consumption taxes postpone tax payments
relative to wage taxes. Hence, with consump-

tion taxation it is possible to reduce the
steady-state present value of taxes paid by
the representative individual.
Feldstein (1978b) has observed that wage
and consumption taxes involve quite different transition paths. To see this, consider the

sudden imposition of a consumption tax.
Consumers of all ages are equally affected.
On the other hand, imposition of a wage tax
has no effect on the retired segment of the
population. Loosely speaking, the consumption tax is less burdensome on workers in the
steady state, because it taxes more heavily
those who are alive at the moment when it is
imposed.
The analysis in this section indicates that
it is inappropriate in either the short or long
'3David Bradford emphasizes the importance of this
"balanced budget" requirement He argues that without

such a requirement the government by running surpluses or deficits can control the level of the capital
stock given any tax structure. The "real world" feasibil-

ity of this sort of policy seems unclear.

consumption taxes are considered as alternatives to capital income taxation,
Ill. Steady-State Comparisons
of Tax Alternatives

In this section, the effect of replacing
capital income taxes with wage and consumption taxes is examined by comparing
steady states. In order to make a general
equilibrium comparison of tax alternatives, it

is necessary to join a production side to the
life cycle savings model examined in the first
section. James Tobin and Robert Hall have
shown this can be done diagramatically.
Above, it was shown that life cycle savings

gives rise to a savings-labor income ratio
which is a function of the interest rate. Under the steady-state assumption, this can be
readily converted into a capital-labor income
ratio by dividing by the growth rate. This is
represented by the SS curve in Figure 1. The
production function also implies a relationship between the capital-labor income ratio
and the interest rate. This is plotted as PP in
Figure 1. (In the Cobb-Douglas case it is a
rectangular hyperbola.) In the no-capital tax
case, equilibrium occurs where the curves
cross. Now consider the effect of imposing a
tax on capital income. This drives a wedge
between the gross interest rate determined by

the production function and the net rate
received by savers. The new equilibrium occurs where the difference between the interest rate along the PP and SS curves is equal
to the tax. It is clear from the figure that as

long as savings respond positively to the

interest rate, imposition of a capital tax raises

the gross return and reduces the net return
on capital. Hence capital taxes will be partially but not completely shifted,
The characteristics of a steady state can be

calculated numerically by finding the value

540

THEAMEPJCAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

SEPTEMBER 19

cent evidence (see the 1980 paper by Fek
stein and myself) suggests that inflation ha
substantially raised the effective rate of a

K

WL

these taxes. A value of .5 for the capita
income tax rate seems conservative on th
basis of these considerations)5 A tax rate c
.2 on labor income is also assumed. Thes

assumptions imply that government revenue
equal 27.5 percent of GNP, which is withii
the empirically reasonable range.
The model was solved for the steady stat
PP

—* r

0
Fioutta I

of K for which
14)

S(FL(1—tL),FK(1—tK))

n+g

K

—
—

where S(•) represents the aggregate savings

function provided in (7). Once the steadystate value of K is found, the levels of output
and consumption as well as factor prices can
be found from the steady-state condition (5)
and the production function.
In calculating the effects of tax changes, it

is necessary to make assumptions about
parameter values. The parameters of the savings function are the same as those assumed

above. In the results reported below, logarithmic utility (y=0) is assumed. As will be
shown, the main conclusions are not sensitive to this assumption. Tax changes are
analyzed with elasticities of substitution in
production of 1 and 1/2.14 In each case,
parameters of the production function were
chosen so that the capital share was .25. The
appropriate value of the tax rates is not easy
to determine. The capital tax is presumed to

represent the combined effect of corporate
taxes, individual income taxes on dividends
and interest income, and property taxes. Re'4These numbers represent bounds on the true elasticity. Cross-section estimates typically imply that a is
close to 1, while time-series estimates suggest an elasticity close to 1/2. Robert Lucas, after contrasting these
approaches, concludes that the time-series estimates are
to be preferred.

under this tax regime. The steady state wa

then recalculated with the capital tax re
placed by a wage tax with exactly equa

revenue yield and with both the interest am
labor income taxes replaced by a consump
tion tax. Thus, all the analysis here is carrim

out within a differential incidence frame
work, in which alternative sources of tht
same amount of government revenue art
contrasted. Representative results are pre

sented in Table 2.
It is interesting to note that the base calcu

lation shown in column I corresponds quiu
accurately to the actual American economy

The gross of tax return on capital in botI

cases mirrors the average return on capital ol
11 percent estimated by Feldstein and mysell
(1977). The savings rate of about 8.5 percenl
is close to the historical rate.

The shift away from capital taxation has

very substantial effects. In the Cobb-Douglas

case, steady-state income rises by about 14
percent if wage taxation is used and 18 per.

cent with consumption taxation. The increase in income occurs because the high

interest elasticity of savings leads to a large

increase in capital intensity. Indeed the

capital-output ratio rises by almost 75 percent in the consumption tax solution. This
increase drives down the gross return on

capital from 10.5 to 6.1 percent. Conse-

quently the owners of capital do not benefit
greatly from the removal of the capital tax.

On the other hand, the increase in capital

intensity raises the gross wage. The increase
'51t is the effective marginal rate which is at issue
here. This will depend critically on the method of financing of marginal investment. Joseph Stigjitz has
argued that complete debt financing at the margin would

imply a zero effective rate. This view has been challenged by Feldstein, Jerry Green, and Sheshinski, among
others.

VOL. 71 NO.4

541

SUMMERS: CAPITAL TAXATIONANDACCUMUL.4TION

TABLE 2—COMPARISON OF STEAJ)Y STATES: INCOME, PAYROI.L, AND CONSUMPTION TAXES

Current System

Payroil Tax

Con-

Percent

Percent

sumption Tax

(1 —2)

(I —3)

(0=1) (o=1/2) (0=1) (o=l/2) (o= 1) (0=1/2)
0.112
0.056
2.018

0.069
0.069

0.800

1.614

0.788

1.334

2.84!

1.541

0.856
2.373
0.083

1.769

0.977
3.652
0.128

RG
RN

0.105
0.053

i3'6
WN

Y/L
C/L

K/Y
S/Y

1.000

1.155

2.589
0.091

(o= 1) (o1/2) (0= I) (o 1/2)
—53.7
14.3

—66.3

18.3

22.4

40.0

44.0

18.3

11.2
10.0

0.056
0.056
2.526
2.526
2.179

—42.4
26.1
14.4
—1.6

—51.9

1.604
3.111
1.928

0.061
0.061
1.202
1.202
1.604
1.004

14.4

9.1

1.955

13.1

3.375
0.118

4.117
0.144

3.653
0.128

42.4
42.4

8.6
26.4
26.4

15.9
53.7
53.7

0.066
0.066
2.420

16.2
18.1
—0.6

0.4

34.1

34.1

Note: These calculations assume n0.015, g=0.02, 7=0.001, and that rw 0.2 and r,0.5 in the current system.

is large enough to almost completely offset
higher taxes on labor income. The net wage

where TN = r( I — 1K) the

net interest rate, and
human wealth H is given by

falls by less than 1 percent when capital
taxes are replaced by the payroll tax.
Since the gross rate of return in the equilibnum with capital taxes is well above the
Golden Rule level, steady-state consumption
is increased as capital intensity rises. When

capital taxes are replaced by wage taxes,

consumption rises by 14.2 percent, while it
rises by 17.1 percent with consumption taxes.

Of course these gains cannot be interpreted
as a measure of the steady-state welfare increment from eliminating capital taxes. The
appropriate criterion is the utility of thtrepresentative individual.
The steady-state change in the welfare of

the representative individual can be expressed as a fraction of lifetime income as
follows. In a steady state, individual welfare
V is given by

)(e_rN)T —1)
(17) H= W( l1L(g—
TN)
Welfare V can be compared across alternative steady-state paths. However, in order to
yield a meaningful result, it is necessary to
express the welfare difference in operational

units. This may be done most easily by
calculating the percentage change in lifetime
earnings in the base steady state which would

be necessary to yield the welfare level
reached in the altered steady state. To do
this, it is necessary to solve the equation:

(18) v(HI(l+L),Tfl=v(H2,T)
for L, which is a measure of the welfare
difference between the two steady states. Un-

V=JTCTe_atdt

like most welfare loss calculations this ap-

proach does not rely on differential approximations. It is accurate for changes of

Substituting using equation (4) yields an
expression for lifetime utility as a function of
lifetime income, H, and the net interest rate.

(16) V(H,rN)=H

(rN-8)T

(e _i —1)
<

(eT—l)(y—1)
'((TN —6)

any

Table 3 presents the steady-state welfare
gains from the tax changes, outlined above
for alternative utility and production functions. The results indicate the potential for
large gains from eliminating capital taxes. In
the intermediate case, where y=O, instituting

a payroll tax would raise welfare by the
'6Cien and Shesbinaki have demonstrated the danger
of extrapolating differential approximation to tax effects
over large ranges.

542

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

SEPTEMBER 19

T.ai 3—TuE STEADY-STATE WELFARS COST OF CAPITAL INCOME TAXATION

y0.5

y=0.001

,=—I

Percentage Change in Steady-State Consumption

Payroll Taxation
Consumption Taxation

12.7

Payroll Taxation
Consumption Taxation

6.1
6.5

(0=1)
13.1
15.9

14.0

13.3
17.4

(0=)
8.6

12.9
17.2

10.0

Welfare Gain (expressed as a percentage of lifetime income)

Payroll
Consumption

7.0

(o=l)
49

11.2

11.7

Payroll
Consumption

3.8
6.2

1.4
11.6

(0=)
3.5

1.1

9.4

16.2

Note: Calculated assuming that n0.015, g0.02, and that t,=0.2 and 4=0.5 in the current system.

equivalent of almost 5 percent of lifetime

duces the present value of the taxes eac]

income, while consumption taxes would raise

individual pays during his lifetime. This (X
curs because the tax burden is increased 01
those alive during the transition to consumç

welfare by about 12 percent, or almost five
years' earnings. Applying these figures to

American aggregates yields huge annual
flows, about $80 billion in the former case

tion taxation. Hence the steady-state cots
parison may be a poor indicator of the ci

and approximately $200 billion in the latter.
These large gains are smaller than the gains

ficiency advantages of consumption taxation

in steady-state consumption shown in the
top half of the table. This is because the
increase in the net interest rate leads individ-

uals to consume later in their lifetimes, reducing the increases in welfare. There are
two reasons why the welfare gain tends to be
smaller for lower values of y. First, a lower
value of y implies a lower savings elasticity,

and hence less gain from approaching the

Golden Rule. Second, a small 1' implies only

a small distortion of the shape of the consumption path.

A very surprising feature of the results is
the large difference in steady state welfare
between consumption and wage taxes. For
example, in the Cobb-Douglas y 0 case, the
steady-state gain in welfare arising from
shifting from labor to consumption taxation
approaches $100 biffion a year. The greater
welfare under consumption taxes occurs for
two reasons. As noted in the previous section, capital intensity is higher with consumption taxes, which raises welfare by mak-

ing possible a higher level of steady-state
consumption. The second reason is probably

more important. Consumption taxation re-

The calculations presented here indicat
that partial equilibrium calculations of th4
welfare consequences of capital taxes an
likely to be very misleading. Such calcula
tions focus on the welfare loss which take
place because the taxation of interest distort
the shape of the consumption profile. Th

results here indicate this effect is of oni'

minimal importance. Since in a realistic lifi
cycle model, savings are very interest elastic

changes in capital taxes have only a smal
effect on the net interest rate. Thus partial
equilibrium analysis by assuming a constan
gross interest rate greatly overstates the im
portance of intertemporal substitution ef
fects.

The important effect of removing capita
taxes on welfare is not captured in partial
equilibrium analyses. The large increase is
capital which results raises real wages anc
leads to a larger level of sustainable con
sumption. It is the interaction of increasec
capital intensity with the preexisting distor

tion of a significant divergence from th

Golden Rule, which causes the removal ol
capital taxes to lead to such large gains is
these calculations.

VOL. 71 NO.4

SUMMERS: CAPITAL TAXATION AND ACCUMUL4 TION

There are two potentially important difficulties with the analysis. First, no allowance
is made for variable labor supply. The distortion of the labor-leisure choice is not considered in evaluating the welfare consequences
of wage taxation. It seems unlikely that re-

laxing the assumption of inelastic labor
supply would alter the results in an important way. The general equilibrium effects
described above imply that shifting to wage

taxation changes real wages only slightly.

Hence, labor supply is likely to be little
affected. Allowing for intertemporal variation in labor supply might actually increase

the estimated gain from reducing capital
taxes. Similar conclusions apply to consumption taxation.

Second, the analysis here is confined to
steady-state comparisons. Higher steady-state
consumption is achieved only at the expense

of consumption during the transition to the
new steady state. Hence, the costs of transition must be weighed against the long-term
gain. This issue is considered in my 1979
paper where the transition path following the

elimination of capital income taxation is
simulated numerically. It is shown there that

convergence to a new steady state is quite
rapid, and that at plausible discount rates,
the gain far exceeds the transition cost. It is
also demonstrated that it is possible to reform taxes in a Pareto-superior way; that is,
so that all those alive on or after the day of
the changeover are made better off.
IV. Conclusions

The results in this paper suggest that the
welfare cost of capital income taxation may
have been seriously underestimated. For reasonable parameter values, the annual welfare
gain from a shift to consumption taxation is

conservatively estimated at 10 percent of
GNP. This surprising conclusion emerges
from an examination of tax effects in the
context of a realistic life cycle growth model.
The large estimates reported here differ from

previous estimates for two main reasons.
First, the multipenod model used here suggests that a very high interest elasticity of
savings is likely to obtain for almost any
reasonable parameter values. Second, the

543

estimates in this paper incorporate the general equilibrium effects of tax changes. The
most important of these is the increase in
gross wages which results from the increased
capital intensity arising from eliminating
capital taxation.
The model used in this study, while more
realistic than the conventional two-period
formulation, could usefully be extended in

several directions. The discussion in this
paper ignores the financing of investment. In
effect it assumes that all investment is equity

financed at the margin. Recently Joseph

Stiglitz has suggested that the corporate tax
may in reality be a lump sum tax, as corporate investment is completely debt financed
at the margin. If this controversial conclusion is correct, it is clear that the analysis
here greatly overestimates the welfare cost of
capital taxes. The results in this paper underscore the importance of empirical and theo-

retical research bearing on the effective
marginal tax rate on capital income.
This analysis has not considered differen-

tial taxation of different types of capital.
Alan Auerbach has shown that optimality
does not dictate uniform tax rates if overall
capital intensity is not at the Golden Rule
level. It would be useful to extend the current analysis by examining a corporate tax
which falls on only some of the capital used
in production.
While these extensions would be valuable,
it is unlikely that the basic conclusion of this
analysis would be altered. Capital income
taxes are likely to appear very undesirable in
any sort of realistic life cycle formulation. A
question of central importance is the realism
of the life cycle hypothesis. While its implica-

tion of a high interest elasticity of savings
may seem implausible, it is the only framework currently available for evaluating com-

peting tax policies. Examining its realism
and/or devising an alternative to it seems a
necessary prerequisite to a fuller understanding of the effects of capital taxation.

REFERENCES
A. Auerhach, "Optimal Taxation of Heterogenous Capital," unpublished paper, Harvard
Univ. 1978.

544

THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW

R. Barro, "Are Government Bonds Net
Wealth?," J. Pout. Econ., Nov./Dec. 1974,
82, 1095—117.

Alan Blinder, Toward an Economic Theory of

Income Distribution, Cambridge, Mass.
1974.

M. J. Boskin, "Taxation, Saving and the Rate
of Interest," J. Pout. Econ., Apr. 1978, 86,
S3—S27.

D. F. Bradford, "The Economics of Tax Policy

Towards Savings" in George von Furstenberg, ed., The Government and Capital Formation, 1980.

P. A. Diamond, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model," Amer. Econ.

SEPTEMBER 1981

published paper, Harvard Univ. 1976.

R. Hall, "Consumption Taxes Versus Income Taxes: Implications for Economic
Growth," Proc. Nat. Tax Assn., 1968,
125—45.

L. Kotlikoff, "Social Security and Capital Ac•

cumulation," unpublished paper, Univ.

California-Los Angeles 1977.
______ and L. Summers, "Tax Incidence in a

Life Cycle Model with Variable Labor
Supply," Quart. J. Econ., Nov. 1979, 93.

705—18.
_______ and _______, "The Role

of Intergener
ational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Ac
cumulation," J. Pout. Econ., forthcoming

Rev., Dec. 1965, 55, 1126—50.

D. Levhan and E. Sheshinski, "Lifetime Excess

505— 16.

Jan/Feb. 1972, 80, 139—47.
R. Lucas, "Labor-Capital Substitution in US,
Manufacturing," in Arnold Harberger and

A. Drazen, "Government Debt, Human
Capital, and Bequests in a Life Cycle
Model," J. Polit. Econ., June 1978, 86,
M. J. Farrell, "The Magnitude of 'Rate-ofGrowth' Effects on Aggregate Savings,"
Econ. J., Dec. 1970, 80, 873—94.

M. Feldstein, "Taxation in a Growing Economy with Variable Factor Supply," Quart.
J. Econ., Nov. 1974, 88, 551—73.
,( 1 978a) "The Welfare Cost of Capital

Income Taxation," J. Polit. Econ., Apr.
1978, 86, S29—S51.

,(1978b) "The Rate of Return, Taxation and Personal Savings," Econ. J., Sept.
1978, 88, 482—87.
______ J. Green, and E. Sheshinski, "Inflation

Burden of a Tax," J. Polit. Econ..

Martin Bailey, eds., The Taxation of In
come from Capital, Washington 1969,
223—74.

R. C. Merton, "Lifetime Portfolio Selection
Under Uncertainty: The Continuous-Time
Case," Rev. Econ. Statist., Aug. 1969, 51,
247—57.

F. Modigliani and R. Brumberg, "Utility Analy

sis and the Consumption Function: An
Interpretation of Cross-Section Data," in

Kenneth K. Kurihara, ed., Post-Keynesiaii
Economics, New Brunswick 1954.
M. Sidrauski, "Rational Choice and Patterm

and Taxes in a Growing Economy with

of Growth in a Monetary Economy,'

Debt and Equity Finance," J. Polit. Econ.,

Amer. Econ. Rev. Proc., May 1967, 57,

Apr. 1978, 86, S53—S70.
______ and L. Summers, "Is the Rate of Profit

Falling?," Brookings Papers, Washington,
1977,1,211—28.
______ and ______, "Inflation, and the
Taxation of Capital Income in the Corpo-

rate Sector," Nat. Tax J., Dec. 1980, 32,
445—70.

______ and S. C. Tsiang, "The Interest Rate
Taxation, and the Personal Savings Incentive," Quart. J. Econ., Aug. 1968, 82, 419—
34.

J. Green and E. Sheshinski, "Approximating
the Efficiency Gain of Tax Reform," un-

534—44.

J. Stiglilz, "Taxation, Corporate Financial
Policy, and the Cost of Capital," J. Pub!.
Econ., Feb. 1973, 2, 1—34.

L. Summers, "The Interest Elasticity of Ag
gregate Savings: Theory and Evidence,'
unpublished paper 1980.
______ "Tax Policy and a Life Cyck

Model," Nat. Bur. Econ. Res. workin
paper, no. 302, 1979.

J. Tobin, "Life Cycle Saving and Balanced
Growth," in William Fellner, ed., Ten Eco
nomic Studies in the Tradition of Irving
Fisher, New York 1967.

