                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          TOWARDS AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE REAL EFFECTS
                    .: AND COSTS OF INFLATION*


                         Stanley Fischer

                        Franco Modigliani



                     Working Paper No.     303




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          November 1978


*Paper prepared for the Baden Conference on "The Economic Crisis of
the 1970' s: Lessons for Stabilization Policy," September 1977, and
forthcoming in Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv.

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper 303
                                                                November 1978


  TOWARDS AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE REAL EFFECTS AND COSTS OF INFLATION

                                   Abstract




     The traditional view that because money is neutral, inflation produces

no appreciable real effects is shown to hold approximately only for an

economy whose institutions are fully inflation proof, e.g. a fully

indexed one.   But the real effects are shown to become more and more

widespread and serious as the institutions of the economy are more

nearly nominal.     The paper examines in succession the consequences

of nominal government institutions (tax systems, definition of taxable

income, accounting procedures); of nominal private institutions and

accounting conventions (long term nominal contracts, measurement of income),

even when current and future inflation was and is fully anticipated.

It finally examines the effects of unanticipated inflation that is not

incorporated in existing nominal long term contracts, and of uncertain

future inflation.     Whenever possible an attempt is made to discuss the social

cost of various real effects, even though current research leaves us a

considerable distance from assessing social cost of inflation.




Stanley Fischer and
Franco Modig1iani
Office address:     E52-280A
                    M.I.T.
                    Cambridge, Mass.   02139

Phone:   253-6666
          TOWARDS AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE REAL EFFECTS AND COSTS OF INFLATION

                     Stanley Fischer and Franco Modigliani*



          There is no convincing account of the economic costs of inflation that

justifies the typical belief -- of the economist and the layman -- that inflation

poses a serious economic problem, relative to unemployment.      In this paper we

pres~nt    a systematic account of the real effects of in!lation that we hope will

 contribute to understanding of and continuing research on the costs of inflation.

          It will become clear that the effects of inflation can vary enormously

 depending on two major factors:    first, the institutional structure of the economy;

. and second the extent to which inflation is or is not fully anticipated.      Because the

 institutional structure of the economy adapts to ongoing inflation, the real effects

 (and costs) of inflation can be expected to vary, not only among different economies,

but also in the same economy at different periods.

          The organization of the paper is simple.   We start by examining the real

 effects of anticipated inflation in an economy that has fully adapted to inflation.

 In particular, in this economy: (i) public institu;ions are fully attuned to inflation

 (or inflation proof), (ii) the same is true of private institutions, (iii) current

 and future inflation is fully reflected in inherited contracts, and (iv) future

 inflation is fully reflected in contracts for the future.     After we have discussed

 the effects of anticipated inflation in this environment, we examine the real effects

 of inflation that arise as the assumptions (i) to (iv) are dropped one after the

 other.    The effects cumulate in the sense that those present in the economy that


        *M.I.T. This is a substantially revised version of the paper presented at
 the Baden conference. We are indebted to Pekka Ahtiala, Rudi Dornbusch, John
 Flemming, Jacob Frenkel, Lucas Papademos, Kari Puumanen and James Tobin for
 comments. Research support to Fischer was provided by the National Science
 Foundation.
                                           -2-



has fully adapted to inflation are also present in economies with non-inflation

proof institutions, and so on.

       The organization of the paper enables us to provide a coherent listing of
                                       l
the major real effects of inflation.       The list is long and surprisingly pervasive,

and is contained in its essentials in Table 1.         The remainder of the paper may

be regarded as a commentary on Table 1, which will also be useful as a guide to the

subsequerit discussion.   We should note that the space devoted in this paper to the

items on the list is not necessarily a judgment on their relative importance, but

in part reflects what is known about the particular effect.         For instance, we have

much to say about the wealth redistributions associated with unanticipated inflation

but relatively little about the misallocations that result from increased uncertainty

that typically accompanies inflation.      The latter effect may well be extremely

important, but very little systematic is known about it.

       We have one other disclaimer to enter before we begin the substantive part

of the paper.   Although the measurement of the social and private costs of inflation

is one eventual goal of research in this area, we do not attempt here to cost

systematically individual    effects of inflation and hence to provide a quantitative
                                                 2
appraisal of the overall cost of inflation.          Any measures would be almost totally

speculative at this stage; our listing of the real effects of inflation will show

that considerable detailed work is necessary before it will be possible to provide

serious answers to the key question of the real costs ( and benefits) of those

effects.   We do, however, provide numerical estimates of the magnitudes of some

of the important effects, and in any event, we believe that the systematic listing

and discussion of the real effects or inflation that is provided in this paper is

a necessary step toward estimating the costs of inflation.
                                                 -3-

                         TABLE 1:     The Real Effects of Inflation

   (Note:   the real effects cumulate. For instance, the effects described in Section I
            are present also under the assumption of Section II.)



                                                            Nature of Effect
      Source of Effect
                                            Direct                  . Indirect (general equilibrium)

                                 I.     Fully Indexed Economy


No interest paid on              1. Increase in government          G1 Reduction in other taxes
currency, a government           revenue (inflation tax)            or increases in government
(outside) liability                                                 spending
                                 2. Economizing on currency
                                                                    G2 Diversion of resources to
                                 3. Reduction in priva.te
                                                                    transactions (shoe leather
                                 net wealth
                                                                    costs)
Need to change prices            4. Resource costs of price         G3 Offsetting increase in
more frequently                  change ("menu costs ll )
                                                                    capital stock, lowering real
                                                                    interest rate.

                   II.     Real Effects of Nominal Government Institutions


Progressive taxation             5. Increased real income           GS   See Gl above
of nominal income                tax bill
                                                                    G6-10 Potential effects on
Nominal tax base                 6. Reduction of net of tax         cost of capital to corpora-
(a) taxation of nominal          real return on lending rela-       tions and individuals, with
interest income received         tive to pre-tax real rate          resultant effects on capital
by persons                                                          accumulation. Changes in
                                                                    patterns of financing.
(b) deductability of nominal    7. Reduction of net real cost      .~     See aiso G1
interest paid by persons        of borrowing relative to pre-
                                tax real rate
                                8. Return to equity-holders
                                in levered corporations rises
                                given constant debt-equity
                                ratios; constant real pre-
                                tax interest rate on bonds,
(c) deductability of nominal    and constant marginal product
interest paid by corpora-       of capital
tions                           9. Changes in government tax
                                recepts; net effect depends on
                                induced changes in pre-tax
                                real interest rate on bonds,
                                differences in tax rates between
                                debtors (in1cuding corporations)
                                and creditors.
                                           -4-



              II.     Real Effects of Nominal Government Institutions Cont.


                              10. Return to equity-holders      GlO~ll  See also Gl
(d) Depreciation at
                              dec1i'Ples                        Combined effects vary among
origiual cost
                                                                firms, depending on nature of
(e) Cost of goods sold                                        . assets. Likely shift away
measured at original          11. Tax revenue increases         from use of long-lived assets.
cost                                                            Shift in inventory accounting
                                                                methods from FIFO to LIFO

                              12. Post-tax return to equity
(f) Taxation of nominal       owners on realized gains
capital gains                 declines if pre-tax return
                              remains constant
                              13. Lock in effects
                               14. Distortions in interpretations
Nominal accounting methods     of economic situation, e.g. nominal
used by government             interest share in GNP rises, savings
                               rate misinterpreted since both
                               income and savings measured
                               incorrectly overstatement of
                               government deficit.




                                 ~   ..

              III.    Real Effects of Nominal Private Institutions and Habits


Continued reliance on          15. Declining real repay-       G15 Possible effects on real
nominal annuity contracts,     ment streams relative to        interest rates, and therefore
mortgages                      nominal streams                 investment
                               16. Distortion of reports of   G16 Effects on stock market
Nomina1.accounting
                               profits; other money illusions valuation of firms; invest-
methods
                               based on confusion between     ment decisions.
                               real and nominal interest
                               rates possible.
                                                -5-



     IV.   Real Effects of Unanticipated Inflation Through Existing Nominal Contracts

Existing contracts for           17. Redistribution between      G17-l9 Effects on level of
goods or services fixed          buyer and seller if quantity    economic activity (Phill~ps
in money te~s or other-          of services fixed by            curve)
wise sticky                      contract
                                                                 Short-run functional income
                                 18. Effects on quantity of      redistributions by income size
                                 services provided.
                                                                 G19 Misallocations of resource:
                                 19. Distortions of relative     arising particularly from need
                                 prices fixed at different       to search for relative price
                                 times                           information
 Existing debt                   20. Redistribution from         G20 Ultimately intergenera-
 contracts fixed                 private to public sector        tional transfers
 in nominal terms··              21. Redistributions between
                                 private debtors and creditors




                      V.   Real Effects of Uncertainty of Future Inflation


Need to make decisions           22. Reluctance to make future   G22 Changes in patterns of
without knowledge of             commitments without knowledge   asset accumulation
future prices                    of prices; absence of safe
                                                                 G23 Increased transaction
                                 asset                           costs of making frequent
                                  23 •., Shortening of nominal   contracts, and loss of
                                  contracts                      planning ability




        VI.   Real Effects of Government Endeavors to Suppress Symptoms of Inflation


Public dissatisfaction            24. Wage and price controls    G24 Shortages, possibly
over inflation, and                                              persuasive. Misallocations
government reactions                                             of resources.


 Government concern over          25. Control of interest         G25 Instability of financial
 potential bankruptcies           rates, intervention in          flows, with possible effects
 and other financial              bond mar~ets                    on direction and level of
 losses resulting from                                            investment activity.
 a rise in interest
 rates
                                          -6-



I.      The Indexed Economy

        The starting point for analysis is a fully indexed economy.    All debt instru-

ments are indexed, except currency, on which no interest is paid (because there is

no convenient way to do so); wage and salary contracts are indexed; the exchange

rate is freely flexible; tax brackets, fines, and other payments fixed by law are

indexed; real rather than nominal returns on assets are taxed; there are no nominal

interest rate ceilings; and so on.     Demand side disturbances in this economy, arisir

for example from a change in the nominal stock of high powered money, would have

temporary real effects, depending on the frequency with which index adjustments are

made.   Similarly, changes in the general price level might be the result of real

supply side disturbances, such as a change in the terms of trade.     In discussing the

effects of inflation in such an economy, we abstract from the frictional real effects

of demand disturbances, and from the effects of real disturbances other than those

on the general price level.

        In this section we discuss the effects of anticipated inflation, noting in

passing, however, that in a fully indexed economy unanticipated inflation      has

very minor real effects, consisting essentially of a redistribution between the private

and public sectors.   Such redistributions are discussed in more detail in Section IV.

        The real effects and costs of anticipated inflation in. a fully indexed economy

would result from the absence of interest payments on currency, and from the "menu

costs" of changing prices and wages.     First we examine the effects arising from the

non-payment of interest on currency, assumed initially to be a government liability,

which is outside wealth for the private sector.     Anticipated inflation represents a

tax on real currency holding, since it reduces the real return earned by currency

holders.   The other side of the tax analysis is that the government obtains
                                           -7-



tax receipts through the issue of new currency, if the inflation is caused by the

growth of high-powered money.

       There are two potential routes for the anticipated inflation to affect real

variables.   First, the demand for real currency should be expected to fall as a

result of the increased cost of holding it, producing the well-known shoe-leather

costs of inflation, the welfare cost of which is measured by the size of the triangle
                                          3
under the demand for currency function.       As the optimal inflation tax literature has
                                                                                             ~

emphasized, the optimal rate of inflation is not necessarily either zero or negative.~

The costs of inflation have to be calculated relative to that rate of inflation that,

as part of the overall pattern of taxation, minimizes the social costs of raising

government revenue.   From this viewpoint, there are welfare costs from inflation

that are below the optimum rate, as well as from inflation above the optimum rate.

       The costs of inflation arising from the reduced demand for currency have the

distinction of being the only costs that have been carefully measured.       An estimate,

for the United States, can be constructed based on an assumed stock of       curr~ncy   of

about $100 billion, and a very generous estimate of the interest elasticity of demand

for currency of one-half.   The annual cost of an increase of the inflation rate from,

say, 5 percent to 6 percent, would then be under $0.5 billion        and this is a
                                                                                   5
relatively high estimate because the elasticity assumption is upward biassed.

       The second potential route through which fully     anti~ipated   inflation could

have real effects in the fully indexed economy is through the relationships

among inflation, saving, and capital accumulation.      Capital accumulation, through

life cycle savings effects, results from the reduction in outside wealth caused

by the reduced value of high-powered money.      Further, capital accumulation may

be encouraged as a result of the fall in the anticipated rate of return on an asset

alternative to capital, namely currency.      Calculation will show that the reduction
                                          -8-




 in wealth caused by the anticiapted inflation is small; given that fact and also

 the fact that currency holdings are very small relative to those of capital, the

effects of the induced changes on the capital stock would probably also be small •

. Nonetheless, such changes would tend to offset the reduction in welfare caused

 by the loss of liquidity.6

        So far we have been considering the costs of a perfectly anticipated

 inflation in an indexed economy where high-powered money is an outside asset.

 If currency were inside money, then an increase in the inflation rate would still

 produce a deadweight loss as the anticipated inflation reduced real currency holding.

 However, with the right to issue currency now being assigned to the banking system,

 an increased real bank revenue due to inflation would increase the value of bank

 stocks and thus wealth, perhaps leading to a decline in capital accumulation; the

 effects of a reduced return on currency on the demand for capital would tend to

 work in the opposite direction.

        The other source of the effects of inflation in a fully indexed economy is

 the "menu costs" of changing prices.    In principle, most prices in the indexed

 economy could be quoted in the unit of account, the cost of a commodity basket.

 In that case, the costs of changing nominal prices would be largely the costs of

 calculating the nominal amount to be handed over in each transaction, based on the

 stated indexed price of goods.    There would be no need to change marked prices in

 an indexed economy more often than in a non-inflationary environment.

        At low rates of inflation it would probably be most convenient (cheapest)

 to fix prices for many commodities in nominal terms.   We have to distinguish here

 between auction markets, in which prices are set to clear markets more or less

 continually, and in which the costs of changing prices would not be affected by the

 rate of inflation, and "custom" markets in which prices are set and usually held
                                                   -9-



                 7
for some time.        The menu costs of inflation arise in the custom markets, which

include those for labor,        man~facturers, much      of wholesale and retail trade, trans-

portation, and such obvious examples as pay telephones, vending machines, and parking

meters.

          If we assume nominal pricing would be used at some low rates of inflation,

and that there is a fixed cost of changing a given nominal price in the custom

sector, then we should expect the frequency of price changes to increase with the

rate of inflation -- though we should, of course, recall that relative prices change

even in the absence of inflation.             However, as the inflation rate rose, prices

would probably be adjusted relatively less frequently, so that the variability

of relative prices might increase as the frequency of absolute price changes

increased.     If the system continued using nominal pricing, the menu costs of

inflation could become dramatic at high rate of inflation.               Before such costs were

incurred, however, the system would probably switch over to the use of indexed

pricing.     Tokens would be used for telephones and other vending machines, and parking

cards could be used in place of parking meters.               The new real monies would compete

with the depreciating money, be a nuisance to carry, and likely reduce the govern-

ment's seignorage.          The transitional costs of moving to such a system would also

be large.

          Thus we should expect menu costs to rise with the (anticipated) inflation

rate up to some fairly high rate of inflation, at which time the system would start

switching over to another unit of account, and for some purposes, to stores of

value that substitute for currency.             The costs of changing nominal prices thereafter

would be largely the costs of calculating nominal prices from stated real prices.

          Overall, the non-payment of interest on currency and the menu costs of
changing     prices    do    not   generate     substantial   real' effects' of
                                            -10-



moderate rates of inflation.   Additional real effects of inflation come into play

when we recognize the existence   o~   nominal government institutions, to be discussed

next in Section II.



II.    Real Effects of Nominal Government Institutions.

       The way in which anticipated inflation interacts with nominal government

institutions to produce real effects on the economy depends on the particular

institutional structure of the economy.      Our discussion in this section relates

 primarily to the United States; while similar conclusions may apply in other

economies, the details are surely not identical.

       The major source of the real effects of inflation that occur, as a result of

"nominal" government institutions is through the tax system.             The tax system in

the United States was clearly intended for non-inflationary times, but it has been

little amended in response to the inflation of the last ten years.             It is significant

that although indexation, particularly in regard to taxation of             capita~   gains, was

discussed in the debates over the tax "reforms" to           be   introduced in 1979, such
                                                   "-_.- .
measures were not included in the bill finally passed.

       Perhaps the best known tax effect occurs as a result of the non-indexation

of tax brackets in progressive         income tax schedules.         As nominal incomes rise,

and nominal tax brackets are not adjusted, the proportion of income that is taken

by the personal income tax rises.      However, this effect is quite small:            Sunley

and Pechman (in Aaron (1976)) estimate an elasticity of real income taxes with

respect to the price level of 1/2.      In 1977, personal taxes were of the order of

$150 billion; a 1 percent increase in the price level would increase taxes by about

$0.75 billion.   Even this small effect could be removed by the simple step of

indexation of-brackets, a change that has been introduced in Canada and other
                                           -11-



countries.     It is also emphasized in Aaron (1976) that in fact the Congress has

made discretionary income tax changes that have kept average personal income tax

rates at about the same levels as in the fifties, despite the intervening inflation.

       The effects of taxes on corporations and asset holders are potentially more

important than those arising from non-indexation of brackets.     Taxes are levied on

the total nominal interest income received by individuals.     Thus, if the pre-tax

real rate of return on an asset remains constant as the inflation rate increases,

the after-tax real rate .to the asset holder will fall.    The magnitude of this

effect at the individual level is quite dramatic.     Consider an individual for whom

the tax rate is 25 percent, and who is earning pre-tax and pre-inflation, 5 percent

nominal and real on his bonds.     His after-tax real return is 3.75 percent.   Now,

let the inflation rate rise to 5 percent, and the interest rate to 10 percent.

Then the nominal after-tax interest rate is 7.5 percent, and the after-tax real

rate received by the asset holder is 2.5 percent.     The 5 percent inflation reduces

the real return by one third.

       The other side of this coin, from the viewpoint of the individual, is that

nominal interest paid on personal debt is deductible from income on which taxes

are levied.    Thus, insofar as nominal rates adjust fuily so as to leave the real

rate unchanged, preventing a redistribution from creditors to debtors in pretax

income, there would still be a redistribution of after-tax irtcome between creditors

and debtors.     This redistribution in taxes may have further social implications

which will be examined later in connection with redistribution of wealth effects.

In addition, there would tend to be overall effects for net government tax take.        Since

the household sector is, on balance, a creditor, net taxes should tend to rise, but

this effect could be more or less fully offset by the fact that debtors appear to be

on the average, richer, and hence in higher tax brackets, than creditors (see below).
                                           -12-



       Corporations too are allowed to deduct nominal interest from their profits

before the corporate tax liability is calculated.    As of a given debt-equity ratio,

and given a constant real interest rate and marginal product of capital, the real

return to stockholders would tend to increase.    Whether the owners of the firm,

including bondholders, would have a greater or smaller real after-tax return,

depends on the relation between the corporate and individual income tax rates.

If we start with the strong and unrealistic assumption that the tax rate paid by

all individuals is the same, and also assume the pre-tax real interest rate on

bonds and marginal product of capital constant, the firm's owners could have

exactly the same real return independent of the rate of inflation if corporations

and individuals paid the same tax rates.     If the corporate tax rate is higher than

the individual rate, an increase in the "inflation rate would reduce total taxes

paid by the firm's owners and government tax collection, and vice versa.

       As long as we consider only the treatment of interest by the tax system,

the effects of inflation on total post-tax real returns of the owners of corporate

firms appear likely to be small; and after-tax real returns would not necessarily be

adversely affected by inflation.    Subsidiary effects would arise if there were

changes in the relative post-tax real returns of bond    and equity holders, which

induced a change in the debt-equity ratio and perhaps a change in the cost of

capital.

       The next two elements in Table I that relate to the nominal tax system tend

to increase the taxes paid by corporations as the inflation rate rises.     First,

depreciation is charged off at historical cost; the present discounted value of the

depreciation deduction from taxes falls as the inflation rate rises, given any

particular depreciation schedule.   This unambiguously raises the cost of capital

to a corporation, as of given real interest rates.     The second element -- the
                                             -13-



measurement of the cost of goods sold at original cost, and the consequent over-

statement of profits         is not required by the tax laws.   Firms have the choice

of using LIFO rather than FIFO inventory accounting methods, and the former will

prevent the overstatement of profits that FIFO produces in an inflationary environ-

mente    Firms did growingly switch to LIFO as the inflation rate increased in the

'70's.

         The more general effects of original cost depreciation depend on the nature

of firms' assets.       There is in general a rise in the cost of capital   as the inflation

rate rises, with the effect being greatest for firms using the longest lived capital.

There would presumably be both a fall in the rate of investment, and a shift to

shorter lived capital, as the inflation rate increased. It should be noted that the

effects of inflation that work through the tax treatment of depreciation are not

present in countries that allow 100 percent write-off of investment expenses in

the first year.

         The presumption from the various effects of inflation on tax revenues that

we have discussed so far is that government revenue would rise with inflation,

mainly through a fall in the real value of the depreciation deductions.        Davidson

and Weil (in Aaron (op. cit.)) find an elasticity of about three for the corporate

income tax with respect to inflation, based on a sample of large firms, and omitting

capital gains on outstanding debt.       With corporate income taxes of about $40 billion

in 1976, the effect of a one percent increase in the price level is to increase

corporate income taxes by $1.2 billion.       Allowing for tax exemption, the inflation

premium included in interest is likely to offset this effect to a very large
         10
extent        ,but there r.emains a net effect through higher taxes on personal interest

received.       Any increases in government revenue would make it 'possible to reduce

other taxes or increase government spending, given the deficit.Il
                                          -14-



         The taxation of nominal capital gains results in the after-tax real return

to equity and other asset holders being reduced by inflation, if the pre-tax real

return remains constant.    It leads also to lock-in effects, given the principle of

taxation only on realization of the gains.       The first effect tends to reduce the

return to equity holders, and would therefore likely lead to an increase in the

cost of capital for firms, and reduced investment.       The allocative effects of lock-

ins are difficult to establish a priori; there is a general case to be made that

they inhibit the efficient operation of the capital markets by encouraging some

asset holders not to register their expectations in the market place by buying and

selling assets.

         The tax effects reviewed are clearly complicated and many.       The net directions

of those effects are not all obvious, and the overall impact of the tax system on

the sensitivity of the post-tax rates of return received by asset holders and the
                                                           12
cost of capital to the rate of inflation is uncertain.            But, it appears that on

balance increases in the inflation rate will tend to increase the cost of capital
   .
and reduce the after-tax real rate of return to wealthholders, given the marginal

product of capital and the pre-tax real interest rate.

         Finally, in our consideration of nominal governmental institutions, we turn

to the inflation illusion that is present in economic statistics.          It is clear

first that inflation increases the reported share of interest in GNP, since interest

is reported as nominal and not real.    It would be preferable to present real in.terest

earnings by deducting the capital losses on outstanding bonds from interest, and

adding     them to profits or whatever other category they should enter.

         In particular, insofar as net interest is paid by the government, the infla-

tion premium portion should be treated as a repayment of principle to the debt

holders and thus deducted from government expenditure.          Failure to do so leads
                                         -15-



to an overstatement of the current government deficit which can be quite large

when inflation is significant.   Thus, a recomputation of the deficit to reflect

the fall in the real value of government liabilities -- or repayment of real debt

through the inflation premium -- would involve a major change. in the perspective on

the last few years deficits in the U.S.; for instance, in 1978, government

liabilities to the public will fall in real value by about $45 billion, or

approximately the size of the deficit.

       Similarly, the nominal treatment of private and government interest payments

leads to an overstatement of both personal and disposable income as well as saving,

since it treats as income and saving respectively what should be correctly treated

as a return of capital and the reinvestment thereof.    It might be argued that with

respect to the government the nominal deficit is still the relevant measure since it iR

the amount that needs to be financed with resulting crowding out effects.    But in

reality that portion of interest payments that represents a repayment·of principle

should give rise to matching "saving" available for reimbursement by the public.

To be sure, to the extent that the public is fooled into treating as income what

is not, there may be some net reduction in real saving with final effects analogous

to crowding out.   But there is clearly no reason why these effects would be

captured by using a wrong measure of interest earned and paid.

       The accounting errors referred to in the previous two paragraphs are not

widely recognized, and may even influence policy.      Thus,     the overstatement of

the government deficit creates at least the potential for errors in fiscal management.

At any rate, it is hard to believe that intelligent policy making is systematically

aided by the use of inappropriate measurement.
                                                       -16-



III.       Real Effects of Nominal Private Institutions

           The private sector as well as the government has continued to use nominal

institutions and practices in the face of ongoing inflation.                          At the same time,

there have been financial innovations in the past decade that mitigate the effects

of inflation on the private sector                    one important illustration is the introduction

of floating rate debt instruments.                  In this section we concentrate on the effects

arising from the continued use of nominal annuity contracts and mortgages, and from

the reliance on nominal accounting methods, while still maintaining the assumption

that inflation is anticipated.

           Reliance on the level payment nominal mortgage as the major vehicle for

financing residential housing means that the time pattern of real repayments on a

mortgage is tilted by inflation.                Since the nominal payment is the same in each

month on a level payment mortgage, the real value of the payment falls over time

if there is inflation; the tilt is greater the higher the inflation rate.                                 If

the real interest rate remains constant, initial                     real repayments,         for    a

mortgage      of given real value at the time of purchase,                   will     rise    with       the

inflation      rate.       Similar       statements    can    be   made   in    the    case    of    nominal

annuites,      purchased         by      constant     nominal      payment      streams;

the real value of the payments by the purchaser of the annuity will fall over time;

then after the annuity starts paying out to the purchaser, the real value of the
       .
rece~pts
             f a 11 over     .
                            t~me.
                                    13

           The consequences of the tilting of the repayment stream on mortgages are

thoroughly explored in Modigliani and Lessard (1975).                        The use of nominal mortgages

means that inflation substantially increases the real burden of financing in the

early years of home ownership, and on those grounds reduces the demand for housing

(of course, the demand for housing may rise because it is an inflation hedge.
                                                -17-



See below.)

        The continued use of constant nominal repayment mortgages poses problems

also for the financial intermediaries that issue them.          We discuss these difficulties

in Section VI, though they fit in also in Section IV.

        The continued use of nominal accounting methods in the private sector leads

to distortions of reported profits and other accounting magnitudes.          Evidence by Bulow

and Shoven (1975, 1976) and Davidson and Weil (in Aaron, 1976) indicates that these

distortions are substantial as between firms in a given period.          Such distortions

create potential misallocations of resources, partly because internal firm data may

be misinterpreted, and partly because markets may incorrectly assess the relative

desirability of investment by different firms, and provide capital at an inappropri-

ate cost.     It is possible to argue that such errors would ultimately be self-

eliminating, but we find it difficult to know how the stock market and the capital

markets in general are to divine "true" profits of corporations if the firms them-
                                 o       14
se 1ves .d0 not k now t h e pro f 1tS.

        Accounting reforms have been proposed by committees in a number of countries,

but have not been adopted.           The failure to change accounting methods stems both

from the inertia arising from the need to convince and educate the accounting pro-

fession and from the intellectual difficulties of problems such as the appropriate

treatment of inflation-induced gains to firms from the reduction in the real value

of their outstanding debt.           Nor is it clear that firms whose accounting profits

would change with the reform would be uniformly enthusiastic about changes in account-

ing systems.

        The use of nominal accounting methods is one example of the type of money

illusion that may remain in the economic system despite continuing inflation; this

illusion results from the convenience of using money as a unit of account, rather
                                        -18-



than the medium of exchange function.   On a priori grounds we are reluctant to

believe such illusions can remain in the system over long periods, but there does

appear to be some evidence of their continued existence.   They are familiar in

everyday discussion; it also appears that even the supposedly sophisticated capital
                                                                          lS
markets may be using nominal interest rates to capitalize real profits.        All

such illusions must ultimately be self-destructive, but the surprise is that they

still persist.



IV.    Real Effects of Unanticipated Inflation Through Existing Nominal Contracts

       We now consider the real effects of unanticipated inflation that occur through

the existence of nominal contracts for goods and services, and for debts.      The

primary effects that have received major attention are the redistributions of income

and wealth associated with unanticipated inflation; there are in addition possible

changes in the level of economic activity, and misallocations arising from ignorance

about relative prices.

       We will start with the income and wealth redistributions.   The direction

of the income redistribution associated with unanticipated inflation will depend-

on the details of the contract structure of the economy.   It has typically been

believed that wages lag behind in inflation, and that inflation therefore implies

a shift away from wage-earners, and towards profits.   It is presumably on the same

grounds that the claim is often made that inflation hurts the poor relatively more

than the rich.

       There seems to be no way a priori of predicting the direction of the income

redistributions, by function (wage, rent, etc.) or size, associated with unanticipated

inflation; the direction may well depend on the source of the unanticipated inflation.

For instance, an exogenous wage push would have different implications for the
                                         -19-



redistribution of income associated with the induced inflation than would a change

in the price of oil.   Empirical evidence for the post War United States economy is

that inflation has, if anything, redistributed income to the lower quintiles of

the income distribution (Blinder and Esaki (1977)), and towards labor income

(Bach and Stephenson, 1974).   However, examination of the cited empirical results

will show that the effects are indeed very small; inflation does not appear to have
                                                                   16
major effects on the functional or size distributions of income.

       The wealth redistributions arising from unanticipated inflation are more

substantial.   The redistribution is obviously from nominal creditors to nominal

debtors.   The emphasis in discussing these redistributions is usually along sectoral

lines, an approach we shall follow for expositional purposes.     From the viewpoint

of the private sector as a whole, the unanticipated change in the price level

reduces the real value of their outstanding claims on the government.      But that is

not the end of the story.   The reduction in the real value of the debt reduces the

real value of future tax payments required to service or retire the debt.

       The increased disposable income of the younger generation, whose taxes have

been reduced, leads them to save more, thus increasing the capital stock, while the

corresponding reduction in consumption comes from the retired, whose real wealth

has been reduced.   There is thus a redistribution from the older generation to

younger and future generations.   The transfer should be thought of as chiefly inter-

generational within the household sector rather than between the private and public

sectors; its extent is reduced insofar as retired consumption is financed through

indexed social security.

       Within the private sector, the shift between the corporate and household

sectors is frequently singled out for special discussion as an effect of an

unanticipated increase in the price level.      The unanticipated increase in the
                                         -20-



price level reduces the real value of outstanding corporate debt, apparently

benefitting corporations at the expense of households.      The redistribution is

ultimately, however, between different households; the reduction in the value

of the outstanding debt should be reflected in an increase in the value of

corporate equity, leaving the net wealth of the private sector unaffected.      The

redistribution is fundamentally from the more risk averse to the less risk averse

this perhaps corresponding to the popular notions of suckers and sharpies.

       However, the assumption that the value of corporate equity rises with

unanticipated inflation is not borne out by United States data. 17     Part of the

explanation for this consistent empirical   findin~   may be the increased real tax

burden caused by an increase in the price level.-       Other explanations for this

characteristic of the United States capital market are examined 'in Lintner (1975)

and Modigliani and Cohn (forthcoming).

       The extent of the wealth redistributions associated with unanticipated

inflation is examined in some detail in the article of Modigliani and Papademos

in this volume and will be only summarized here.      It is shown to depend on the

maturity structure of existing debt and on the path of unanticipated inflation over

the life of the assets.   Specifically, for an asset of a given (remaining) maturity

the redistribution is roughly proportional to the unanticipated change in the price

level over the life of the asset (or the cumulated unanticipated rate of inflation).

It follows in particular that a one percent     unanticipated inflation in the current

period followed by no unanticipated inflation in later periods would produce a

transfer of one percent of the value of outstanding debt.

       Now, how large are the wealth redistributions associated with unanticipated

inflation in the United States?   The total value of nominal assets in the United

States economy on December 31, 1975 was about $4.7 trillion, composed of the assets
                                         -21-



 shown in Table II. This does not mean that an unanticipated change in the price

 level of one percent redistributes $47 billion of wealth, since individuals and

 institutions hold both nominal assets and nominal liabilities, and because there

 is some pyramiding of the asset structure.

        It is more relevant to the question of redistributions to look at the
                                                                        18
 household sector's balance sheet for nominal assets and liabilities.        Table

III shows that the household sector had in 1975 about $1.8 trillion in nominal assets,

and just under $800 billion in nominal liabilities.    The net outstanding value of

nominal assets held by the private sector was over $1 trillion, so that an unanti-

 cipated change in the price level by one percent would have reduced the real value

 of househQld sector net holdings of nominal assets by about $10 billion.     However,

 this $10 billion figure probably understates the total real losses of those who

 on balance lost from inflation since the balance sheets of different individuals

 no doubt differ in proportions from those of the .sector as a whole.    Assuming no
                                          ,
major changes in asset positions since 1975, a number like $15 billion would be in

 the ball park as a measure of the loss of real wealth suffered on nominal asset

 account by all those in the private sector who on balance lose on nominal asset

 account from the inflation.

        Of course, $15 billion does not reflect the total effects of the inflation

 on distribution, since it does not adjust for the effects of a change in the price

 level on the real value on non-nominal assets and liabilities, particularly equity

 and housing.   For equity, existing evidence is that an increase in the price level

 reduces real value; for housing   there is little evidence, but a belief that the

 real value of housing rises with inflation. 19 We must, therefore, acknowledge

 a great deal of uncertainty as to the net effect of inflation on the real value

 of real assets in the U.S.
                                          -22-




          TABLE II:     Outstanding Volume of Nominal Assets in
                        U.S. Economy, December 31, 1975




                                                                  $ billions

           Demand dzposits and currency                             290.3

          Time and saving accounts                                  884.6

           Life insurance and pension reserves,                     591.8
             plus interbank claims

          Credit market instruments                                2626.7

                Federal government                558.1

                State and local government        230.5

                Corporate and foreign bonds       317.2

                Mortgages                         803.3

                Other                             717.6

           Trade credit                                             308.9


                                                                  $4702.3 .




Source:   Flow of Funds Accounts, 1946-1975, Federal Reserve Board of Governors,
          December 1976, p. 90
                                            -23-



  TABLE tIl:     Balance Sheet for Nominal Assets and Liabilities Held by
                 Household Sector in U.S., December 31, 1975




Assets

         Demand deposits and currency                              165.6

         Time and savings accounts                                 776.2

         Credit market instruments                                 346.8 .

               Federal government                  123.4

               State and local government           74.2

               Corporate and foreign bonds          65.9

               Mortgages                            72.7

               Other                                10.5

         Life insurance reserves                                   164.6

         Pension fund reserves                                     368.6


                                             Total assets         $1821.8




Liabilities

         Credit market instruments                                 753.5

               Mortgages                           508.2

               Consumer credit                     197.3

               Other                                48.0

      Other                                                         29.3

                                             Total liabilities    $782.8


                                             Net                 $1039.0


Source:    Flow of Funds Accounts, 1976, Rederal Reserve Board of Governors, p. 100
                                         -24-



        One very important aspect of wealth redistribution is from the young

to the old, but unfortunately the relevant evidence is skimpy.    The only system-

atic information we have is taken from Bach and Stephenson (1974).     (Table IV

reproduces part of the relevant table from Bach and Stephenson.) Using a 1969
        20
survey,    they find that the ratio of net nominal to real assets rises with the age

of the head of household, and, in particular, that it is only after the age of 55

that households become net creditors in nominal terms.    If this evidence stands

up, then the indication is that the redistributions which occur    when the price

level rises chiefly reduce   the real wealth of the old, while increasing the real

wealth of the young.   As noted above, such redistributions tend to be mitigated by

the existence of indexed social security in the United States.

        We can also use Table IV to look at the net nominal creditor position by

income class.   It turns out that those with very high and very low incomes are net

nominal creditors, while the middle of the income distribution is occupied by nominal

debtors.   Thus we can think of the redistribution as being from those with high and

low current incomes to those with intermediate incomes, but we should emphasize

that such statements cannot be made meaningful without standardizing for the stage

of the life cycle, something we are not able to do with the data we have.

        We have so far been discussing the extent of redistribution caused by an

unanticipated one percent change in the price level.     We noted, however that the

redistributions caused by a change in the inflation rate depend on the maturity of

the outstanding stock of nominal obligations.     Of the assets and liabilities of the

households shown in Table III, about $900 billion of assets and over $500 billion of

liabilities are of a term longer than one year.     On the assets side, life insurance

and pension fund reserves are of long maturity, as are mortgages on the liability

side.   The effects of a change in the inflation rate might roughly cancel out for
                                                -25-



                TABLE IV:       Assets and Debts of Households, Early 1969




                                                         Percent of Total Assets
                   Percent All        Total Assets                Variable
Age of Head        Households         ($ billion)      Monetary   Price
of Household         (1 )                 (2)          Assets     Assets     Debts   (2) / (1)


     18-24           10                   27             14            86     49       2.7


     25-34           21                  189              8            92     48       9.0

     35-44           18                  335              9            91     37      18.6
                                                                                                 i
     45-54           17                  366             13            87     22      21.5       I
                                                                                                 I
     55-64           15                  301             21            79      9      20.1

     65-             19                  404             23            77      3      21.2
                                                                                                 I
                            ,
 By 1968 Money
 Income Before
 Taxes
                                                                  ..

Under $3000          17                   92             20            80      8       5.4

 3000-4999           14                  119             20            80     15       8.5

 5000-9999           33                  350             18            82     23      10.6

10,000-14,999        24                  420             14            86     29      17.5

15,000-24,999         9                  359             12            88     21      39.9

25,000-49,999         2                  177             14            86     18      88.5

50,000 and
over                 0.4                 105             18            82     10     262.5



      Source:    Bach and Stephenson (1974), p. 6, based on data from Michigan
                 Survey Research Center, 1969 Survey of Consumer Finances
                                           -26-



these classes of assets and liabilities.     That still leaves over $400 billion of

other longer-term nominal assets.    The maturity of these assets is not known,
                                                              21
though that of federal obligations is close to three years.        Accordingly, a

one percent change in the inflation rate would reduce the current value of these

assets by substantially more than $4 billion.

          It is clear that the wealth redistributions arising from unanticipated

inflation are large, of the order of one percent of GNP per one percent unanticipated
                                                                                        (
increase in the price level.    While these effects are large, it is difficult to

attach a social cost to them.    For every loser there is a gainer; to calculate the

social costs of the redistributions it would be necessary to have a Bergsonian

social welfare function that appropriately weights the welfare of every individual.

Unfortunately, there are no data on individual redistributions, and we do not have

an accepted welfare function at: hand.

          We have devoted considerable attention to the wealth redistributions

associated with unanticipated inflation.     This is partly because the redistributions

have received a good deal of attention in the literature, and in part because there

are some relevant data; but it is also because the extent of the redistributions

is substantial.

          We turn next to the other real effects that occur through the use of

nominal contracts.   The fixity of some prices might give unanticipated inflation

real effects on the level of economic activity.     One of the main theories underly-

ing the Phillips curve (Lucas, 1973) argues that unanticipated inflation increases

labor supply and therefore output, and Keynesian sticky wage theories would also

suggest that unanticipated inflation increases output.

          The fixity of nominal prices may also lead to misallocations of resources

in the face of unanticipated inflation, as relative prices change -- because of the
                                             -27-



differential costs of changing prices in different markets, and because of imperfect

information about relative prices    a~ong   consumers.     It is reasonably well established

that relative price variability increases with the inflation rate;
                                                                          22 such increased

variability leads to misallocations of resources, and to the absorption of resources

in search and information gatherir.g ac- tivi tiE's.



V.        Real Effects of Uncertainty of Future Inflation

          Practical men tend to emphasize that inflation makes it difficult to plan

in the absence of knowledge of future prices.          This argument clearly implies that

uncertainty about future price levels is increased at high inflation rates.          We

know that in principle there is no necessary link between the rate of inflation

and the variability of the inflation rate.          In fact, it appears that the variability

of the rate of inflation (which is not quite the same as uncertainty about the rate)

increases with the level of inflation.       Flemming (1976) suggests' the reason may be

that governments typically announce unrealistic stabilization programs as the

inflation rate rises, thus increasing uncertainty about what the actual path of

prices will be.

          If we accept the link between the level of inflation and uncertainty about

future price levels, we can ascribe to inflation the effects that arise from the

need to make decisions with decreased certainty of future price levels.          The first

effect is a change in the pattern of asset accumulation.          If there is no indexed

asset, increased uncertainty about future prices reduces the safety of nominal

assets, and increases the relative attractiveness of real assets          as inflation

hedges.     Residential structures occupy a prominent position among such assets,

especially when the performance of the equity values is as disappointing as it

has been in the recent inflation allover the world.           Other assets the public may
                                         -28:-



turn to include non-reproducible tangible wealth such as land, gold, art work,

etc.   Given the fixity of the supply, the prices of such assets will tend to be

bid up faster than the general price level.      It is entirely conceivable that the

resulting "capital gains" increase in real wealth will result in a decline in

saving and, finally, in physical investment.

        A second effect of uncertainty about the rate of inflation is the shortening

of contracts.   Uncertainty about the real value of the quid for which the quo

is being exchanged is likely to reduce the use of long-term contracts.     Uncertainty

about the rate of inflation should lead also towards the use of indexed contracts.

There seems to be some evidence of this in labor markets, but very little in capital

markets, except through the use of floating rate notes, which are equivalent to

shortening the effective maturity of the contracts.      This reduces uncertainty about

the real value of the payments over the lifetime of the note, but also implies

sacrificing the possibility of hedging against future movements of the real rate.

        Both the changes discussed in the previous two paragraphs -- shifts in    th~


demand for assets, towards inflation hedges, and the shortening of contracts

would tend to reduce the rate of investment by firms, and lead to investment in

shorter lived assets.



VI.     Real Effects of Government Attempts to Suppress Symptoms of Inflation

        Governments frequently attempt to suppress inflation using wage and price

controls.   Such controls are likely to produce serious distortions and inequities,

particularly when they are introduced at times of excess demand.     Measures of the

extent of the distortions for particular cases have apparently not been undertaken,

though anecdotal evidence on shortages induced by wage and price controls abound.

        Governments also intervene in attempts to control rising interest rates, or
                                        -29-



the consequences of potential increases in interest rates.      Attempts to keep

interest rates. from rising in inflationary situations may result from the desire

of the government to avoid the imposition of capital losses on bond holders, in

part under the fear that large capital losses would tend to destroy the capital

markets.   Attempts to keep interest rates low by monetary policy are ultimately

destabilizing; attempts to keep them low through controls lead also to credit

rationing and also to disintermediation and misallocation of "funds.

       In the United States, Regulation Q, which controls the interest rates paid

by ,financial intermediaries, has been responsible for episodes of disintermediation

in credit crunches in 1966, 1970, and 1974.     The disintermediation resulted in

sharp reductions in construction activity.     However, the control over interest

rates imposed by Regulation Q may well have been desired by the financial inter-

mediaries, since competitive rises in interest rates would have led to large

losses for them, as the rates they would have had to pay on their liabilities

would have exceeded receipts from their assets.       (See Modigliani and Lessard, 1975).

The ultimate cause of Regulation Q and the credit crunches may be thought of as

the extreme imbalance in the maturity structure of the balance sheets of financial

intermediaries -- borrowing very short, lending      verylong'-~~   ratner than government

concern with interest rates as such. . The effects we attribute here to

government intervention are certainly partly to be ascribed also to the existence

of nominal institutions in the private sector.       It is worth noting that the financial

intermediaries in the United States have innovated significantly in recent years,

both by introducing new debt instruments (rollover mortgages, variable rate

mortgages, etc.) and by inventing new liabilities (generally of longer term,

some with variable interest rates, tied to the treasury bill rate).

       It should be recognized that the cost    o~   government intervention must be
                                             -30-



set against the possible reduction in cost that may arise from success in suppressing

some symptoms or concomitants of inflation.         For instance, if it succeeded in

keeping the price level permanently       lowe~   then it might avoid the cost of redistri-

bution.    On the other hand artificially holding down long term interest rates

reduces the cost to the initial holders of long term debt, but it increases the

cost to those investing in money fixed assets thereafter perpetuating the transfer

from creditors to debtors.      A full   cost~benefit   analysisoof government intervention

is actually a complex task.      The prevailing conviction among economists today seems

to be that the costs resulting from attempts to suppress or reduce inflation through

gove~~ent       interferences with the market mechanism -- some of which costs are

outlined above -- are likely on balance to outweigh the benefits even when, if

initially, they may appear to produce small gains.          Though this view could no

doubt stand some closer scrutiny, particularly in terms of redistribution effects,

the task is clearly beyond the scope of this survey.



VII.      Concluding Comments

          Perhaps the only surprising feature of this paper is the length of the list

of the real effects of inflation.        Conventional analysis of the welfare costs of

inflation emphasizes the area under the demand curve for money as the cost of

anticipated inflation     and redistributions as the cost of unanticipated inflation.

However, in economies that have not fully adapted to inflation -- and that means

all economies -- potential real effects are far more pervasive.          Some of these

real effects are very hard to pin down -- for instance, the extent of misallocations

caused by variability of relative prices and uncertainty of future price levels,

but they may well be as important as the costs that are conventionally emphasized.

          We should also repeat that measurement of the costs of the real effects
                                        -31-



that we have listed is obviously a task of importance.   Our hope is that systemiza-

tion of the list of real effects will assist in organizing attempts to measure the

costs (and benefits) of inflation.
                                          -32-



                                     FOOTNOTES

1.   The listing is probably incomplete, and the emphasis possibly not to everyone's

     liking.   We have been struck by reactions to this paper of the nature:    "Of

     course, you omitted (or failed to emphasize) the most important item, X", where

     X varies widely.   Such reactions of course reflect the lack of quantitative

     knowledge of the effects of inflation.

2.   Surveys of the costs of inflation are contained in Phelps (1972), Foster (1972),

     Laidler and Parkin (1975), and Flemming (1976).    Laidler (1975), Okun (1975),

     and Solow (1975) contain useful non-survey discussions of the costs of inflation.

     The present paper has benefited considerably from the stimulus of a paper by

     Tobin (1976).

3.   This cost has the dimension of a flow, $/time.    For some purpose one may be

     interested in the capital value of this flow, through suitable discounting.       A

     recent paper by Martin Feldstein (1977) raises some difficulties about the

     discounting procedure.

4.   See, for instance, Edmund Phelps (1973),

5.   Even if we assumed the inflation tax applied to   M1~   the annual welfare cost of

     the tax would be under $2 billion.    But in the fully indexed economy, demand

     deposits would pay interest at least equal to the rate of inflation.

6.   The effects of anticipated inflation on capital accumulation have been at

     the center of a long controversy.    Such effects do arise in the context of

     life-cycle utility-maximizing individuals or families with finite horizons,

     but they do not occur in steady state if the family effectively has an infinite

     horizon (see Sidrauski (1967), Fischer (1978),

7.   The distinction is Arthur Okun's (1975); it is related to some Hicksian

     distinctions.
                                         -33-



8.    The "might" is included since the variability of relative prices would depend

      on both the correlation of the timing of price changes and the frequency of

      such changes.

9.    Increased variability of relative prices might absorb resources as individuals

      search for information on prices; this point is taken up in more detail in

      Section IV.

10.   This conclusion is suggested by a comparison of the magnitude of the over-

       statement of equity returns due to inventory and nominal depreciation with

       the magnitude of the understatement due to real capital gains or debt.     See, e.g.,

       study of Bulow and Shoven (1975-1976) and Davidson and Weil (in Aaron, op.cit.).

11.    It is estimated by Fellner, et. ale (1975) that taxes in 1974 were $17 billion

       higher than they would have been had the tax system been indexed.   The inflation

       rate in that year was about 10 percent and tax receipts $265 billion.

12.    The effects discussed in this section have been studied recently by Feldstein

       and others; see for example Feldstein and Summers (1978).

13.    In principle, the tilting of the payments stream could be offset by anyone

      with access to the capital markets, by borrowing to make the early payments.

       Loans for such smoothing purposes do not appear to be readily available.

14.   Preliminary evidence by Modigliani and Cohn (forthcoming) seems to show that the

      capital markets do, at least in aggregate, correctly adjust for inappropriate in-

      ventory and depreciation accounting, but do not adjust for capital gains accruing

       to equity owners as inflation reduces the real value of outstanding debt.

15.    See Modigliani and Cohn (forthcoming).

16.    Preliminary empirical work shows that the results of Blinder and Esaki and

       Bach and Stephenson are not fundamentally changed when the effects of anti-

       cipated and unanticipated inflation on the income distribution are distinguished.
                                         -34-




17.   See Zvi Bodie (1976) and Charles Nelson (1976).

18.   The household sector in these tables is actually "Households, Personal

      Trusts, and Nonprofit Organizations."

19.   Budd and Seiders (1971) in their study of the effects of inflation on dis-

      tribution argue that real estate maintains but does not increase its real

      value in the face of inflation.   They do claim that real equity values rise

      with inflation.

20.   The Michigan Survey Research Center stopped its surveys of consumer financies

      after 1970; they are in the process of being reinstated (in 1978).

21.   Economic Report of the President, 1977, Table 77.

22.   Jaffee and Kleiman (1975), and Vining and Elwertowski (1976).
                   /                    -35-



                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY



Aaron, Henry (1976), Inflation and the Income Tax, Brookings Institution.

Bach, George L. and James B. Stephenson (1974), "Inflation and the Redistribution

       of Wealth," Review of Economics and Statistics, LVI, 1 (February), 1-13.

Blinder, Alan S. and Howard Y. Esaki (1977), "Macroeconomic Activity and Income

       Distribution in the Postwar United States," forthcoming, Review of Economics

       and Statistics.

Bodie, Zvi (1976), "Common Stocks as a Hedge Against Inflation," Journal of Finance

       (May), 459-470.

Budd, Edward C. and David F. Seiders (1971), "The Impact of Inflation on the Dis-

       tribution of Income and Wealth," American Economic Review, Papers and

       Proceedings, LXI, 2, 128-138.

Cohn, Richard and Franco Modigliani (1979), "Inflation in the Stock Market"

Feldstein, Martin (1977), "The Welfare Cost of Permanent Inflation and Optimal Short-

       Run Economic Policy," unpublished, Harvard University

____ and Laurence Summers (1978), "Inflation, Tax Rules, and the Long-Term

       Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1), 61-99.

Fellner, William, Kenneth Clarkson and John Moore (1975), Correcting Taxes for

       Inflation, American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D. C.

Fischer, Stanley (1978), "Capital Accumulation on the Transition Path in a

       Monetary Optimizing Mode," unpublished, M.I.T., forthcoming in Econometrica.

Flemming, John (1976), Inflation, Oxford University Press.

Foster, Edward (1972), "Costs and Benefits of Inflation," Federal Reserve Bank of

       Minneapolis. .
                                          -36-



Jaffee, Dwight and Ephraim Kleiman (1975), "The Welfare Implications of Uneven

       Inflation," unpublished, Institute for International Economic Studies,

       University of Stockholm.

Laidler, David (1975), "On the Costs of Anticipated Inflation," unpublished,

       University of Western Ontario.

____ and Michael Parkin (1975), "Inflation: A Survey," Economic Journal

       (December 741-809.

Lintner, John (1975), "Inflation and Security Returns," Journal of Finance,

       (March) •

Lucas, Robert E. (1973), "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Trade-

       offs," American Economic Review (June), 326-334.

Modigliani, Franco and Donald Lessard, etc. (1975), New Mortgage Designs for

       Stable Housing in an Inflationary Environment, Federal Reserve Bank of

       Boston, Conference Series, No. 14.

Nelson, Charles R. (1976), "Inflation and Rates of Return on Common Stocks, "

       Journal of Finance (May), 471-482.

Okun, Arthur (1975), "Inflation:    Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs," Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activity, (2), 351-390.

Phelps, Edmund S. (1972), Inflation Policy and Unemployment Theory, Norton.

        (1973), "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance," Swedish Journal of

       Economics, 75, 1, 68-82.

 Sidrauski, Miguel (1967), "RatLona1 Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary

        Economy~   American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 534-44.

 Shoven, John B. and Jeremy 1. Bulow (1975), "Inflation Accounting and Nonfinancial

        Corporate Profits: Physical Assets," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,

        (3), 557-598.
                                         -37-



---- and ----        (1976), "Inflation Accounting and Nonfinancial Corporate

       Profits: Financial Assets and Liabilities," Brookings Papers on Economic

       Activity, (1), 15-58.

Solow, Robert M. (1975), "The Intelligent Citizen's Guide to Inflation," The

       Public Interest (Winter), 30-66

Tobin, James (1976), "Inflation Control As Social Priority," unpublished, Yale

       University.

Vining, Daniel R. and Thomas C. Elwertowski (1976), "The Relationship Between

       Relative Prices and the General Price Level," American Economic Review

       (September), 699-708.
