                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             EFFICIENT WAGE BARGAINS UNDER UNCERTAIN
                        SUPPLY AND DEMAND



                         Robert E. Hall

                               and

                         David M. Lilien


                     Working Paper No.     306




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          December 1978


This research was supported by the National Science Foundation.
We are grateful to Jerome Culp, Avinash Dixit and Jeffrey Harris
for useful suggestions.

The research reported here is part of the National Bureau of
Economic Research's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 306
                                                            December 1978


          EFFICIENT WAGE BARGAINS UNDER UNCERTAIN SUPPLY AND DEMAND
                                       by
                       Robert E. Hall and David M. Lilien

                                   Abstract


       This paper examines efficient arrangements between employers and
workers for handling shifts in the demand for and supply of labor.
Efficiency is achieved when the marginal revenue product of labor equals
the marginal value of time. The problem is to set up contractual
provisions so that employment can vary as supply and demand change.
Where the shifts are observable and outside the control of the parties
to the contract, a fully contingent contract can achieve efficiency.
However, these conditions are rarely met in practice and contingent
labor contracts, apart from cost of living escalators, are almost never
found. The paper investigates non-contingent contracts that are efficient
or approximately efficient. It shows the impossibility of full efficiency
in the face of shifts in both supply and demand and the feasibility of
efficiency when only demand or only supply shift. It argues that very
nearly efficient contracts are possible when demand shifts are much larger
than supply shifts, and shows that the type of contract appropriate for this
case bears strong resemblance to collective bargaining agreements in the
United States. In particular, it shows that the current state of demand
should be completely irrelevant in the process of renegotiating a labor
contract.


                                               Robert E. Hall
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               204 Junipero Serra Boulevard
                                               Stanford, CA 94305

                                               415/326-7160
           EFFICIENT WAGE BARGAINS UNDER UNCERTAIN SUPPLY AND DEMANDt


                       Robert E. Hall and David M. Lilien*




     Much recent thought has been devoted to the macroeconomic importance of
                                  1
the existence of wage contracts       and to the deeper problem of-the nature of

the optimal employment bargain. 2      Still, some puzzling features of the most

conspicuous form of wage bargaining, that done formally by employers and

labor unions, deserve further theoretical attention.      Among these important

features are:

     1.   Collective bargaining agreements are rarely contingent on outside

          events even though the parties have very imperfect knowledge of

          prospective economic conditions during the period of the contract.

          The only important exception is the indexing of wages to the cost

          of living.

     2.   Employers are permitted wide discretion in determining the level of

          employment when demand shifts unexpectedly.     As employment varies,

          total compensation varies according to a formula established in the

          agreement.

     3.   Agreements are not permanent but are renegotiated on a regular cycle.

     4.   In the process of renegotiation, the current state of demand has

          little impact on the new wage schedule.     On the other hand, current

          wages in other industries have an important influence.

The last feature especially has been denied or ignored by economic tlleorists

even though it is a prominent part of the thinking of labor economists on

wage determination.
                                         2



I.   The employment bargain

        Since Wassily Leontief's classic paper, it has been known that employers

and workers must agree on more than just an hourly wage.     In bargaining under

certainty, there is a presumption that the bargain establishes a level of

employment as well as a level of compensation.     A review of this case will

help to establish some concepts that are useful when bargainers are grappling

with uncertainty as well.     First, let the technology of the firm and the

demand function for its products be jointly summarized by a revenue function,

R(L), giving gross dollar revenue as a function of total labor input, L.        We

assume; as seems appropriate in the context of collective bargaining, that

the firm has some monopoly power.     Second, let V(L) be the labor union's

opportunity cost of supplying that amount of labor, in the sense of foregone

consumer surplus from diverting leisure to work, or foregone earnings from

other employment.     V(L) can be thought of as the minimum offer that the union

would ever accept to supply L. 3    We do not pursue the question of how the

union divides L among its members, nor the way that it allocates the proceeds

of the sale of L.     If the union members have identical preferences and

identical alternative employment opportunities and if the union allocates

work and iricome evenly then V(L) simply represents the typical union member.

Our results are compatible with many other views of the internal politics of .

unions, however.

        Labor input, L, is one dimension of the bargaining problem.   The other

is dollar compensation.     It is most convenient to deal with total compensation

or the wage bill, say B, rather than with the more familiar average hourly

wage.     The firm's concern is with profit, n = R(L) - B, and the union's

concern is with income net of the opportunity cost of the time devoted to

work, Y = B - V(L).     The bargaining problem is illustrated in Figure 1.     The
                   Figure I
   wage bill 1 B



                              •
   •
unIOn                         Isoprofit
indif - .                     curves
ference
curves




                              Employment, L
                                           3



contract curve, or set of alternative efficient bargains, is the vertical

line, L   = L*. 4    Each point on the line satisfies the basic efficiency

requirement that the marginal revenue product of labor, R'(L), equals the

marginal opportunity cost of work, V'(L).       We assume that cooperative

bargainers will always strike a bargain that is efficient.          The major issue

in bargaining is the determination of the wage bill, that is, the splitting

of monopoly profits between firm and union.          Most theoretical work on

collective bargaining has concerned this very difficult issue. S We will

avoid it altogether.       Our interest is in describing efficient bargains, and

in the Case of complete certainty, the answer is straightforward--a bargain

is efficient only if it sets a level of employment at L*.

     As Leontief pointed out, the efficient bargain cannot generally be

supported by agreeing on an average wage,      W =    B/L, and then letting the firm
maximize profit subject to this wage.       Profit maximi.zation sets the marginal

revenue product of labor to the wage, while an efficient bargain requires

that it equal the marginal opportunity cost of work.         Only by coincidence

would they be the same.       Figure. 2 illustrates the point.    Suppose bargaining

settled on the efficient point A.       The slope of the line OA is the implicit

average wage, and the line itself is the set of employment levels and wage

bills that the firm would choose among if it maximized profit subject to the

average wage.       The point of maximum profit is A'. where OA is tangent to an

isoprofit curve, and profit here is necessarily higher than at A.         So the

collective bargaining agreement must specify the level of employment as well

as the total compensation or average wage.       Alternatively, the bargainers may

use some other mechanism to ensure efficiency.

     Most employers have wide latitude in setting the level of employment.

It is interesting to ask whether there are contractual arrangements that
            Figure 2       indi f ference
                           curve


                                  isoprofit.
                       ___...-_ } curves .




Il:...-..                         L
o
                                           4




achieve efficiency while permitting unilateral profit maximization by the

firm.     In particular, we ask if there is a way to make the wage bill a

function of employment, say B(L), so that maximization of profit,       ~(L)   =
R(L) - B(L) occurs at the efficient level of employment, L*.        In fact, ther~

is an infinite variety of such arrangements.        Any compensation rule is

satisfactory if the marginal cost of labor to the firm B'(L) equals the

marginal opportunity cost of labor, V'(L), at the efficient level of

employment, L*.       To avoid the possibility that this point is a minimum

instead of a maximum, and to eliminate multiple local maxima, we will also

require that the marginal cost of labor, B'(L), be an increasing function of.

L.    Then as an alternative to stating the bargain as a particular level of

employment and a particular amount of compensation, bargainers may arrive at

a compensation rule B(L) instead, and let firms choose employment unilaterally

subject to the rule.       This way of expressing the outcome of bargaining seems

closer to the actual practice in American collective bargaining.



II.     Efficient wage bargains under uncertainty

        Neither party to a collective bargaining agreement has full knowledge of

the economic circumstances that will prevail during the agreement.        Both the

demand for products and the opportunity cost of labor can change unexpectedly.

Framers of agreements must anticipate the possible need to adjust the level

of employment as supply and demand change.       Adjustments of employment are in

fact made on a weekly schedule in most American industries.

        Suppose that shifts in demand can be characterized by a single random

variable, x,    S0   that the revenue function is R(L,x).   Though we do not make

any assumptions about the probability distribution of x, it is not necessarily

a variable that moves around a normal level -- it may drift upward or downward.
                                            5



On the supply   side~   we hypothesize a similar random shift, z, in the

opportunity cost of employment, V(L,z).         Again, z captures general changes

in the cost of living and in wages elsewhere in the economy, as well as

conditions in labor markets close to the firm where union members might seek

alternative employment.

      For particular values of x and z, the efficient level of employment is

still defined by the equality of the marginal revenue product of labor and

the marginal opportunity cost of the labor


                                 ()R(L,x)       aV(L,z)
(1)
                                    aL      =     aL


This defines an efficient level of employment as a function of x and z:

L*(x,z).   The problem that concerns us in the remainder of this paper is

contractual mechanisms that permit the level of employment to fluctuate

exactly, or at least approximately, according to this function.        Throughout,

we assume that it is physically possible to adjust employment as supply and

demand shift, so the relevant concept of efficiency is ex post.        Because we

seek contracts that are efficient in this sense no matter what random shifts

have occurred, we make no assumptions about the probability distributions of

x and. z, nor do we assume that these distributions are known to the bargaining

parties.

      One class of contracts achieves efficiency ex post exactly for any values

of x and z.   In these contracts, the level of employment is made contingent

upon the values of the random shifts.       The employment part of the bargain is

then a function of x and z, and the bargain is efficient only if the function

is L*(x,z).   As in the case of certainty, the hard part of the bargaining

process is settling upon a distribution of monopoly profits.        Now this must
                                          6



be done separately for each possible contingency, by establishing a contingent

wage bill, B(x,z).

      Important practical obstacles limit the scope of contingent contracts.

~e   of these is the need to measure the variables describing the contingency

quickly and accurately, and to avoid costly legal disputes about the

measurements.   Government statistics of high quality, such as the Consumer

Price Index, are acceptable for this purpose, but many other kinds of data,

publicly or privately collected, probably are not.        Making contracts

involving millions or billions of dollars contingent on a particular

statistic obviously puts immense strain on the collectors of the statistic.

The second practical obstacle is moral hazard.        If the contract is contingent

upon variables that can be influenced by one of the parties to the contract,

they will face an incentive to change the variable accordingly.6        The

existence of moral hazard does not preclude the use of contingent contracts.

It may simply be accepted as an inevitable source of inefficiency, as for

example in the case of automobile insurance where insured drivers presumably

are not quite as careful as they should be.

     As an extreme case of the problem of moral hazard, suppose that there

are no genuine shifts in demand, but the bargainers agree upon a contingent

contract providing employment, L*(x,z), and compensation, B(x,z).       Manageme~t

can in fact announce any value of x they please.       Then the contract effectively

establishes a marginal cost of labor which is the change in compensation per

unit change in employment, (aB/ax) /   (aV'~/ax).   To maximize profit, management

will choose the x that equates the marginal revenue product of labor to the

implicit marginal cost of   labor~   Unless this has been foreseen by the

bargainers, the resulting level of employment will not be efficient.          For

example, suppose that the compensation side of the bargain is a guaranteed
                                           7



annual wage, independent of demand and supply:         B(x,z)   = Bo ,    a constant.

Then management can cheat by driving.the marginal revenue product of labor

down to the implicit cost of labor, namely zero, by a suitable overstatement

of the level of demand.       Conversely, if the compensation rule were quite

sensitive to demand, management would have an incentive to understate demand

in    orde~   to reduce labor input.

        Cheating of this kind does not seem to be an important problem in

American labor relations.       Rather, both parties agree from the beginning that

management is free to maximize profit under the terms of the contract.                  There

are no outside demand variables, supposedly beyond the control of the firm,

upon which the collective bargaining agreement is contingent.

        Similar considerations limit the usefulness of contingent bargains on

t~e    supply side.   A reliable government cost of living index is published in

the United States, and many agreements are contingent upon it.                Much less

reliable, but highly relevant data on hourly wages are also published, but

we are unaware of any formal contingencies based on wages.               Many of the same

obstacles limit the use of outside variables to measure shifts in the

opportunity cost of labor as limit the use of demand variables.                 In the rest

of this paper, therefore, we assume      th~t   contracts cannot simply specify

employment as a function L*(x,z) and compensation as B(x,z).                 More subtle

procedures for achieving efficiency are required.



III.    Efficient contracts that are not contingent on outside variables

       Bargainers who are wary of making agreements contingent upon outside

measures of demand and supply nonetheless have a powerful tool at their

disposal for achieving efficiency ex post:        They can make the level of
                                                                         7
compensation contingent upon the actual level of employment.                  Of all the
                                          8



data that might be supplied by the firm to the union, the level of employment

is most easily verified by the union.         However·, since both parties have a

direct influence over the amount of employment, bargainers presumabiy must

accept the constraint that both management and labor will separately try to
                                                                8
maximize well-being by adjusting the level of employment.           This situation

would breed a tension of its own unless the provisions of the contract are

such as to make both parties agree on the desirable level of employment          ~

        9
post.

        The collective bargaining agreement we study here establishes a

compensation rule, B{L), not directly contingent upon the demand and supply

shifts x and z.    The firm has profit, R{L,x) - B{L), and the union has well-

being, B{L) - V{L,z).   The efficient level of employment is the same L*{x,z)

defined earlier.    We ask:   Is there a compensation rule under which the

quantity of labor demanded by management, derived from


(2)                             aR(L,x)   =    B'(L),
                                  elL

is equal to the quantity of labor supplied by the union, derived from


(3)
                                aV{L,z)   =    B t (L)
                                  elL


for all possible x and z?     Under such a compensation rule, management and

labor will never disagree about the desirable level of employment.          In

particular, there is no danger of default by either party to the contract.

Furthermore, a compensation rule that achieves agreement in this sense is

automatically efficient ex post.     Since elR/aL and aV/aL are both equated to

the same B'(L), they equal each other, and this is the definition of

efficiency.
                                                     9



      Compared to the full contingent bargain discussed in the previous

section, only one major restriction limits the ideal employment-contingent

contract:   The distribution of monopoly profit cannot be made separately

contingent on shifts in demand and ,supply.                 The shape of B(L) is determined

by the efficiency requirement alone.                 As L shifts, the distribution of

monopoly profits shifts as a byproduct of the shape of the compensation rule.

The bargainers retain the single most important distributional tool -- they

are free to determine the overall level of B(L) by adding a constant to it.

Efficiency depends only on the marginal rate of compensation B'(L) and not

on its level.    But the ideal employment-contingent contract is incapable of

insuring workers against fluctuations in income, unless B(L) provides the
        .
appropr~ate   amount   0
                           f   .
                               ~nsurance.
                                             10

      Under the most general conditions, the ideal employment-contingent

compensation rule does not exist.                 A fixed relation between compensation and

employment does not have enough degrees of freedom, so to speak, to achieve

efficiency under all possible combinations of demand and supply shifts.

This proposition is formalized and proved in the Appendix.

      Ideal compensation rules do exist under more restrictive conditions.

First, suppose that there are no uncertainties about the opportunity cost on

the supply side, or, more realistically, all uncertainties can be eliminated

through the use of a cost-of-living escalator.                 Then V(L,z) is just V(L).

The ideal compensation rule satisfies


                                   aR(L,x)   =     B'(L), all 'x, and
                                     aL
(4)
                                    v' (L)   =     B' (L)
                                                10



The second equation suggests the nature of the ideal rule.                   Firms should be

made to internalize labor's opportunity costs by paying a marginal cost of

labor, B'(L), which always equals labor's marginal opportunity cost, V' (L).

In other words, the compensation rule has the form


(5)                                 B(L)     = Bo + VeL)

B is a fixed cash payment to labor which is independent of the amount of
 a
work and is chosen by the negotiators in the light of purely distributional

considerations.    Again, we have nothing to say about B               ~   but any value of B
                                                                   o                           0

is consistent with efficiency.           Under this compensation rule, the well-being

of the union is


                         B(L) - VeL) = B -I- VeL) - VeL)
(6)
                                        a
                                            = Bo ,

a constant independent of L.        Labor never disagrees with management about L

because it is indifferent among all levels of employment.                   Rather than a

guaranteed annual wage, labor has a guaranteed annual level of well-being.

Management alone knows the true level of demand, measured by x, and makes a

unilateral decision about employment.                The level chosen is efficient because

of the internalization of labor's opportunity costs by management.                   The

absence of contractual limitations on employer's rights to vary employment

is one of the four major features of American collective bargaining that we

set out to explain.     In that respect, contracts where the compensation rule
       '
emb 0 d1es t h e opportunity cost   0f     1abor I
                                                 s t1me
                                                   '    may b e rea 1 · · 11
                                                                    1st1C.

      At the opposite extreme, suppose that demand is known in advance, so

that the revenue function is just R(L), but random shifts in the supply side
                                            11



make laborDs opportunity cost depend on z:          V(L,z).    An ideal compensation
rule then satisfies


(7)                                 RD(L)    =   B'(L)


(8)                                 av(t2~) ==   B'(L).
                                .     aL

Again, such a.rule exists for this case, but now it has an entirely unfamiliar

flavor.     Compensation must be total revenue less a distributive constant:


(9)                             B(L)    = R(L) - Bo •

Profit is


(10)                          n(L)      =   R(L) - B(L)

                                        =   B,
                                             o

so management is indifferent among all levels of employment.            Labor

internalizes the production function and product demand functions and

unilaterally determines employment to maximize its "profit, II R(L) - V(L,z) - B •
                                                                                o
No collective bargaining agreement known to us provides that the union makes

the employment decision and management acquiesces passively, even though this

kind of contract seems a theoretical possibility.

       The striking difference between the two cases makes it clear why an ideal

employment-contingent contract does not exist when both demand and supply

shift randomly.    To achieve efficiency in the face of demand shifts, the

marginal rate of compensation. B'(L). must increase with L, as it reflects

the increasing marginal opportunity cost of labor.            But to achieve efficiency

in the face of supply shifts. B'(L) must decrease with L. because the marginal

revenue product of labor is a decreasing function.            The two requirements are
                                                12



contradictory.    The contradiction is also apparent between the administrative

arrang~ments    that support the two kinds of contracts.       One or the other

party, but not both, must set employment unilaterally.

       One other special case will prove useful for the ensuing discussion.

Suppose that both supply and demand shift, but that the two shifts are

related.    Specifically, let


                                      z     =    f(x)


The conditions for an ideal compensation rule are


                                   aR(L,x)
(11)                                             =   B'(L)
                                     aL

                                aV(t,f(x»
(12)
                                    at
                                                 = B'(t)

These define the efficient level of employment as a function, t*(x), of the

random shift.    The most interesting and relevant case is where the shift

raises the marginal revenue product of labor and raises the marginal

opportunity cost of labor, but the former predominates so the efficient level

of employment rises when x rises.          For example, this would describe a

cyclically-sensitive industry where x is a measure of aggregate demand.

       In this case the ideal compensation rule exists but does not have a

closed mathematical form.    On the margin, it can be described in the following

way.   Let x(L) be the value of the random shift for which L is the efficient

level of employment (the inverse of L*(x».              Then


                                             aV(L,f(x(L»)
(13)                         B'(L)     =
                                                  aL

or,
                                            13




(14)                      B(L)               aV(L,f(x(L») dL
                                                  aL


B is a purely distributional parameter, as before.         The principle remains
 o
that marginal compensation should equal the marginal opportunity cost of

labor, but now the opportunity cost must be evaluated at the value of the

supply shift, z, corresponding to the demand shift, x.         Under our assumptions,

the dependence of the supply shift on the demand shift has a particular

implication about the shape of B(L):        Marginal compensation rises more

sharply with L than does the marginal opportunity cost of labor.

        Under the ideal compensation rule, management determines employment

unilaterally by setting L to satisfy profit maximization:


(15)
                                  aR(L,x)        B'(L)
                                    aL

It is interesting to compare the response of employment to a change in x in

this case to the response when 5upply is unaffected by x.         In the present

case, where the compensation rule takes account of related shifts in supply,

the steeper marginal compensation schedule acts to limit employment

fluctuations.      The logic is straightforward--if demand shocks are accompanied

by offsetting supply shocks, then the efficient change in employment is

smaller than it would be if supply were unrelated.       An important special case

of this proposition has been pointed out by Robert Barro:         Purely monetary

disturbances generate exactly offsetting shifts in supply and demand and

leave   th~   efficient level of employment unchanged.    If collective bargaining

achieves efficiency ex post, then monetary disturbances should have no effect

on employment even within the span of labor contracts.         This is a major

criticism of existing contract theory, which frequently claims to explain the
                                         14



apparent sensitivity of employment to monetary disturbances.      We will return

to this point at the conclusion of the paper.



IV.   Approximately efficient contracts

      When both demand and supply are uncertain, ideal employment-contingent

compensation rules do not exist.     Collective bargainers seem to deal with

this problem in the following way:     Approximately efficient contracts are

adopted that preserve efficiency in the face of the most likely source of

large fluctuations.      The contracts have a finite duration, almost always
               12
three years.        At the time of renegotiation, events that have caused the

previous contract to become inefficient can be taken into account.      An

important feature of this approach to collective bargaining is the irrelevance

at renegotiation of events which have already been accommodated within the

existing contract.     To the extent that the previous contract was successful

in establishing a framework for adapting to the major contingencies, only

minor contingencies will remain to be accommodated.     To the naive   observer~


then, collective bargainers will appear to be preoc.cupied with trivial issues

and to ignore what is most important.     In particular, we believe this accounts

for the strong belief among many economists that collective bargainers are

perverse and irrational in failing to let the wage respond appropriately to

changes in demand.     We will argue that, to a first approximation, the state

of demand should be irrelevant to rational collective bargainers.

      We begin with the hypothesis that the stochastic natures of unexpected

fluctuations in demand and in supply are rather different.     The demand for

the products of a single firm fluctuates with large amplitude, and some. but

not all, of the fluctuations are transitory.     Many demand shifts are unrelated

to fluctuations in aggregate demand.     On the other hand, fluctuations in the
                                         15



opportunity cost of labor are relatively small and are closely related to

developments elsewhere in the economy, especially unexpected changes in

average wages and prices and in the availability of work in neighboring

markets.   When these changes occur, they are frequently permanent.           Some of

the fluctuations in demand and supply are       related~-for   example, an increase

in aggregate demand raises both the demand for the firm's product and the

opportunity cost of the labor it uses.        But the correlation on this account

is weak.   Most fluctuations in demand are unrelated to aggregate demand, and

although these fluctuations are invisible in aggregate statistics, they are

crucial in designing an efficient labor contract.

     Collective bargainers choose between two very different types of

contracts in designing an approximately efficient bargain.         They may

establish a compensation rule based on expectations about the opportunity

cost of labor, and let management choose the level of employment unilaterally

in view of their perceptions of demand.       Alternatively, the compensation rule

may be based on expectations of the level of product demand, and labor given

the task of determining the level of employment unilaterally in response to

supply conditions.   The first type is efficient for demand fluctuations and

the second for supply fluctuations.   Neither is ideal.        There is no way to

compromise between them without creating some kind of joint decision-making

body to determine the level of employment.

     Under our hypotheses about the nature of fluctuations in demand and

supply, it is apparent that the first type of contract will be adopted by the

bargainers.   The dominant source of .potential inefficiency over the life of

a three-year contract is demand fluctuations.       But supply fluctuations need

not be completely ignored.   To the extent that supply and demand shifts are

correlated, management can be induced to treat the demand shift as a signal
                                           16



of a supply shift as well.      Suppose that the supply variable, z, can be

decomposed into a part that is predictable from the demand variable, say

f(x). and an unpredictable residual,       z:

(16)                               z   =   f(x) +   z.

Under these conditions, an approximately efficient contract can be drawn

along the lines suggested in the previous section.       The marginal rate of

compensation should be


(17)                           B'(L)   = aV(L,f(x(L»)
                                              aL

The resulting contract will be exactly efficient in the face of any demand

shift that is accompanied by the typical supply shift.      Again, if the

efficient level of employment rises with rising demand and if supply shifts

away from the firm, typically, when demand rises, then the compensation rule

based on this principle will result in more stable employment than will a

rule based only on demand shifts.      This stabilization is achieved by making

it financially unattractive to management to make large adjustments in

employment, not by prohibiting them.



v.     Institutional aspects

       We have been deliberately vague up to this point about the mechanisms

used to achieve the variations in employment that are needed to preserve

efficiency.    Members of effective labor unions are strongly attached to their

jobs because the union obtains a share of the monopoly profit for them, so it

is implausible that variations in our L are achieved by changing the number

of   job~holders.   Our apparatus is based on the contrary assumption that
                                        17



variations in L are achieved by changes in the amount of work done by a fixed

group of union members.     Part of these variations correspond to the well-

understood process of changing weekly hours of work in response to shifts in

demand.    But data on unionized industries show equally important fluctuations

in employment.     Why would a powerful union let one of its members lose his

job?    If decreases in L are brought about by discharging union members, and

subsequent increases in L are achieved by hiring new workers from the labor

market at large, then the union is failing in its task of protecting the

interests of its members.

       The answer to this puzzle seems to lie in the hypothesis that relatively

few of the people who stop working when demand falls actually lose their jobs.

Reductions in employment are achieved by layoffs, and workers who are laid

off are generally recalled after a matter of weeks or months and resume their

old J"obs.13   Th"1S process ta k es pI     I
                                      ace even      Ieve I s
                                               at norma        0   f d eman,
                                                                          d so

reduced layoff rates and faster recall are methods for increasing L when

demand is strong, as well.    In other words, an important method for varying

L is to change the annual weeks of work of a fixed labor force.       In some

industries, notably automobiles, this is accomplished by laying off the

workers in entire plants for single weeks whenever output threatens to exceed

demand.    In other industries, layoffs are more selective and last longer for

each individual.

       The compensation rules suggested by our analysis make the marginal rate

of compensation a fairly sensitive function of the level of employment.

Management must pay a sharp premium to obtain unusually high levels of labor

input, but escape very little of the obligation to pay compensation when they

use low volumes of labor.    The institutional arrangements that impose the

disincentive to excess employment are, first, overtime premiums that require
                                       18



that marginal excess hours be paid at 50 percent above the average wage,
                                                                            14

and, second, provisions that require the promotion of existing workers and

limit new hires to entry levels.   With respect to low levels of demand, the

most obvious arrangement to depress the marginal rate of compensation is the

supplementary unemployment benefit.    The part of   state~administered


unemployment insurance that is experience-rated has the same effect.      Further,

some collective bargaining agreements, notably in the steel industry, provide

that workers who are moved downward in the job ladder as a result of "bumping"

are protected against the corresponding reduction in pay.

     The evidence on compensation rules in American collective bargaining

seems consistent with a marginal opportunity cost of labor schedule that

rises fairly rapidly in the range of full-time work, though we emphasize that

our theory predicts a more steeply rising marginal rate of compensation than

marginal opportunity cost when demand and supply fluctuations are positively

correlated.   Empirical evidence on labor supply shows extreme sensitivity of

the marginal opportunity cost of all labor supplied by an individual, in that

estimated labor supply functions are virtually unresponsive to wages in the

case of the adult men who are the bulk of union membership.     However, the

opportunity cost of all labor is not the same as the opportunity cost of

labor supplied to the firm signing the collective bargaining agreement, since

many union members hold second jobs or are able to find temporary work during

periods of layoff.   For them, the marginal opportunity cost of work at the

union job does not fall quickly to zero below full-time work.     Similarly, the

part of unemployment compensation that is not experience-rated makes time

spent on layoff have a positive value to workers.     All of these considerations

make it desirable for the compensation rule to provide incentives to reduce

employment in times of slack demand.
                                        19



VI.   Risk and insurance

      Efficient contracts expose workers to risk.    Using the compensation

schedule to make the employment-contingent contract efficient rules out the

alternative of smoothing the variability of income by divorcing compensation

from the level of employment.     In this respect, our study is the polar

opposite of most other work on labor contracts.     Under the assumption of

convenience adopted in the body of the paper that the marginal opportunity

cost of labor does not depend on wealth, it turns out that the efficient

contract does not expose the union to any risk at all--the union is exactly

compensated for the stochastic variation in employment arising from

fluctuations in demand.     But this is an artifact of our otherwise very

convenient assumption.     In general, the expected utility of the union could

be increased by a set of insurance payments and premiums with expected value

zero across the various possible levels of product demand.     Were it not for

the problems of moral hazard and unobservability of demand that limit the

contracting process, either the firm or a private insurance company could

sell insurance to the union.     The work of Calvo and Phelps suggests that it

is difficult to reach any definite conclusions about the optimal contract

that balances efficiency against risk aversion.     Rather than pursue the

insurance side of labor contracts any further here, we will limit ourselves

to listing the considerations that would make the insurance side particularly

important:

      1.   If alternative levels of employment have large effects on wealth,

           then the need for insurance against them will be correspondingly

           large.   Thus, if union members have little income apart from

           compensation under the contract, and if the movements in employment

           that take place under the contract are permanent, then the optimal
                                               20



            contract    .~ll   sacrifice a considerable amount of efficiency.      On the

            other hane, if the movements are largely transitory, the need for

            insurance is      ~eak   and efficiency will be the dominant consideration

            in drawing the contract.

       2.   Insurance    ~eco~es     important when the marginal opportunity cost of

            labor is sensitive to the level of wealth, or, to put it another way,

            the elasticity of labor supply to wealth is strongly negative.

            Research    ~    labor supply has shown quite yeak income inelasticities

            for adult Eales.

       3.   Obviously, the demand for insurance depends on tbe degree of risk

            aversion   o~    the part of the union.

       4.   Finally, t2: demand for insurance depends on tbe magnitude of the

            fluctuatio~s      that are likely to occur under the efficient contract.

            The incenti7e to insure against small fluctuations is weak.



VII.    Macroeconomic    i=~lications     of efficient employment-contingent    cont~acts


       Labor contracts are of critical interest in macroeconomics because they

seem to offer an    ~lanation         for the persistence of unemployment.     If wages

are unresponsive to general economic conditions during the three years of a.

contract, then it      f~llryws   that wages cannot fully offset an aggregate

disturbance until 27ery contract has been renegotiated.           This appears a more

satisfying   explana~io~       than the principal alternative where persistence is

attributed to the      51~. diffusion of information in the labor market. IS But
as Barro has    point=~      out, purely nominal aggregate shocks, such as those

caused by unexpected        ~onetary   developments, have no ·effect on the efficient

level of employmen= or         u~employment,   and framers of labor contracts ought to

be able to figure      ~ut   a way to avoid inefficient responses to these shocks.
                                         21



If all disturbances are purely nominal, then the efficient contract is

extremely Simple--it specifies a predetermined level of employment.         The

mere existence of labor contracts does not explain the persistence of

unemployment satisfactorily.

     Our discussion of the contracting problem at the level of the firm and

the union   suggest~   the difficulties in achieving the efficient response to

an economy-wide   disturban~e.    Employment~contingent contracts   seem a workable

solution to the   collecti~e   bargaining problem at this level, but they embody

a strong limitation on the response to aggregate disturbances.        Only the part

of the supply side of such a disturbance that can be predicted from the

firm's own demand can be offset under the terms of the contract.        If most

fluctuations in demand at the level of the firm are unrelated to aggregate

demand and thus are unrelated to changes in the opportunity cost of the labor

supplied to the firm, then     d~nd   is a very noisy signal and the degree of

offset (measured by our f(x»     is relatively weak.    As perceived at the level

of the firm, where recessions are just one of many sources of fluctuations,

the inefficiency is fairly swall, but in the aggregate, where only aggregate

fluctuations are visible, this limitation becomes important.        A recession, in

this view, is treated by fir.3S as no more than another reduction in demand

for which a reduction in e3ployment is the efficient response.        Within the

framework of   employment-c~ntingentbargains,    there is no way to provide

employers with a separate incentive to stabilize       emplo~ent   in the face of an

economy-wide reduction    i~ d~nd.
                                           22



VIII.        Concluding remarks

        We conclude by summarizing the explanations provided by our theorypf

the four puzzling features of collective bargaining listed at the outset:

        1.    Absence of contingencies on outside    variables~   Moral hazard and

imperfect measurement limit contingencies based on outside variables.

Further, contingency on the level of employment is such a powerful tool that

it dominates outside contingencies.

        2.    Unilateral determination of employment by management.      This is the

central feature of employment-contingent contracts.         The compensation rule

makes labor approximately indifferent among alternative levels of employment,

so there is little or no disagreement with management's choice.           Neither

management nor labor has an important incentive to default on the          contract~.


        3.    Periodic renegotiation of contracts.    Changes in the opportunity

cost of labor not predictable from changes in demand generate cumulative

inefficiencies that can be relieved only by renegotiation.

        4.    Irrelevance of the current state of demand in collective bargaining.

Employment-contingent contracts provide a complete mechanism for taking

account of unexpected shifts in demand.         Both parties are satisfied with the

current level of employment if there have been no unexpected shifts on the

supply side, no matter what is the level of demand.         Only supply issues are

sorted out in collective bargaining.       This explains the paradox of large

increases in wage schedules emerging from collective bargaining that takes

place at a time of depressed employment.        Labor's conventional justification

for these increases -- that wages elsewhere have risen substantially -- is

exactly supported by our analysis.
                                             23



                                       Appendix

Efficient wage bargains when the opportunity cost of labor depends on income



       A more general description of preferences would make the opportunity

cost of labor depend on the overall level of well-being, u, according to a

function V(L,u,z).    Well-being depends on income from sources other than

employment of union members.      Further, in accordance with the life cycle-

permanent income hypothesis, u should reflect expectations of future earnings

as well as the effect of the current contract.          In the absence of demand and

supply fluctuations, the basic condition for efficiency is


(AI)                                         =


(VI is the derivative of V with respect to its first argument.)          The contract

curve is no longer a vertical line in the L-B diagram of Figure 1, but

presumably slopes downward, assuming that the marginal opportunity cost of

work is. higher at higher levels of well-being.         The efficient compensation

rule is defined implicitly by


(A2)                                   =

an ordinary differential equation.          Here g(L,B) is the level of well-being

achieved when work is L and compensation is B.

       With random demand and supply shifts x and z, a fully contingent contract

providing compensation B(x,z) is efficient if


                         R(L,x)
(A3)                               =       V (L,g(L,B(L),z),z)
                           aL               1

for all x and z.
                                                        24



       Then we can formalize the impossibility of an ideal compensation rule:


       Theorem:        Suppose that all of the second derivatives of R and V are

continuous, that both x and z can vary within some rectangular region

a 1 < x < a 2 and b 1       ~   z < b 2 , and .that the disturbances matter within this

region in that a 2 R/aLax > 0 and a 2 V/aLaz > O.                     Suppose further that the

marginal revenue schedule slopes downward: a2R/aL 2 < 0 and nonwork is a
            aV I  aV I ag
normal good aL + ag aL > O. Then there is no compensation rule for which


                                             aR
(A4)                                                =      B' (L)
                                             aL

and

(AS)                                         av =          B' (L)
                                             aL

for all values of x and z in the region.


Proof:   Suppose       ther~    were such a B(L).            Then:


(A6)        aR~LLx)         =   B' (L) makes L a function of x, with                     ~~ :f    0


(A7)       V (L,g(L,B(L),z),z)
            1
                                            =    B'(L) makes L a function of z, with

            aL    f:    0
            az

             2                                                                                   a 2R
(A8)
           a -R-aL
           -
           dL2 dZ
                 - = B"(L) aL
                           az
                                        .       But since
                                                               aL
                                                               a;    :f    o.    B"(L)    =      aL2
                                                                                                      < 0



            [3V1 +          aV I a
                            _2..8.
                                        [*                 1;; .               aL
                             au aL +                                                      :f 0,
(A9)                                            B' (L) ]             But since dX
             aL



           B"(L)                   +   a;: [*        +     *   B' (L)]    ~ 0,   a contradiction.
    25



References
                                         26



Wassily Leontief, "The Pure Theory of the Guaranteed Annual Wage Contract,"

     J. Polito Econ., Feb. 1946, 56, 76-79.

David Lilien, The Cyclical Pattern of Temporary Layoffs in United States

     Manufacturing, Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. of Economics, MIT, Aug. 1977.

George de Menil, Bargaining:     Monopoly Power versus Union Power, MIT Press,

     19710

Edmund S. Phelps, "Indexation Issues:      A Comment on the Blinder and Fischer

     Papers," in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer (eds.), Stabilization of     th~

     Domestic and International Economy, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series

     on Public Policy,   2,   1977, 149-159.

Edmund S. Phelps and John B. Taylor, "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy

     under Rational Expectations," J. Polito Econ.,Feb. 1977, 85, 163-190.

Herbert A. Simon, Models 'of Man, New York, 1957.
                                         27



                                     Footnotes



     tThis research was supported by the National Science Foundation.        We are

grateful to Jerome Culp, Avinash Dixit and Jeffrey Harris for useful        sugges~


tions.

     *Stanford University and University of California, San Diego.

     lStanley Fischer, Edmund Phelps and John Taylor, and Robert Barro.

     2Costas Azariadis 1975, 1977, Martin Baily, Donald Gordon, Herschel

Grossman 1976, 1977, Phelps and Guillermo Calvo, and Phelps.
     3
         In general, V(L) ·should depend on wealth as well as employment.    This

dependence complicates the analysis without changing its character, and is

deferred to the Appendix.

     4The fact that the contract curve is vertical is a consequence of our

assumption that the marginal opportunity cost of labor is independent of

wealth and so is unaffected by the level of compensation.     Again, see the

Appendix for the more general case.
     5
         George de Menil presents a complete discussion with many references.

     6These limitations on contingent labor contracts, especially moral

hazard, are discussed by Phelps and Calvo and by Phelps.      In this paper., we

do not present an extended justification for the assumption that contracts

are not contingent, but rather pursue the implications of the assumption.

In our view, it is still an unsettled question why contingencies are so rare.

     7Again, this type of contingen~y is discussed by Calvo and Phelps.

     8An interesting discussion of this problem appears in Herbert Simon,

Chapter 11.    Simon asks under what conditions labor will permit management

to make a unilateral employment decision in exchange for a lump-sum wage

payment.    He does not consider the generalization where management makes the

employment decision subject to a more general compensation rule.
                                         28



     9
         In the usual contingent contract of the kind studied by Azariadis (1975)

for example, optimization is prohibited.      However, the limited ability of

employer's to enforce the terms of an employment contract against workers makes

it possible for workers to default by quitting, as discussed by Grossman.

Under the type of contract considered here, workers never have an economic

incentive to quit.
    10
         Here we depart from Calvo and Phelps.    They define the preferred

contract as the optimal compromise    betwe~n    the goals of efficiency and

insurance.     The compromise is necessary because of the limited power of the

employment contingency.     However, under the assumptions we use in the body of

the paper, the efficient contract also provides optimal insurance.        The

effect of modifying the assumptions is discussed in the Appendix.       We will

return briefly to the insurance issue at the end of the paper.

    'llUnder the fixed wage contract that is studied in the pioneering ,work of

Baily and Azariadis, the level of employment is made contingent on an outside

measure of demand.     Lower levels of employment are desirable under that type

of contract when demand is low if labor values its time.       The novel feature

here and in Calvo and Phelps is to make management responsible for setting

employment and to use profit maximization     ~   post as the mechanism for

achieving the efficient level of employment.

    12In the United States, there are legal restrictions on the enforcement

of contracts lasting more than three years.

    13See Martin Feldstein and David Lilien.

          ,
    14Some premiums are required by law.

    15For a discussion of this point, see Robert Hall.
