                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         INCOME AND RACE DIFFERENCES IN CHILDREN'S ALTH




                        Linda N.   Edwards

                        Michael Grossman


                      Working Paper No. 308




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                          January 1979




                  Preliminary;   Not for Quotation

Research for this paper was supported by PHS Grant No. 1 RO1 HS
02917 from the National Center for Health Services Research to
the NBER and by a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
to the NBER. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in the economics of health. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the NBER.
                        NBER Working Paper No. 308

                               January 1979




             INCOME AND RACE DIFFERENCES IN CHILDREN'S HEALTH

                  Linda N. Edwards and Michael Grossman



                                ABSTRACT


     In  this paper we explore income and race differences in nine mea-
sures of the health of children aged 6 through 11. We show that when
health measures from mid-childhood are the subject of analysis, both in-
come and race differences are much less pronounced than they are in in—
f ant mortality and birth weight data. We do find differences in the
health status of black and white children and of children from high and
low income families, but these differences by no means overwhelmingly
favor the white or high—income children. With respect to differences
by race, whether or not they are adjusted for differences in associated
socioeconomic factors, black children in many cases are in better health
than their white counterparts, In the case of income differences in
health, the high income children do appear to be in better health accord-
ing to most measures, but their advantage is greatly diminished when one
controls for related socioeconomic factors like parents' educational
attainment. Even so, for measures relating to the "new morbidity," such
as the presence of allergies or excessive tension, children from higher
income families are in worse health.




                                           Bureau of Economic Research
                                    National
                                    15—19 West 4th Street, 8th Floor
                                    Washington Square
                                    New York, New York 10012
                                    (212) 598—3321/3532
                      INCO€ AND RACE DIFFERENCES IN CHILDREN' S HEALTH

                           Linda N.   Edwards and Michael Grosslnan*



I.   Introduction
        Recent   studies of children's health in the United States have stressed

the differences between black and white children and between children in high

and low income families. Newberger, Newberger, and Richmond (1976), for ex-

ample, cite mortality rates for both infants and older children that are

over 50 percent higher for blacks than for whites (pp. 252—53). They also

point   out that the incidence of low birth weight (a good negative indicator
of whether an infant will survive his first year and of his successful fu-
ture development) is more prevalent among black and poor families. Similar
statistics   are cited by Keniston (1977) and the National Research Council

(1976).

        The income and race comparisons in children's health status cited above,

as well as those cited elsewhere, rely primarily on measures that relate to the

first year of the child's life. This results largely from the unavailability

of comprehensive measures of morbidity for older children. Recent publication

of data from Cycles II and III of the Health Examination Survey, however,

makes it possible to explicitly study the health of older children. In this

paper we use data from Cycle II, which covers children aged 6 through 11 years,

to explore income and race differences in nine measures of children's health.

        We report two kinds of results. First, we show that when health measures

from mid—childhood are the subject of analysis, both income and race differences

are much less pronounced than they are in infant mortality data. Second, these

differences do not uniformly favor children from white or higher—income families.

Indeed, children from toor families and black families are found to be in better

rather than worse health when measures that reflect the "new morbidity" are
                                          —2—


examined. This is the phrase originated by Haggerty, Rcghmann, and Pless             (1975)

to   describe "learning difficulties and school problems, behavioral disturbances,
allergies, speech     difficulties, visual problems, and the problems of adolescents

in   coping and   adjusting"   (p. 316). They observe   that   over this century   the

traditional     childhood diseases have been declining in importance while health
problems associated with the new morbidity have become         more widespread. That is,

growing levels of family income in this century have been accompanied by an increased

prevalence of the new morbidity. This observation is remarkably parallel to our

own findings of a positive association between family income and the incidence

of this type of health problem.


II. Measuring Health in the Cycle II Sample

       Cycle II of the Health Examination Survey is an         exceptional source of in-
formation about a national sample of 7,119 noninstitutionalized children aged
6 to 11 years in the 1963-65 period.1 The data comprise complete medical            and

developmental     histories of each child provided by the parent, information on
family socioeconomic characteristics, birth certificate information, and a
school    report with data on school performance and    classroom   behavior provided
by teachers or other school officials. Most important, there are objective
measures of health from physical examinations administered by the Public Health
Service. Together, the data provide an unusually detailed picture of the health
of children in this cohort.
       Given the unusual detail and diversity of the health data in the Cycle II

survey,   the   choice of health status measures is not dictated by data availabil-

ity but rather is an issue that must be faced directly. The problem of defining

and measuring children's (and adults') health is very much an unresolved one,

even among professionals in the area of public health.2 The economist's
                                           —3—


approach is to define health as a form of human capital which determines the
anunt of time available for consumption and for work in the home and labor
market.3 (Individuals       may also derive disutility, or even utility, from the

state    of being ill.) With this type of definition, an appropriate measure of
health status over some time period would be the proportion of potential time
that is actually available for usual consumption, maintenance, and work ac-
tivities. Similarly, the complementary measure of ill health would be the
proportion of time lost as a result of imperfect functioning. Such disability
may be relatively easy to measure when dealing with adults who are members of
the labor force (a good approximation is days lost from work because of ill-
ness), but it is not easy to measure for other adults or for children.
Therefore,    in economists' studies of adults' health, both        the   incidence of

particular    physical conditions and the     individual's own   assessment   of his

health    status have been used as     supplementary health measures [Grossman

(1975)].

         We use the same type of restricted, morbidity—oriented, definition of


children's health——focusing on the child's physical health rather than his

overall    well—being——and similar types of measures—disability, physical con-
ditions, and parental assessment of health status. Even some of these mea-
sures, however, may not     always be appropriate for children. There is a

natural sequence of     childhood diseases and acute conditions which prevent
children    from   carrying out   their normal activities but may   not   reflect their

health   capital or "permanent" health. A useful distinction to make here is
between "permanent" health——one's prospect for life preservation and normal
lifetime functioning——and "transitory" health—-short-run deviations from
one's normal state of health. It is the child's "permanent" health status
                                          —4—



that we wish to study, and we seek to use health measures which are good in-
dicators of that "permanent" health status.4
      In some situations a single overall index of permanent health might be
desired——to parsimoniously describe the health status of a population, for
example, or to allocate public funds. Infant mortality statistics are fre-
quently used in this way. Health, however, is clearly a multidimensional
concept. Consequently we use a set of health measures rather than          a   single
index.    Analysis of a set of component measures also avoids the essentially

arbitrary weighting of the various        dimensions of health implied by a health
index.5       Finally, such analysis   allows   for the possibility that the various

aspects   of children's health are differentially related       to family income

and   race.

         The actual choice of components of children's health status to be ex-

amined has been guided by        the child health literature ,6 as well as by dis-

cussions with public health pediatricians.7 The measures are listed and

described below.

         1. The parent's assessment of the child's overall current health,

represented by PFGHEALTH. PFGHEALTH is a dichotomous variable indicating

whether       the   parent views the child's health as poor, fair, or good (as

opposed to very good).

         2.     Current height, represented by IHEIGHT. Height is a standard
indicator       of children's nutritional status [for example, National Center

 for Health Statistics (1970) and (1975); Seoane and Latham (1971)], and

 good nutrition is an obvious and natural vehicle for maintaining children's

 health. Since it is well known that physical growth rates differ by age

 and sex, IHEIGHT is computed as the difference between the child's actual
                                             —5—

height and the mean       height   for his or her age—sex group divided by the   stan-
dard deviation of height for that age—sex group.8

       3. The child's visual acuity, represented by the dichotomous variable

ABVIS. ABVIS indicates if the child has abnormal distance vision. All

children were examined without their eyeglasses; their uncorrected binocular

distance vision is defined as abnormal if it is worse than 20/30 (NCHS (1972)].

       4. The child's blood pressure, represented by HDBP. HDBP is a dummy

variable which indicates if the child's diastolic blood pressure exceeds the

95th percentile for his or her age and sex.

       5. Whether or not the child has hayf ever or other allergies, repre-

sented by the dummy variable ALLEG.

       6. An assessment of the child's level of tension, represented by the

dummy variable TENS. TENS characterizes children who are rated by their

parents      as "high strung" or "moderately tense." Both the     tension and al—

lergy variables may be regarded as measures of the "new morbidity."
        7.    The    presence of one or more "significant acquired abnormalities"
on physical examination of the child, represented by the dummy variable
ACABN. These abnormalities include heart disease; neurological,          muscular,

or   joint conditions; and other major diseases.9
        8.     The   child's periodontal index, represented by APERI.   APERI    is a
good overall indicator of oral health as well as a correlate of nutrition
(Russell (1956)3. Since the periodontal index is known to differ system-

atically by age and sex, APERI it is standardized by age and sex in the

same   manner as is height. Higher values of APERI denote        poorer values of

oral   health. 10
                                         —6—

         9. Excessive absence from school for health reasons during the past

six months, represented by the dichotomous variable SCHABS. This variable

is taken from information provided by the child's school.11

        Precise definitions of the above health measures appear in Table 1

along with a notation concerning the source of each variable (medical his-

tory, physician's exam, birth certificate, or school form). As is implied

in the above definitions, IHEIGHT is a positive correlate of good health and

PFGHEALTH, ABVIS, HDBP, ALLEG, TENS, ACABN, APERI, and SCHABS are negative

correlates of good health.


III. Race and Income Differences in Health
      atus in the Cycle II Sample

        Table 2 presents the mean levels of these nine health measures for

the whole sample as well as by family income and by race)2 The two fam—

ily    income classes are under $5,000 per annum and $5,000 or more per annum.

This income cutoff is selected because it identifies the lowest quartile

of the income distribution for the Cycle II sample. For purposes of com-

parison, Table 2 also includes statistics on infant mortality and the in-

cidence of low birth weight for corresponding income and race classes.

        Significant   race differences in health are observed for four of the
nine   health   measures: IHEIGHT, PFGHEALTH, ALLEG, and    TENS.   Black children
are in worse health than    white   children according   to their parents' assess-

ment of their overall current health (also according to HDBP and ACABN,

though for these two the race differences are not statistically significant).

Black children are in better health, however, in that they are taller and

they exhibit a lower incidence of allergies and tension (favorable differences

are also apparent for ABVIS, APERI,      and SCHABS, though these are not statis-
tically significant). Race comparisons of children's health based on these
                                             —7—



                                         TABLE 1
                            Definitions of Health Measures


    Variable
      Name


    PFGHEALTH        Dummy variable that equals one if parental
                     assessment of child's health is poor,   fair,
                     or good and   zero if
                                         assessment is very good

    IHEIGHT          Height, standardized by the mean and stand-             3
                     ard   deviation of one—year age—sex cohorts
    ABVIS           Duirmy variable that equals one if uncorrected           3
                    binocular distance vision is abnormal
    HDBP            Dummy variable that equals one if the child's            3
                    diastolic blood pressure is above the 95th
                    percentile for his age and sex

ALLEG               Dummy variable   that equals one if the child
                    has had   hayfever or any other kind of
                    allergy
TENS                Dummy variable that equals one if the parent
                    rates the child as high strung or moderately
                    tense

ACABN               Dummy variable that equals one if the physi-             3
                    cian finds a "significant" acquired abnormal-
                    ity in examining the child (other than an
                    abnormality resulting from an accident or
                    injury)
APERI               Peridontal index, standardized by the mean               3
                    and standard deviation of one—year age—sex
                    cohorts

SCHABS              Dummy variable that equals one if child has              4
                    been excessively absent from school for
                    health reasons during the past six months



      *
       The   sources are 1 = medical   history form completed   by parent,
2      birth certificate, 3 = physical, examination,   4 = school form com-
pleted by teacher or other school official.
                                                   TABLE 2
              Mean Values of Health Measures in Cycle II Sample by Family Income and Race,
                    and Infant Mortality and Birth Weight by Family Income and Race


               Cycle II                                "F" Statistic                                        "F" Statistic
Cycle    II    Working                                          for         Income <      Income >           for   High—Low
Health         Sample       Blacks        Whites                           $5,000 p.a.   $5,000 p.a.           Income
Measure       (n — 4777)   (n = 581)    (n 4196)        White—Blac
                                                        Difference          (n   1645)       (n     3132)   Difference b

PFGHEALTH        .4706        .6127        .4509             54.23             .5939              .4058        158.20
IHEIGHTC         .0258        .0900        .0169              2.82           —.1177               .1012         54.07
ABVIS            .1160        .1136        .1163               .04             .0954           .1268           10.33
HDBP             .0557        .0671        .0541              1.65             .0614           .0527            1.56
ALLEG            .1478        .0878        .1561             18.98             .1015           .1721           43.02
TENS             .4593        .3373        .4762             39.92             .4304           .4745            8.44
ACABN            .0373        .0430        .0365              0.61             .0389           .0364            0.19
                —.0392       —.0736       —.0344              1.42             .0711          —.0971           55.88
APERICd                                                                                                                       co
SCHABS           .0445        .0422        .0449              0.08             .0483           .0426            0.75


                                                                       Population        Population
Other            Total        Black        White                       with Income       with Income
Health        Population   Population   Population                     <   $5,000 p.a.   >   $5,000 p.a.
Measures        1963—65      1963—65      1963—65                           1963—65           1963—65


Infant
mortalitye        23.0         39.5         20,8                               28.4               19.1
Percent of
births with
weight <
2,500 grams       7.87        14.01         7.01                               8.89               7.05
                                       —9—



                               Foothotes to TABLE 2



      or description of working sample, see footnote 12.

      bCjUl values for F are 2.69 at 10 percent level of significance
and 3.84 at the 5 percent level of significance.

      Th mean of this variable is not zero because standardization was
done using the means and standard deviations for the entire Cycle II
sample rather than for our working subsample.

      dMeans derived from subsample of working sample for which a school
report was available (n •    4333   rather than 4777).

      eh per 1,000 live legitimate births •              Source:   Infant Mortal
Rates: Socioeconomic     Factors, N.C.LS. Series 22,      No. 14, Table 3,
p. 14, U.s.   1964—66.
                                           — 10   —




nine   measures, therefore, clearly yield a much less uniform impression than

is   drawn from inspection of data on infant mortality and low birth weight.
Rather than exhibiting the dramatically large health deficits of black in-
fants, older black children are in some ways          worse off but also in some ways
                                           13
better of f than their white counterparts.

        Significant   income differences are found for six of the nine health

measures, although, as in the case of race differences, the nature of these

differences is not uniform.       Children   from higher income families   have

significantly   better health as measured by PFGHEALTH, IHEIGHT, and APERI
(also HDBP, ACABN, and SCHABS although for these three the income differ-
ences are not significant). On the other hand, they have significantly

poorer   health as measured by    ABVIS,   ALLEG, and TENS.14 Again,   the overall

impression conveyed by these data is less clear—cut than that obtained from

examining income differences in infant mortality and birth weight: in some

cases children from low income families do have poorer health than those

from higher income families, but with respect to measures that reflect the

"new morbidity" it    is   the children from low income families who appear to be

in better health.


IV. Decomposition of Observed Race and Income Differences

        We have docwnented the fact that race and income differences in health

status in the Cycle II     sample   children are much less sharp than are corre-

sponding differences in measures of infant health. Nevertheless, some dif-

ferences still do exist. To what extent are these uniquely associated with

income and race and to     what   extent can they be attributed to correlated

socioeconomic factors?
                                          — 11 —



A.     Race Differences

         It is well known that race and         income are themselves highly corre-
lated. Thus it is not surprising that the four health measures display-

ing significant race differences also exhibit significant income differ-

ences (see Table 2). An obvious first step, therefore, is to try to

determine if these observed race differences are really just a result of

differences in income. To do so we obtain mean values for the nine health

measures   when the       Cycle II sample is cross-classified by both income and

race    (Table 3).    znong low income families significant race differences

remain   for two     of   the four variables,   height   and   tension.   In   addition,

for APERI the race difference is now significant where it was not before.

For all three of these measures, however, black children are found to be

in better health than white         children from   families of comparable low in-

come levels. In high income families, significant race differences still

exist for PFGHEALTH, ALLEG, and TENS, with black children in worse health

according to PFGHEALTH and in better health according to TENS and ALLEG.

Thus, within income classes significant health differences still exist be-

tween black and white children. As before, these differences do not urii—

formly favor children of either race, but most of the significant differ-
                                          15
ences show blacks to be better off.

     A further way of investigating the nature of race differences in chil-

dren's health is to look at residual race differences after a much larger

list of socioeconomic variables is held constant. This is done using

multiple regression analysis. The dependent variables in the regression

equations are the nine health status measures. For the explanatory vari-

ables we use a set suggested by the economic model of family investment
                                                                   TABLE 3
                              Gross and Net Race Differences in Children's Health Status



                            Low   Income Farilies         (<   $5,000   pa.)     High Income Families         (>   $5,000 p.a.)
                 Gross      —                                                    —
              Difference      Black            White                               Black           White
 Health      (Black Mean—     Mean             Mean                                 Mean           Mean                              Net
 Measure      White Mean)   (n = 418)     (n   =    1,227)        Difference      (n = 163)   (n   =                Difference    Differencea
                                                                                                        2,969)

PFGHEALTHc      .162**        .612                 .589                 .023        .614               .394             .220**

IHEIGHTC        .073*         .068             —.181                    .249**      .146               .099             .047         .657**



ABVISb         —.002          .108                 .091                 .017        .129               .127             .002         .009

HDBPb           .013          .069                 .056                 .013        .061               .052             .009        —.003

ALLEGC                        .084                 .108             —.024           .098               .176                          .227**

TENSb                         .354                 .456                             .295               .484

ACABNb          .007          .046                 .037                 .009        .037               .036             .001         .018*

APERIC         —.039         —.063                 .117                           —.101            —.097               —.004

SCHABSb        —.003          .045                 .049             —.004           .034               .043            —.009        —.005
                                               — 13 —




                                      Footnotes to TABLE   3




        *   **
                 Significant     race differences in means at the 10 percent and 5

percent levels of significance, respectively.


        asee     text fox description.


        bNet      difference equals regression coefficient of a race dummy vari—

able (1 =        black)   from   a   pooled regression of black and   white   children that

holds   constant all. other independent variables.

        CNet difference equals difference in intercepts between black and
white regressions with all, independent variables held constant.
                                            — 1.4   —




 in   children's health described in Edwards and Grossman (1978). Included are

 family   income, parents' educational attainment, whether the child's father
lives with the family, whether the        child     is a twin or a first—born, whether
a foreign language is spoken in the home, an indication of the region of

residence and size of city of residence, and the sex of the child (the

latter is included only for health measures that are not standardized by

sex). These variables are defined in detail in Edwards and Grossman (1978).

         Race differences in children's health net of differences in this set

of socioeconomic variables are presented in the last column of Table 3)6

In general, the net differences are not smaller than the gross differences.

In fact, the net differences are significant for six rather than four of the

nine variables, with blacks exhibiting better health for four of the six,

and   worse health   for the remaining two. Specifically, when the above set

of socioeconomic variables is held constant, being black is associated with

significantly better health for black children when their health is measured

according to their parents' assessment, their height, their tension level,

and their periodontal index, and with significantly worse health according

to the prevalence of allergies and acquired abnormalities. In addition,

comparison of these net differences with the gross differences (for all in-

comes or within income classes) reveals two changes in the health rankings

of black and white children: the parental assessment measure now favors

blacks    and the allergy measure now     favors    whites.
         What conclusions do   we   draw from the    various   statistics in Table 3?
First,    that race differences in children's health do not disappear when in—
come and various     other socioeconomic variables are held constant; if        any-

thing, they increase. Second, these differences do not obviously favor
                                        — 15   —




children of either race. As to the reasons for these differences, one can
speculate about the roles of such factors as differential genetic endow-
ments (in the case of height or the periodontal index, for example) and
differences   in tastes or in life    styles.

3. Income Differences

        Race differences in childrens' health did not disappear when various

socioeconomic factors (including income) were held constant; does the same

conclusion hold for income—related differences? Put differently, to what

extent do the gross   differences     in health status between       income   classes

disappear when additional socioeconomic factors are           held   constant? To

answer this question, we use    the   same type of multiple regression analysis

described earlier. We simplify the analysis, however, by restricting the

decomposition of gross income differences to the white sample only.17

       Gross and net income   differences      for the nine health measures are

presented   in Table 4. The "net" income        differences   are   computed similarly
to   the corresponding race differences18 and should be interpreted as the

difference in mean health status between the two         income classes if       all of

the socioeconomic variables (other than income, of course) took the same

values in both classes. The number of health status measures for which

significant income differences exist is reduced to four when related socio-

economic factors   are held constant. For three of the four, PFGHEALTH,
IHEIGHT, and APERI, low income is
                                associated with significantly poorer
health; for the fourth, ALLEG, it is associated with better health. In
addition,   the magnitude of these differences is substantially reduced,

with the net differences being typically less than half of the gross dif-

ferences (see last column of table). For example, on the basis of the
                                          — 16   —




                                         TABLE    4
Gross    and   Net   Income Differences in the Health Status of White Childrena


                                                                      Ratio of
                     High       Low       Gross          Net           Net to
 Health           Income       Income     Income        Income      Gross Income
 Measure             Mean       Mean    Differenceb   DifferenceC    Difference

PFGHEALTH            .394       .589                                        37

IHEIGHT              .099      —.181       .280**        .117**          .42

ABVIS                .127       .091       .036**        .020            .56

HDBP                 .052       .056      —.004         —.001            .25

ALLEG                .176       .108       .068**        .028*           .41

TENS                 .484       .456       .028*        —.009           d

ACABN                .036       .037      —.001         —.004           2.00

APERI             —.097         .117                                     .36

SCHABS               .043       .049      —.006        —.001             .17




   aThere are 2,718 white children in the high—income ( $5,000 o.a.)

sample and      1,227   white children in the low—income ( $5,000 p.a..) sample.

   bThjg is computed as the mean in the high income sample minus         the
mean in the low—income sample.


   CThjg   is   the coefficient of a dumy income variable (high-income chil-.

dren have value of one) in a multiple regression which includes variables

listed in text.


   dNot computed because of change in sign.

   *   **
         Significant        income differences at the 10 percent and 5 percent

levels of significance, respectively.
                                           — 17 —




gross difference, about 20 percent more of the high income parents than of                  -




the    low income parents assessed their childrens' health as very good.

When related socioeconomic factors are held constant, this difference is

reduced to only 7 percent. Thus, although income differences in health

status still do exist, their magnitudes are greatly diminished when re-

lated factors are held constant. The main conclusion to be drawn is

clear: gross income differences in health greatly overstate the true re-

lationship    between family income and health.
              insight about the nature of gross income differentials in
         Further

health status is obtained by studying the precise role of the explana-
tory socioeconomic      variables. Table 5      presents   calculations which illus-
trate how    the gross income differences are decomposed among the various

explanatory    factors for the     six   health variables exhibiting significant
gross income    differences.      The procedure is simply to multiply the co-
efficients of       these explanatory    variables   by the differences in their

mean    values in the high and     low   family income samples of children.19
Several results in Table 5        are   noteworthy. First, almost all of the dif-
ferences in the six      health   measures between the     high   and low   income sub—

samples can    accounted for by differences in the independent variables
               be

that we have included in our empirical work. Second, a detailed examina-
tion of the decomposition indicates that for four of the six                measures
(PFGHEALTH, IHEIGHT, ALLEG,       and    APERI), differences in parents' average

schooling   between high and low income families account for as much or more
of the gross differences as does income itself. For the other                two   measures,
ABVIS   and TENS, no single component accounts for a large part             of the gross

differences,   but rather many components play small roles.
                                         — 18 —




                                      TABLE 5

 Components of the Difference in PFGHEALTH, IHEIGHT, ABVIS, ALLEG, TENS
   and APEEX Between White Children from High and Low Income Families



      Component          PFGHEALTH    IHEIGHT     ABVIS     ALLEG       TENS        APER.I



Family income              —.072        .117       .020         .028   —   .009      —.077

Parents schooling          —.089        .126       .002         .045       .005      —.145

Other familX     char-
acteristics                 .000        .009       .004         .004       .012     —.011

Charactei sti Cs
of child                   —.013        .008       .000         .001       .007       .001

Region                    —.024         .010       .007     —   .005   — .002         .020

City size                  —.006        .009       .004     —   .004       .016      —.003


Total . Predicted
Gross Difference          —.205         .279       .037         .069       .029     —.215

Actual Gross
Difference                —.195         .280       .036         .068       .028     —.214




   aThese include whether or not a foreign language             is spoken in      the home

and   whether or   not the father is absent from    the   home.


  bThese     include whether or not the child is a first—born or a twin,

and   his   or her sex. The latter is not included for IHEIGHT and APEII,

both   of which are   standardized   by sex.
                                      —19—



        Our findings with respect to race and income differences may be com-

pared with those in a recent study of infant mortality by Gortmaker (1977).

He    attempts to determine what portion of the large income    and race differ-

ences in infant mortality can be explained by differences in parents' edu-
cational. attajnient, mother's age, the child's birth order, and the pre-
vious pregnancy experience of the mother • He finds that poverty families
and black families still display a much higher incidence of infant mortal-
ity   even when these factors are   controlled for.

V. Conclusions
       The first point that we make in concluding is that income and race
differences in infant mortality provides a poor, and even misleading
description   of income and race differences in the health of older children.

It may be appropriate to use     infant   mortality statistics in broad across—

country comparisons   of the   health status of various populations but these

statistics should not be used to indicate the health status of various

groups of older children within the United States.

        We do find differences in the health status of black and white chil-

dren and of children from high and low income families, but these differ-

ences by no means overwhelmingly favor the white or high—income children.

With respect to differences by race, whether or not they are adjusted for

differences in associated socioeconomic factors, black children in many

cases are in better health than their white counteroart.g. In the case of

income differences in health, the high income children do appear to be in

better health according to most measures, but their advantage is greatly

diminished when one controls for related socioeconomic factors like par-

ents' educational attainment. Even so, for measures       relating to the new
                                         — 20   —




morbidity     children from higher income families are    in worse   health. Of.

course,   one could argue that the latter conclusion is erroneous because
health problems like allergies and excessive tension are comparatively
subtle    and are   detected only   in a setting (i.e. in high income families)

where other types of health problems are minimized. However, the greater

incidence of the new morbidity among children from high as opposed to low

income families is consistent with the well known positive relationship
between    income and morbidity and      mortality rates observed for adults in

the   United States     (for example, Auster et al. (1969) and Grossman       (1975)].
         Implicit   in the above discussion is the necessity of recognizing the

multidimensional nature of health. Our results clearly differ           for   differ-

ent health status measures. Poor and black children tend to be in better

health when aspects of the "new morbidity" are        under   study, and in worse

health when more traditional health        measures are used. Thus, our findings
underscore the importance of treating childrens' health status as multi-

dimensional and      illustrates how the use of a   single health index could lead
to   erroneous conclusions about health status and its relation to income and

race.

        The   primary   focus of this paper has been to clarify coimnonly held

notions about income and race differences in childrens' health. Our analy-

sis, however, has also raised two important and as        yet unanswered questions.

The   first relates to our     finding   that race differences in childrens' health
still exist even after a host of socioeconomic         factors are held constant.

What are the causes of these differences and what        do they mean? The second
arises    out of the divergence between infant mortality statistics and our

mid—childhood health measures. Why are the income and race differences in
                                   — 21 —




infant mortality so striking when corresponding differences in mid—childhood
morbidity are not? This divergence is not simply a result of the type of
measure   (mortality versus morbidity); differences in the mortality of older

children are also less striking. Perhaps the health differences of various

demographic groups are minimized in the mid—childhood years. If so, we

need   to know why. The answers to these questions are clearly pertinent to
the conduct of public policy towards the welfare of children.
                                       FOOTNOTES




        *
         Associate   Professor, Queens College of C.U.N.Y. and Professor,

Graduate Center of C.U.N.Y., respectively. Research for this paper was

supported by PHS Grant No. 1 ROl }fS 02917 from the National Center for

Health Services Research to the National Bureau of Economic Research and

by   a grant from the Robert Wood Johnson     Foundation   to the NBER. We   are

indebted   to   Ann Colle and Steve Jacobowitz for their research assistance

and comments.


           full   description of the   sample, the sampling technique, and the

data collection is presented in NCHS (1967). The one deficiency of this

sample from the point of view of studying children's health is the exclu-

sion of children in institutions. To the extent that these children are

more   likely to have serious and   disabling physical conditions, the re-

ported incidence of certain conditions will be lower in our sample than

in the entire population of children. In addition, if the probability of
the institutionalization of a child with a given condition depends on in-

come and race, our results will incorporate unknown biases. The number of

institutionalized children is small, however, at about four-tenths of a

percent of all children aged 5 through 13 years.           [This is the proportion

of 5—13 year—olds living in "group auarters" in 1970 according to the U.S.

Bureau of the Census (1973), Tables 52 and 205. The corresponding percent-

ages by race are .38 percent for whites and .7 percent for blacks.]


       2See, for example Sullivan (1966), Berg (1973), and, more recently,

ware (1976).
                                          F-2


         3See Grossman (1972), p. 58. This definition is also very similar

to that proposed in Torrance (1976).


         40f course, there is a positive relationship between "permanent" and

"transitory" health status in the sense that a child with low health capi-

tal is more likely to contract some acute conditions and to have them for

a more extended time period. For example, Birch and Gussow (1979) dis-

cuss    how nutrition (which is clearly a determinant of "permanent" health
status) and disease are intimately related.

         51n earlier work some attempts were made to condense the health in-.

formation using principal component analysis. The analysis yielded al—

most as many       equally   weighted components as there were initial health mea-

sures.


         6The studies we consulted are: Wallace (1962); Mechanic (1964);

Mindlin and Lobach       (1971);   Talbot, et al. (1971); Kaplan et al. (1972);

Hu (l973) Starfield (1977); Kessner (1974); Haggerty et al. (1975); and

Inman    (1976).

         7The following physicians gave us extremely helpful advice: John

McNarnara, M.D., then Assistant Professor of Public Health and Pediatrics

at Columbia University School of Public Health and Associate Commissioner

in the New York City Department of Health; Roy Brown, M.D., Associate

Professor of Community Medicine and Pediatrics at the Mount Sinai School

of Medicine of the City University of New York; Thomas Travers, D. D. S.,

Director of Ambulatory Care in the New York City Department of Health;

and Ruth T. Gross, Professor of Pediatrics and Director of Ambulatory

Pediatrics, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, California.
                                     F— 3



        81f the actual height of each age—sex group is normally distributed,

IHEIGHT can be translated directly into the child's height percentile.


        91n defining ACABN, we exclude abnormalities resulting from accidents

or injuries because these are likely to reflect transitory rather than per-

manent health variations.

       10
         The periodontal index suffers from the defect that it is subject to
                .




intra—rater arid inter—rater variability. We have experimented with a some-

what more objective measure of oral health, the number of decayed permanent

and   primary teeth adjusted for age and sex, and   have obtained results simi-

lar to those for the periodontal index. Compared to the number of decayed

teeth, the periodontal index reflects more serious oral health problems.


        11There is no school form for approximately 500 children in the Cycle

II data set. Since excessive absence due to illness is the only variable

taken from the school form, children without the school form are eliminated

from our working sample only when school absenteeism is examined.


        12These means are computed using only 4,777 of the 7,119 observations

because our working sample only includes children who lived either with

both of their parents or with their mothers only (no step-parents, foster

parents, grandparents, etc.). In addition, the 72 children who turned 12

years old after having been chosen fro the Cycle II survey are excluded as

well as those children for whom there were missing data on either these

health measures or on the socioeconomic   variables used in the next section.
Comparison of these means with corresponding means for the entire Cycle II
sample reveals that there is very little difference between the full sample

and   our working subsample.
                                        F— 4



        13This difference between the relative health profile of blacks in
infancy and in midchildhood is not simply a result of differences in data
sources or differences between sample data and population data. Available
data on the Cycle II children during their infancy (birth weight, the
incidence of congenital abnormalities, and the parents' retrospective

assessment of the infant's health) indicates that the black children had

significantly poorer health in infancy.


        L4income differences were also computed for an all—white sample with

virtually identical results (see Table 4). Thus, these reported income

differences in health are not the result of the higher proportion of blacks

in poor families.


        15These   results can again   be contrasted with comparable data for the
two   infant health measures discussed earlier. Even within income classes,
race differences in infant mortality and in the incidence of low birth
weight remain large and consistently favor whites:

                                 Low Income                  High Income
                                  $5,000 p.a.)           (    $5,000   p.a.)

                              Blacks      Whites       Black      Whites
       Infant   mortality      439         24.2         23.6        18.6

       Incidence of low
       birth weight            13.2         7.6         17.1           6.6


       (Source and definitions of health measures are the same as
        in Table 2).
                                  F—S


      16Net differences are computed in two different ways depending on

whether or not there are significant race differences in slope coeff i-

cients in the underlying health equations. If there are no significant

differences in the slope coefficients by race (as in the case for the

dependent variables HDBP, ABVIS, TENS, ACABN, and SCHABS), the "net" race

difference is represented by the regression coefficient of a race dummy

variable (black = 1) from a pooled regression of black and white children

that holds constant all other dependent variables. In this case, the

"net" difference is that portion of the gross difference that remains

after holding constant differences in the mean values of the explanatory

variables. When there are significant race differences in the slope co-

efficients (as in the case of the deoendent variables APERI, IHEIGHT,

PFGHEALTH, and ALLEG), the net differences is computed as the difference

in intercepts from race—specific regression estimates with the set of ex-

planatory variables held constant. In this case the net difference repre-

sents that portion of the gross race difference that remains after allow-

ing for race differences in both means and in slope coefficients.


      17The list of health measures for which there are significant income

differences is the same for the white sample as it is for the full black

and white sample reported on in Table 2.


      18Unlike in the case of race differences in no cases were there sig-

nificant references in the slope coefficients in the two income classes.
                                    REFERENCES



Auster, Richard D.; Leveson, Irving; and Sarachek, Deborah. "The Produc-

        tion   of Health: An Exploratory Study." Journal of    Human   Resources,
        4 (Fall 1969). Reprinted in Victor R. Fuchs, ed., Essays in the
        Economics of Health and Medical Care. New York: Columbia Univer-
        sity   Press for the   National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.

Berg, Robert L. Health Status Indexes. Proceedings of a conference con-

        ducted by Health Services Research, Tuscon, Arizona, October 1972.

        Chicago: Hospital Research and Educational Trust, 1973.


Birch, Herbert G., and Gussow, Joan Dye. Disadvantaged Children: Health,

        Nutrition, and School Failure. New York: Harcourt, Brace and

        World, Inc., 1970.


Edwards, Linda Nasif, and Grossman, Michael. "Children's Health and the

        Family." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper

       No. 256, July 1978.


Gortmaker, Steven L. Poverty, Race, and Infant Mortality in the United

       States. Institute for Research on Poverty Discussion Paper

       No. 404—77, University of Wisconsin. (March 1977).

Grossman, Michael. "The Correlation Between Health and Schooling." In

       Household Production and Consumption, edited by Nestor E. Terleckvj.

       New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of

       Economic Research, 1975.

Grossman, Michael. The Demand for     Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
       Investigation. New York: Columbia University Press for the

       National Bureau of Economic Research, 1972.
                                        R- 2



Haggertv, Robert J.; Roghmann, Klaus J.; and Pless, Ivan B. Child Health

           and the Community. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1975.

Hu, Teh—Wei. "Effectiveness of Child Health and Welfare Programs: A

           Simultaneous Equations Approach." Socio—Economic Planning Sciences,

           7 (1973).


Inman, Robert      P. "The Family Provision of Childrens Health: An Economic
           Analysis." In The     Role of Health Insurance in the Health Services

           Sector, edited by Richard Rosett. New York: Columbia University

           Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1976.


Kaplan, Robert S.; Lave, Lester B.; and Leinhardt, Samuel. "The Efficacy

           of   a Comprehensive Health Care Project: An Empirical Analysis."
           American Journal of Public Health, 62, No. 7 (July 1972).

Keniston, Kenneth, and     the   Carnegie Council on Children. All     Our   Children:
       The American Family Under Pressure. New York: Harcourt Brace

           Jovanovich, 1977.

Kessner,    David M. Assessment of Medical Care for Children. Contrasts in

           Health Status, Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Institute of Medicine.

           1974.


Mechanic, David. "The Influence of Mothers on Their Children's Health,

           Attitudes and Behavior." Pediatrics, 33 (March     1964).

Mindlin,    Rowland L., and Lobach, Katherin S. "Consistency and Change in

           Choice of Medical Care for Preschool Children." Pediatrics, 48

           (September 1971).
                                      R- 3

National   Center for Health Statistics. Arithropometric and Clinical Findings.

          U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health

          Service, Vital and Health Statistics, Publication No. (HRA) 75—1229

           (April 1975).


National Center for Health Statistics. Height and Weight of Children:

          United States. U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare,

          Public Health Service, Vital and Health Statistics, Series 11,

          No. 104 (September 1970).

National Center for Health Statistics. Infant Mortality Rates: Socioeconomic

          Factors. U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Public

          Health Service, Vital and Health Statistics, Series 22, No. 14

           (March 1972).


National Research Council. Towards a National Policy for Children and

          Families. Washington, D.C.: National Academy of Services, 1976.


Newberger, Eli H.; Newberger, Carolyn Moore; and Richmond, Julius B.

           "Child   Health in america: Toward a Rational Public Policy."
          Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly, 54,   No.   3 (Summer, 1976).

Russell, A.L. "A System of Classification and Scoring for Prevalence Sur-
          veys of Periodontal Disease." Journal of Dental Research, 35,
           (June 1956).

Seoane,   Nicole, and Latham, Michael C. "National     Anthropometry in the

           Identification of   Malnutrition in Childhood." Journal of
          Tropical Pediatric and Environmental Child Health (September 1971).
                                       R- 4


Starfield,      Barbara.   "Health Needs of Children." In Children's Medical
           Care Needs and Treatment. Harvard Child Health Project Report
           Volume II. Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1977.

Sullivan, Daniel F. "Conceptual Problems in Developing an Index of Health."

           PHS Pub. No. 1000. Vital and       Health   Statistics Series 2, No. 17.

           Rockville, Md.: National Center for Health Statistics, 1966.


Talbot,   Nathan     B.; Kagan, Jerome; and   Eisenberg,   Leon, editors. Behavioral

           Science   in Pediatric Medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders       Company,

           1971.

Torrance,      George W. "Health Status Index Models: A       Unified Mathematical
          View." Management Science 22, No. 9 (May 1976).

U.S.    Bureau of the Census, 1970 Census of Population Vol. I, Characteristics

          of the Population, Part 1, U.S. Summary, Sections 1 and 2.

          Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1973.

Wallace, Helen M. Health Services for Mothers and Children. Philadelphia:

          W.B. Saunders Company, 1962.


Ware,   Jr.,   John E. "The Conceptualization and Measurement of Health for

          Policy Relevant Research in Medical Care Delivery." Presented         at
          the   annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement

          of Science, Boston, Massachusetts, February         1976.
