NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY POLICY UNDER EXCHANGE RATE FLEXIBILITY*

Rudiger Dornbusch

Working Paper No.

311

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
January 1979

*A paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Conference on "Managed Exchange Rate Flexibility", Bald Peak
Colony Club, October 1978. The Research reported here is part
of the NBER's program of research in International Studies.
The opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Work:ing Paper 311
January 1979
Monetary Policy Under Exchange Rate Flexibility
SUMMARY

The paper presents an evaluation of exchange rate theories and the
empirical evidence :in the field.

The analysis is extended to sketch the

role of flexible exchange rates :in a macroeconomic context, :in particular
for the case of the U. S .
Among exchange rate theories "asset-market" models are now recognized
as the most attractive formulation.

These models emphasize the determination

of exchange rates as part of short-run asset market equilibrium.
aIIDng these theories is the "monetary approach".

Prom:inent

A review of the evidence

f:inds the empirical support for the view quite weak.

An alternative

approach emphasizes the imperfect substitutability of assets and views
exchange rate determination as linked to the relative supplies of financial
assets denom:inated :in domestic and foreign currency.

EmpiriCal support

for this view is only start:ing to come :in now.
The paper offers a criticism of the manner :in which empirical tests
of exchange rate models have been conducted.

I t is shown that, along

l:ines familiar from macroeconomics or f:inance, only unanticipated changes
in the determinants of exchange rates should affect the deviations of
exchange rates from the :interest parity trend.

Such a formulation suggests

that the explanatory variables are the innovations -- such as unanticipated
money -- :in the determinants of exchange rates, not their actual levels.
There is a brief review concern:ing the evidence of exchange rate effects
on :inflation and trade flows.

The review concludes that exchange depre-

ciation does exert a significant effect on domestic :inflation, given the
rate of unemployment, but that there do remain effects on competitiveness.
Changes in real exchange rates :in turn do exert an important long-run
effect on trade flows, although the lags are quite pronounced.

Rudiger Dornbusch
Department of Economics
M. 1. T. E52-357
Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253-3648

- 1 ...

MONETARY POLICY UNDER EXCHANGE RATE FLEXIBILITY*
Rudiger Dornbusch
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

INTRODUCTION
The continuing depreciation of the dollar stands out as one of the big policy
issues.

It has started to impinge on

us

monetary policy, it influences the chances

for international commercial diplomacy and it is enhancing the move toward
European monetary integration.

Above all it leaves most observers, with a

puzzle as to the causes of the ongoing depreciation.
This paper will, of course, not resolve the puzzle.

It rather attempts to

layout the basic analytical framework that has been developed for the analysis
of exchange rate questions and to relate it to the question of monetary policy.
Part I concentrates on the development of the relevant theoretical framework.
main

The

points to be made here are: (i) exchange rates ,are primarily determined in asset

markets with expectations playing a dominant role.

(ii) the sharpest formulation of

exchange rate theory is the "monetary approach", Chicago's quantity theory of the
open economy, (iii) purchasing power parity is a precarious reed on which to
hang shortterm exchange rate theory, (iv) the current acc,ount has just made it
back as a determinant of exchange rates.
In Part II we review the main strands of empirical research on exchange rate
determination.

The review concentrates mainly on the monetary approach where

work has been quite plentiful, but also looks at some alternative formulations.
Part III pulls together these elements to form some co?jectures about the

*

Helpful discussions with Jeffrey Frankel, Jacob Frenkel, Stanley Fischer and
Michael Rothschild and financial support from the NSF are gratefully acknowledged.

- 2 -

working of monetary policy under flexible rates and about the dollar
depreciation.

In particular we draw attention to the trade-off between

increased net exports and the inflationary impact induced by a
depreciation.
The topic covered in this paper has received an extraordinary amount
of professional attention in the last few years and much fruitful
research has been accomplished.

The fine surveys by Isard (1978),

Kohlhagen (1978) and Schadler (1977) will place our sketchy review
in the perspective of the literature and the books by Black (1977) and
Willett (1977) help relate our topic to the ongoing policy discussions.

- 3 -

I.

THEORY

In this part we review the main strands of exchange rate theory.

We

start off with two rock-bottom models that, in an oversimplified manner
perhaps, represent exchange rate theory as viewed by the person in "the
Street".

These models, purchasing power parity and a balance of payments

theory of the exchange rate, each contain of course more than a germ of truth
and thus serve as a useful introduction to our review.
We proceed from there to more structured models that emphasize
macroeconomic interaction or the details of asset markets.

These theories

can be described as asset market theories of the exchange rate.
·of these models are then considered in an effort to add realism.

Extensions
These

extensions deal with expectations, questions of dynamics and of indexing
and policy reaction.
1.

Purchasing Power Parity and the Quantity Theory:
Purchasing power parity theory of the exchange rate is one of those

empirical regularities that are sufficiently true over long periods of
time to deserve our attention but deviations from which are pronounced
enough to make all the difference in the short run.

Clearly, purchasing power parity

(PPP for short) is much like the quantity theory of money and indeed can
be viewed as the open economy extension of quantity theory thinking. I
i.

PPP Theory
PPP theory argues that exchange rates move over time so as to offset

divergent movements in national price levels.

A country that experiences

a hyperinflation, for example, will experience at the same time a
corresponding external depreciation of its.currency.
The theory leaves open two important operational questions.

The first

deals with the channels through which this relation petween inflation

IFor extensive reviews see Officer (1976), Frenkel and Johnson (1978)
and the collection of essays in the May 1978 issue of the
Journai of International Economics.
~

•..•0_.:

"0" 0

- 4 differentials and depreciation will come about.

The second question

concerns the extent to which PPP is complete, -- does it hold in
the shortrun and is there no possibility for trend deviations over time?
The extent to which PPP holds exactly, at every point in time, and
without trend deviation has been an important issue in trade theory.
There is no question that in theory the p9ssibility of systematic
deviation has
goods.

been established that arise from the existence of nontraded

Specifically Balassa and Samuelson have argued that because

services tend to be nontraded, labour intensive and show low technical
progress as opposed to traded manufactures we would expect fast-growing
and innovating countries to experience an increase in their real price
level over time.

With prices of tradeables equalized/the productivity

growth in the traded sector would raise wages and the relative price of
nontraded goods and thus the real price level in the fast growing countries.
A second source of systematic deviation has been pointed to by the
earlier literature, including Viner, that dealt with the effect of capital
flows· or current account imbalance.

Here it was argued that a borrowing

country has a relatively high (real) price level.

The argument here relies

on the fact that an increase in aggregate demand, financed by borrowing
and a current account deficit, would raise the relative price of nontraded
goods and thus .the real price level.

There are thus two reasons for

trend deviations or systematic deviations from ppp that serve as important
reservations to the generality of the theory.
Settinq these reservations aside we are still left with the issue
of how rapidly and completely we expect ppp to hold and through what
channels it comes about.

Here the literature is considerably more diffuse.

A hard core theory, associated with

~hat

Marina Whitman (1975) has

aptly called "global monetarism ll asserts the IIlaw of one price ll •

Goods

- 5 produced by us and by our competitors behave as if they were perfect substitutes.
Simple arbitrage by market participants will establish uniformity of price in
closely integrated markets.
This hard core view is no longer very fashionable except, of course, for
raw materials, commodities and food.

A more differentiated view would argue

that in the shortrun and perhaps even in the longrun there is substantial
scope for product differentiation.

Under these conditions price adjustment is

no longer a matter of arbitrage but rather becomes a question of substitution.
When our prices get out of line with those of our competitors so that we
become more competitive ,then we would expect demand to shift toward our goods,
and in a fully employed economy, start putting upward pressure on costs and
ultimately prices.

The price adjustment here is certainly time consuming; it

depends not only on substitutability between supply sources--Okun's
distinction between customer and auction markets is important here--but
also on the state of slack in the economy and on the expected persistence
of real price changes.

The description of this mechanism suggests that

deviations from PPP are not only possible, but may persist for some time.
The empirical content of PPP theory can be summarized as in equation (1):
k..

(1)

where k and

= (l-a1 Jk
~l

+ a 1 k-1 + a 2 z

;

O<a <l,a >0
1
2

measure the current and lagged deviation from PPP, k

is the equilibrium real price level that has perhaps

~

time trend and z

measures the systematic effect of borrowing or current account imbalance
on the deviation from PPP.

We would expect a

1

to be positive thus showing

some serial correlation or persistence in deviations from PPP.

ii.

Money, Prices and the Exchange Rate:
We turn now to a development of the 'monetary approach' of exchange

rate theory.

This model or approach combines the quantity theory of

- 6 -

JI1oney--fully flexible prices determined by real money demand and nominal
money supply--with strict PPP to arrive at a theory of the exchange rate.
The approach can be simply formulated in terms of a combined theory
of monetary equilibrium and exchange rate determination.

Let M,P,V and Y

be the nominal quantity of money, the price level, velocity and real income.
Then the condition of monetary equilibrium can be written as:
(2)

M

-V(r,Y)
P

=Y

where our notation indicates that velocity may be a function of other
variables, such as interest rates, r, or income.
We can rewrite equation (2), solving for the price level, as:
M
p=vy

(2) •

which states that for a given velocity an increase in money leads to an
equiproportionate rise in the price level.

A rise in velocity likewise raises

,the price level while an increase in real income, by raising real money demand,
would lower the equilibrium level of prices.
To go from here to a theory of the exchange rate we draw on a strict
version of PPP which states that our price level is equal to foreign prices,
P*, converted at the exchange rate,E:
(3)

/

P = P*E

where'E is the domestic currency price of foreign exchange.

Substituting

(3) in (2)' yields an expression for the equilibrium exchange rate:
(4)

E = (l/P*) V

~
Y

The equilibrium exchange rate depends on nominal money, real output and
velocity.

An increase in nominal money or'in velocity will depreciate

the exchange rate in the same proportion.
to appreciation•. What is the mechanism?

A rise in real income will lead

- 7 -

The theory argues that domestic
linked to world prices by PPP.

l?ric::~~ .CU'e

fully flexible, but are

Given the nominal quantity of money any

variations in the demand for money must be offset by compensating
changes in the level of prices and thus in the exchange rate.

An

increase in real money demand, because say of an increase in real income,
will be accommodated by a decline in

~e

level of prices so as to raise

the real value of the existing nominal money stock.
I

with a decline in our

prices, though, we are out of line with world prices and thus require
.appreciation of the exchange rate.
To complete the theory we note two extensions.

First there is

symmetry in that the foreign price level, p*, is determined by foreign
money demand and supply so that we can write (3) as
(4) ,

Clearly then, what matters for exchange rate determination in this view
is relative money supplies, velocities and real incomes in the two countries.
Our

exchang~_.':'~::'.~~~l

depreciate if, other thinC]'sE!qual, our nominal money.

stock rises relative to that abroad.
The second extension is a specification of a velocity function.

•

Here.

the tradition has been to assume that velocity depends on real income
and tlle alternative cost of
(5)

V

hold~ng

money:

= y A-I
. exp(8r)

where r is the nominal rate of interest.

The functional form is a matter

of expositional convenience and monetary tradition.
Substituting (5) in (4)' and taking logs we obtain the standard
equation of the "monetary approach":
(6)

e

= m-m*

1

-A(y-y*) + 8(r-r*)

1 The literature of the monetary approach has predominantly used the forward
premium rather than the interest differential. See for example Frenkel and
Clements (1978). The theoretical rationale is, I believe, the idea that the
relevant substitution is between domestic and foreign monies rather than
h.,.M.1......... mn....,." ::Inri hnnN'"

1<'n,...:::l -F",..t-h.,.,.. rli",,..,,,,,,,,inn "'...., llh... 1 ...t-:>.1

(lQ77\

- 8 -

where e, m, m*,y,y* are logarithms of the corresponding capital letter
variables.
In the final f0rIll't:Cluation (6) shows that an increase in our relative
money stock or a decline in our relative income will lead to depreciation
as would a rise in our relative interest rate.

The last conclusion is

particularly interesting since it certainly is the opposite of the
conventional wisdom that a
appreciation.

r~se

tn

interest rates will lead to

We return to the question below when we compare the relation

between interest rates and the exchange rate in alternative theories.
note here the explanation;
for real money balances.

We

an increase in interest rates reduces the demand
Given the nominal quantity of money the price

level has to rise to reduce the real money stock to its lower equilibrium
level.

With our prices thus getting out of line internationally a

depreciation is required to restore PPP t
2.

Balance of Payments Theory of Exchange Rates
A

textbook

view of exchange rates will argue that the exchange

rate adjusts to balance receipts and payments arising from international
trade in goods, services and assets.

The current account is affected by

the exchange rate because it changes relative prices and thus competitiveness,
the capital account is affected to the extent that expectational considerations are important.

The theory can be formulated with the help of

equation (7):
(7)

BoP

= 0 = C(EP*/p,Y,Y*)

+ K(r, r*,sl

where BoP denotes the balance of payments, EP*/P measures the relative
price of foreign goods and thus serves as a measure of our competitiveness,
C denotes the current account, K the rate of capital inflow and s is a
speculative variable which we disregard for the present.
Figure 1 shows the schedule BB along which our balance of payments
is in equilibrium, given prices,foreign income,and interest rates.

A rise

- 9 -

E
B

E

o

I

I

E'

--------- -+f

I

- - -- ---- -1---

E"

A"

I

I

f

:

I

I
I

I
I

f

r

r'

o

B

B

r

FIGURE 1
in E or a depreciation of the exchange makes us more competitive and

thus improves the current account.

To restore overall balance of payments

equilibrium lower interest rates are required so as to generate an
offsetting rate of capital outflow.

We can readily sho\o1 that in this

framework the exchange rate depends on interest rates/activity levels,
relative price levels and the exogeneous determinants of the composition
of world demand:
(8)

E

= E(Y,Y*,r,r*,P*/p)

Specifically, an increase in our income, because of sayan autonomous
increase in spending, will worsen the currentcaccount and thus requires
an offsetting depreciation.

An increase in foreign prices leads to a

- 10 -

precisely offsetting appreciation and an increase in our interest rate
leads to an appreciation.

The mechanism through which higher interest

rates at home lead to an appreciation can.be illustrated with the help
of Figure 1.

In the first place the increase in interest rates will lead

to a net capital inflow or a reduced rate of outflow and thus causes the

overall balance of payments to move into surplus.

The exchange rate

will accordingly appreciate--assuming the right elasticities--until we
have an offsetting worsening of the current account.

This is shown by

the move from A to AI on BB.
We may not want to stop at this point but rather recognize that the
higher interest rates and the exchange appreciation will exert subsidiary
domestic effects.

With higher interest rates aggregate demand declines

and thus output will fall.

The same effect arises from the appreciation

and the resulting deterioration of the current account.

Thus we have

a second round of adjustments to the decline in income which shifts the
BB schedule inward over time.

The longrun balance of payments schedule

that incorporates the equilibrium level of income implied by the real
exchange rate and interest rate is the steeper schedule BB.

In the

longrun we have further appreciation until point A" is reached.
Two

points deserve emphasis here.

First, the approach views changes

in exchange rates as changing (almost one for one) relative prices and

competitiveness.

It in this respect represents a view opposite to that

embodied in the monetary model.

Second, it contradicts the monetary

model in predicting that an increase in interest rates will lead to an
appreciation.

I will not pursue this model further, but rather take a

specialized version and embody it in a macroeconomic setting.
3.

The Mundell-Fleming Model:
The balance of payments model has drawn attention to the role of

- 11 -

capital flows in the determination of exchange rates.

This is also

the perspective adopted by the modern macroeconomic approach to exchange
rate determination that originated with the pathbreaking work of
Mundell (1968) and Fleming (1962).

Their theorY argues that the exchange

rate enters the macroeconomic framework of interest and output determination
because changes in exchange rates affect competitiveness.

Depreciation

acts much in the same way as fiscal policy by affecting the level of
demand for domestic goods associated with each level of output and interest
rate.

A depreciation shifts world demand toward our goods and thus acts

in an expansionary manner.

The Mundell-Fleming model is illustrated in Figure 2 for the case of
perfect capital mobility.

Perfect capital mobility means that there is

only one rate of interest at which the balance of payments can be in
equilibrium.

If the rate were lower there would be outflows that would

swamp any current account surplus and conversely if it was higher.
illustrated by the horizontal BB schedule.

The LM schedule is the conven-

tional representation of monetary equilibrium.
raise the demand for money.

This is

Higher income levels

Given the money stock, interest rates will

have to rise to contain money demand to the existing level of supply.
Finally the IS schedule

resembles that of a closed economy except that

it includes as a component of demand net exports as determined by income
and competitiveness.

That is why a depreciation will shift the IS

schedule out and to the right.

- 12 -

W'

LM

/
r

O

B

/
B

I

I

I

\

t
I

I

)(

\

IS

IS'

I
I

y

y' .

YO

FIGURE 2

Consider now a monetary expansion indicated by a rightward shift of
the LM schedule.

The impact effect is of course to lower interest rates

and thus to exert an expansionary effect on demand.

The decline in

interest rates, however, leads to exchange depreciation because of
incipient ·capital outflows. "The depreciation in turn enhances our
competitiveness raising demand and shifting the IS curve to the right
until we reach point A'. Here output and income have
risen sufficiently for the increased money stock to be held at the initial
rate of interest.
The framework has an important lesson for exchange rate theory and
monetary policy.

First, under conditions of perfect capital mobility and

- 13 -

given the world rate of interest, monetary policy works not by raising
the interest sensitive components of spending, but rather by generating a
depreciation and thereby a current account surplus.

Monetary policy works

not through the construction sector but rather through the net export
component of demand.

This is of course a striking result, due in part

to the small country assumption.

It draws attention to the central role

of net exports in aggregate demand and to the link between interest
rates and exchange rates.

It is the latter link that has become central

to recent exchange rate models.
The theory implies an equilibrium exchange rate which we can obtain
either from the condition of goods market equilibrium:
E

(9)

l

= E(r,Y,Y*,P*/p, ••• )

or as a reduced form equation of the full system:
(lO)

E

= E(M,Y*, ••• }

where the dots denote fiscal policy variables and other exogeneous
determinants of goods and money demand.

It is interesting to note that

in ,( 91 an increase in the (world) interest rate, because it reduces

~~~re~ate

demand and thus creates an excess supply of goods, requires an offsetting
depreciation that increases competitiveness and gives rise to a trade
surplus.
In its present form the model has three limitations;
no role whatsoever for exchange rate expectations.

First, there is

This point is important

because it implies that strict interest equality must obtain internationally.
Second, the model allows for no effect from the depreciation on domestic
prices.

The depreciation is not allowed to affect either the general price

1 The condition of goods market equilibrium is: Y = A(r,Y) + C(EP*/P,Y,Y*)
where A( ) denotes aggregate spending by domestic residents and C is
the trade balance. We solve the equation for the exchange rate to obtain ( 9) •

- 14 -

level, and therefore the real value of the money stock, or the price of
our output and therefore our competitiveness.

It is quite apparent that in

fact we should expect at least some spillover into domestic prices and
that the extent to which the real effects of a monetary expansion are
dampened.

We return to this question in section 5 below and in part II

where we look at the empirical evidence.
the absence of any dynamics.

The third limitation concerns

This limitation is important not only in

respect to the price adjustment that we just noted but also for the
adjustment of trade flows.

The existence of adjustment lags, reviewed

below in part II, implies the possibility that monetary policy in the
shortrun may fail to be expansionary.
4.

The Portfolio Balance Model:
The Mundell-Fleming model emphasizes the high substitutability

between domestic and foreign assets.

Capital mobility is perfect so that

the slightest deviation of interest rates from the world level unleashes
____________~unb==~o~unded incipient capital flows.

An alternative formulation emphasizes

a more limited substitutability between domestic and foreign assets and introduces the level of the exchange rate as a variable that along with
asset yields helps achieve balance between asset demands and asset supplies. l
The model concentrates on asset markets but can readily be extended to
include the allocational effects of exchange rates in affecting the
current account.

- 15 -

Consider now the basic model as shown in equations (11)-(13) and
Figure 3.

In equation (11) we show the condition of monetary equilibrium

where W denotes nominal wealth and where ¢(r,r*) is the fraction of wealth
people wish to hold in the form of domestic money:
M = jiS'(r.r*)W

(11)

¢.r ,¢r * < 0

Equilibrium in the market for domestic assets requires that the
existing supply, X, equal the demand:
(12)
where W(r,r*) is the desired ratio of domestic assets to wealth.

The

ratio is assumed to increase with the own rate of return and to decline
with the return on foreign assets. Equations (11) and (12) together with
the wealth construint;

imply an equilibrium condition in the market for net external assets;
(13)

EF

=

(111 - ¢)W = P(r,r*)W

where F denotes net holdings of foreign assets measured in terms of foreign
exchange.

Note that since net external assets can be

n.cgative.

We

Cl::5SmnC

ne~ative,

p

c~

be

that assets are substitutes so that ilsset demands respond

positively to their own yield and negatively to yields on il1ternatiye assets,

1 Portfolio balance models as discussed here have been developed among others by
by Boyer (i977) , Dornbusch (1975), Dornbusch and Fischer (1978), Flood (1976)
Henderson and Girton (1975) r Kouri (1976,1977), Branson (1976), and Porter U977).

-16 -

In figure 3 we show the money and domestic asset market equilibrium
schedules for given stocks of each of the assets.
money market is in equilibrium.

Along MM the domestic

Higher interest rates reduce money

demand so that equilibrium requires a depreciation and thus a rise in the
domestic currency value of foreign assets and hence wealth.

The exchange

rate thus plays a balancing role by affecting the valuation of assets.
Along XX the domestic asset market is in equilibrium.

Higher interest

rates raise the demand for domestic assets and thus require an appreciation to reduce wealth and asset demand thus restoring equilibrium.
We want to establish next the effect of

ch~nges

in

rates, changes in domestic money or net external assets.

for~i<]n

interest

In terms of

Figure 3 an increase in the foreign interest rate creates an excess supply
of domestic money and domestic securities thus shifting the MM schedule
down and to the 'right and the XX schedule up and to the right.

Without

question the equilibrium exchange rate depreciates.
Consider. next an increase in the domestic money stock.

At the initial

equilibrium there will be an excess supply of money and an excess demand
for domestic (and foreign) securities.

Accordingly the MM schedule will

shift down and to the right while the XX schedule shifts down and to the
left.

It is readily established that the net effect is unambiguously

a depreciation of the exchange rate. 1
Finally we consider an increase in net external assets.

Now both the

money market and the domestic security market schedules shift to the left.
1

Using equations (11) and (12) along with the definition of wealth we have:
dE/dM

= ( F1 )

'l:' (l-ep)+'l:'q,
r

ep'¥ -'¥ep
r

. r

r

=

which is positive on our assumption of substitution.

> 0

- 17 -

They will shift in the same proportion, as inspection of (11) and (12)
together with the wealth constraint will reveal.

Accordingly the equilibrium

exchange rate appreciates in proportion to the increase in foreign assets.
The implications of the portfolio balance model are summarized in
equation (14) which shows the reduced form equation for the equilibrium
exchange rate:
E

(14)

1

= E(r*,M,

X, F)i

E

r*

> O·
'

E > O·
M
'

Furthermore since (14) is homogeneous in domestic nominal money and
. .
.
.
secur1t1es
we can rewr1te
t h e equat10n
as: 2

E

(14) •

= Y(r*,

X/M) ~

In this form we emphasize that the equilibrium exchange rate depends
on relative asset supplies.

In particular an increase in domestic nominal

assets--money and securities--relative to external assets will lead to
an equiproportionate depreciation.

This homogeneity property is, of course,

desirable since it corresponds to an ongoing, neutral inflation process.
The portfolio balance model draws attention to the substitution
possibility between domestic and foreign assets.

Domestic and foreign

securities are no longer perfect substitutes and accordingly their relative
supplies determine, along with the nominal money stock, equilibrium interest
rates and the exchange rate.

A link with the current account is established

1 The effect of an increase in domestic securities on the equilibrium
exchange rate is ambiguous.
2 To derive (14)' we note that taking the ratio of (11) and (12) and
solving for the equilibrium interest rate we have: r = h(r*, X/M).

From (13) and the wealth definition we obtain: E
(M!F)
r

= h(

1 ~ P

(1 + X/M).

= --e---(M/F
1 - p

+ X/F)

=

Substituting the equilibrium interest rate

) yields (14)', where Y(r*, X/M)

=1

p(r*, h(r*, X/M)

- p(r*, h(r*, X/M)

(1 + X/M).

- 18 -

by virtue of the fact that external assets are acquired over time through

the current account surplus.

Accordingly~

as Kouri (1976, 1977) and

others have emphasized,the current account determines the evolution of
the exchange rate over time.

In particular a current account surplus

which implies accumulation of net external assets leads to an appreciating
exchange rate.

r

x

x

E

EO

FIGURE 3

The mOdel remains a partial equilibrium representation in
respects.

two ~ortant

First, we do not consider the interaction between financial

markets , the exchange rate, goods markets, and the current account.
we do not allow for any expectational effects.

Second,

- 19 -

What makes this model potentially attractive for the analysis of exchange
rate questions is the direct relation between asset market disturbances
and movements in exchange rates.

It extends

.the monetary model because

we do not have to rely on shifts in money demand or supply as sole
determinants of exchange rate movements but rather can consider shifts
between domestic and foreign assets, for example, as motivated by say
expectations.
5.

Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics
We have so far concentrated on models of the exchange rate that are

largely static and that do not emphasize the role of expectations.

We

extend the analysis now to questions of dynamics and to the place of
expectations.

The role of expectations is central to exchange rate

determination, and therefore to policies under 'flexible exchange rates.
The spot exchange rate
is almost entirely dominated by the course the public expects it to take
in the near future.

These expectations, of course, are influenced by

. the structure of the economy and institutional features such as
indexing or systematic policy responses.

We will in this section first

review a fairly general model of exchange rate expectations and dynamics
and then extend the analysis to discuss the idea of a virtuous and vicious
. 1e. 1
cJ.rc
1.

Expectations:
We return to the assumption of perfect capital mobility to establish

1 This section draws on Dornbusch (1976).

-

20 -

a relationship between interest rates, current exchange rates and expected
exchange rates.

With perfect capital mobility asset holders would find

themselves indifferent between holding domestic or foreign assets provided
they carry the same yield, that is provided the interest differential
matches the anticipated rate of depreciation:
(15)

r-r*

=

(E/E -

1)

where r-r* is the interest differential, and where (E/E -1) is the expected
depreciation of the domestic currency which is defined as the percentage
excess of the expected future spot rate, E, over the current spot rate, E.
We can rewrite (15) to yield an equation for the spot rate:
(15) ,

E

E
= --=-1 + r-r*

Equation (15)' is central to a correct interpretation of exchange rate
movements.

It argues that movements in the spot rate are due either to

changes in interest differentials, given expectations or to changes in
expectations over the future course of exchange rates.

Specifically, an

increase in our interest rate will lead to an appreciation.

The anticipa-

tion of depreciation, given interest rates, will lead to an immediate
depreciation in the same proportion.

We close the model of exchange rate determination with a theory
of nominal interest rates and a theory of how exchange rate expectations
are formed.
theories.

This is the point where our model ties in with the earlier
Thus we can appeal, for example·, to the Keynesian model to

argue that interest rates are determined by income, the terms of trade and
the real money stock.

Suppose the foreign interest rate is given.

The

·domestic interest rate, using the condition of money market equilibrium as

- 21 -

implicit in an LM schedule, will depend on income and real money:
r

(16)

= r(M/P,Y)

The expected future or longrun equilibrium exchange rate, E can be written
as a function of the teJ:ms of trade, cr, and longrun price levels, P/P*

(17)

E

t5"

= cr(

)-=-=

p*

) 1I'M

cr(

1I'*M*

which in turn are proportional to longrun money stocks M, M* with the
factors of proportionality,

11'

and 11'*, deteJ:mined by exogeneous real variables.

Substituting (16) and (17) in (15)' gives us a reduced fOJ:m equation for
the equilibrium exchange rate:
(18)

E

=1

cr (

) (7IM/1I'*M"*)

+ r(M/p,Y)-r*

What are the implications of our model for exchange rate deteJ:mination and
monetary policy.

The analysis is helped by Figure 4.

The schedule QQ

shows the equilibrium exchange rate of (18) for given longrun money, teJ:ms
of trade and price levels

and a given foreign interest rate.

The QQ schedule is downward sloping since, given money, a higher
price level, say a move to point A"'- raises the equilibrium interest
rate at home and thus creates a differential in favor of the home
country.

To offset the differential the spot rate must appreciate--

E must decline--to the point where the anticipated rate of depreciation
matches the interest differential.
HoW will a peJ:manent increase in the money stock work itself out in
this framework?

An increase in money in the longrun, with all prices

flexible will increase prices and exchange rates in the same proportion.
This implies that the QQ schedule shifts out to Q'Q' and that in the final
longrun equilibrium we will be at point A' with all real variables unchanged.'
In theshortrun, though, an increase in nominal money is an increase
in the real money stock.

Prices are unlikely to jump and therefore a

- 22 -

lower rate of interest is required for the public to hold the higher real
money stock.

With a decline in interest rates there will be an incipient

capital outflow until the exchange rate has depreciated enough to
create the anticipation of appreciation exactly at the rate of the
interest differential.

This is true at point A" where the exchange rate

has depreciated beyond its new longrun level.

This overshooting of

exchange rates is an essential counterpart of permanent monetary changes under
conditions of shortrun price stickiness

and perfect capital mobility.

By how much will exchange rates overshoot?

That depends on the nature

If prices rise very rapidly because

of the price adjustment process.

interest response of money demand is low and that of goods demand is
high or because demand is highly responsive to relative prices--then the
overshooting will tend to be small.

Conversely, if the adjustment process

of prices is slow then the overshooting is large.
The adjustment, following the impact effect of an increase in money,

is shown in Figure 4 by the movement along Q'QI.

The exchange rate has

depreciated thus making domestic goods more competitive.
at home have declined thereby raising demand.
upward pressure on our price level.

Interest rates

Both factors work to put

Prices will rise, real money declines

and interest rates rise back up until the new longrun equilibrium at
Al

iie

is reached.
Virtuous and Vicious Cycles

1

The framework we have laid out here helps-understand a controversy
that has developed about the working of a flexible rate system.

It

has been argued that flexible rates make inflation stabilization more
difficult in soft currency countries and more easy in hard currency countries.
1

The virtuous and vicious cycle has been discussed arnoung others by
Krugman (1977), Sachs (1978), Basevi and de Grauwe (1977) and Willett (1977).

- 23 -

p

p'

Q'

E
FIGURE 4

The reason is that monetary policy, through the rapid reaction of exchange
rates and through the overshooting, exerts rapid inflationary pressure
in expanding countries and inflation-dampening in relatively tight
countries.

Monetary policy bedomes quite possibly ineffective if one

recognizes that the inflationary pressure of depreciation is quite soon
translated into domestic price increases.

These price increases limit

the gain in competitiveness from a depreciation.
In these circumstances monetary policy is primarily
inflationary, it has very little if any effect on real aggregate demand.
All that would happen is that renewed attempts at stimulating aggregate
demand would translate into increasing inflation rather than more employment.

- 24 -

What institutional factors would check or enhance such an ostensibly
unstable process? It has been argued with force that the virtuous and vicious
cycle is entirely a matter of monetary determination.

Unless monetary

policy validates the depreciation it will ultimately undo itself.

There

can be little disagreement with this conclusion, except that it is
fundamentally irrelevant as an observation about policy.

The relevant

policy setting is one where wide-spread indexation, for example, will
immediately translate depreciation into wage and price inflation with
~

the consequence of growing unemployment if the central bank fails to
accommodate through further monetary expansion. The central bank may in
practice have very little power to stop this inflationary process and
the right starting point is incomes policy not monetary policy.

At the same

time it is, of course, true that the prospect 'of an effective stabilization
program will immediately receive the side benefit of an appreciation and a
consequent bonus in terms of inflation reduction.
6.

Swmnary:
We have now reviewed a wide spectrum of exchange rate theories.

There is little purpose in endorsing one particular formulation since each
of these models seeks to capture a special effect and thus is more or less
suitable for a particular instance of policy analysis.

Some models view

the place" of the exchange rate mainly in its shortterm effects on
competitiveness and its longterm role
nationally.

in keeping in line prices inter-

Monetary and portfolio models assign importance to exchange

rate movements through valuation effects, exchange rate movements change
the real value of the money stock or the relative supplies of domestic and
foreign assets.
If a choice has to be made between models then I do see a difference
between Quantity Theory oriented models that leave for the exchange rate the

- 25 -

purely passive role of keeping the current stock of real balances just
right

and expectations oriented asset market models in which the current

level of the exchange rate is set primarily by reference to its anticipated
path. . In this latter perspective changes in current rates bring about an
adjustment dynamics the details of which depend on the differential speeds
of adjustment in goods and money markets and where the adjustments that
are taking place are quite possibly directed toward events that have not
yet materialized but are already anticipated.
Monetarist models, of course, also recognize the importance of
expectations.

In those models, however, the spot rate is influenced by the

effect of anticipated depreciation on real money demand.

The anticipation

of depreciation would reduce real money demand thus raising the price level
and therefore, via PPP, lead to a depreciation of the exchange rate.
extent of the

d~preciation

money demand.

The

depends on the interest responsiveness of

By contrast in the present model the anticipation of depre-

ciation leads directly, as of given prices and interest rates, to an
equiproportionate depreciation of the spot rate.
From the

~erspective

of monetary policy these two strands of modelling

differ of course quite radically.
literally that

~rices

The Quantity Theory model assumes quite

are fully, instantaneously flexible.

have any use for monetary

~olicy,

except

~erhaps

level in the face of money demand fluctuations.

It thus cannot

to stabilize the price
All other models, of

course share a macroeconomic--as opposed to monetarist--persuasion where
monetary policy works, more or less, because the central bank can move the
real money stock.

In this perspective exchange rates become a vehicle for

monetary policy.

One of the chief channels of monetary policy is the direct

effect of money on interest rates and on the exchange rate and thereby on

- 26 -

relative prices and aggregate demand.

The empirical problem is of course

whether this link makes price adjustment more rapid, or to put it differently,
whether flexible rates make the Phillips curve steeper.

"

- 27 -

II.

SOME EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE
In this part we will look at some of the empirical evidence that

has a bearing on the exchange rate models· discussed above.
start with the evidence on PPP.

From there we turn to the monetary

model of exchange rates which is reviewed in section 2.
model is considered in section 3.

We will

The asset market

A discussion of the two key issues

for monetary policy--the inflationary impact of import price changes
and the response of trade flows to relative prices--is presented in .
section 4.

-

- 28 -

Table 1;

INFLATION AND DEPRECIATION:

1970-77

. (Average Annual % Rates)

~:

In the last Ehree columns a minus sign indicates an appreciation of the
effective rate and an appreciation relative to the $ us respectively. The
effective real rate is based on wholesale prices.
Source:

International Financial Statistics

the dollar appreciated relative to the DM by nearly ten percent and we see
in the chart associated increase in the real exchange rate.

Conversely,

the depreciation of the dollar in late 1977 and early 1978 is reflected
in a declining real exchange rate.
Can these deviations from PPP be modelled in a simple fashion?

In

particular are these deviations from PPP shortlived and self-liquidating?
A for.mulation that tests this hypothesis regresses the log of the real

exchange rate, k

= e+p*-p,

on its own lagged value and a constant: Using

monthly data for the period March 1974-May 1978 we obtain:
(19)

k

=

.33

(.11)

+

.~9k_l

Rho

=

.65

SER

= .018

DW

(.10)

The model suggests that deviations from PPP do have persistence.

= 1.91

- 29 ...
Log ( DM/$ • pUS
pGER
)

/

1.15

.

,,
,,,
t

,

1.09

+

I",

Fitted

\

,
I

\

+

,I

Actual

\.

+

+

.95

1974

1975

1976

CHART 1 THE GERlWf-US REAL EXCHANGE RATE

1977

1978

- 30 -

To make that point we can rewrite ( 19 ) in terms of its longrun value E:
(19) ,

k = .3lk + .69k_

l

so that the real exchange rate depends to the extent of one third on its
longrun value and two-thirds on its recent history.l
One strand of literature, referred to earlier, views deviations
from PPP that are associated with current account imbalance and capital flows.
To the extent that an increase in interest rates will draw in capital flows

we would expect the interest" differential to help explain deviations •
from PPP.

In (20) we report a PPP equation that includes the interest

differential as an explanatory variable:
(20)

k

= .19

+ .8lk_

( .12)

l

(.10)

-2.6l(r-r*)

Rho=.60

SER=.018

DW=1.90

(1.56)

The equation shows that an increase in the· interest differential in
favor of Germany would cause the real exchange rate to decline.

That would

correspond to the case where the interest differential appreciates the mark
at unchanged prices.

While the interest differential thus has the

expected sign it is very imprecisely estimated and contributes little to
explaining the behavior of the real exchange rate.
We have now seen the evidence on
from PPP.

subst~tial

~ersistent

deviations

I believe there is no surprise, i.f only because of the impo:rtant

role of nontraded goods.

Consider for example the :rates of i.nflation for

different price indices reported in Table 2.
-:,::..-

and

We limit ourselves to Japan

and Germany since these are the only countries that report export and
1

From (19) we have k

=

.33
1 - .69

as k

= .31

(

.33
.31

)

+ •69k_ l

.33

-

or k·

We can therefore rewrite (19)

,31
:::;

.3lk + .69k_ •
l

- 31 -

import prices (as opposed to unit values).

The table reveals persuasively

the very substantial changes in relative prices.

Export prices systematically

rise at lower rates than the GNP deflator thus lending impressive support
to the Balassa-Sarnuelson hypothesis.

The terms of trade--the ratio of

export to import prices--change by more than half a percent per year.

Table 2:

MEASURES OF PRICE CHANGE
(Average Annual % Rates)

CPI

GERMANY
DEF
EXP

1958-70

2.4

4.0

1958-77

3.5

4.6

Source:

JAPAN

IMP

CPI

DEF

EXP

IMP

1.2

-0.3

5 .. 2

4.9

0.8

0.2

2.6

2.1

7.2

6.3

3.8

4.1

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and International Financial
Statistics

In addition to sectoral changes in relative prices over time we have
to recognize that pricing strategies differ across industries, across
countries and across the business cycle.

In the US pricing in manufac-

turing has been based on standard unit labor costs with little impact of
aggregate demand or competitors' prices.
substantially more flexible prices.

Abroad there is evidence for

The asymmetry reduces but does not

eliminate the scope for exchange rate changes to affect relative prices
and thus bring about deviations from PPP.

.. 32 -

2.

The Monetary Approach
The sharpest formulation of exchange rate determination ~s the I'~oneta~

approach" that is associated with the University of Chicago.

It is represented

in work such as Bilson (1978a, b, c)Dornbusch (1976b), Frenkel (1976),
Frenkel and Clements (1978)and Hodrick (1978).

The approach assumes, as we

have seen, perfect price flexibility as well as ppp.l

With these assumptions

monetary equilibrium here and abrQad implies an equilibrium exchange rate
that can be written as in (6) and is repeated here

e

(6)

= m-xn*

~or

convenienceJ

- A(y-y*) + 6(r-r*)

The theory predicts that an increase in our income will appreciate the
exchange rate and that monetary expansion or higher interest rates will
depreciate the exchange rate.
for

Fr~nce

Equations such as (6) have been estimated

in the 20's, Germany in the hyperinflation period, the UK and

Germany and the US and Germany in the 70' s.
1. and 4. estimates for such an equation.

Table 3 reports in equations
In each case the coefficient on

relative money supplies was restricted to unity.

The estimates for the

period March 1974-May 1978 show that the coefficients have the expeeted
sign, although the
significant.

coeffic~ent

on interest rates is not statistically

We also note the very high estimate of serial correlation

and the low level of the Durbin Watson even after correction for serial
correlation.

In sum, the equation is not very satisfactory.

1 PPP is not ~lways assumed to be instantaneous.
autoregressive adjustment such as in (19').

Bilson (1978) allows for

- 33 -

There are several :i,mprovements
deserve attention.
poorly specified.

on the basic formulation that

A first one recognizes that the demand for money is
There is no recognition of adjustment lags,

although they have been found significant in domestic studies of money
demand.

l

Nor does the equation include a longterm interest rate or deposit

rate that measures the alternative cost of holding money rather than
longterm assets.
In eqUation 2. and 4. we show equations that include both a shortterm
and a longterm interest differential.

The coefficient of the longterm rate

is of the expected positive sign and is statistically significant.
In equations 3. and 6. we complete the specification of money demand
by allowing for partial adjustment so that our exchange rate equation
becomes:

This specification shown in Chart 2 substantially improves the equation
by reducing the standard error and raising the Durbin Watson.

The lagged

coefficent is of the expected sign and magnitude and is statistically
significant.

At the same time, however, the adjustment changes the sign

of the shortterm interest differential which now becomes negative,

1 In Bilson (1978b) the possibility of lagged adjustment of real
money demand is explicitly recognized. In the empirical implementation,
however, only a lagged exchange rate is used.

- 34 -

e+m*-m

,.
\

\
\

+

\
\

\ Fitted
+
\

\

Actual
. - - - - Fitted

1974

1976

1975

Chart 2:

1977

THE MODIFIED MONETARY APPROACH

although it remains insignificant.

This change of sign is maintained

when instrumental variables estimation is used as in 6.

In fact the

stability of the coefficients across estimation techniqUes lends further
support to our formulation.
One interpretation of this sign pattern has been offered by Jeffrey
Frankel (1978).

He argues that the exchange rate equation of the form

shown in 2. or 4. is a reduced form equation from a system where we have
both shortterm real effects of monetary changes and longerterm inflation
differentials.

In this perspective a rise in the shortterm rate has to

MONTHLY OM/$ EXCHANGE RATE EQUATIONS:

(y-y*)

(r -r*)
s s

1

-.41
(.20)

.87
(1. 61)

2.

1

-.38
(.20)

.14
(1.61)

3.

1

-.23
( .17)

-1.05
(1. 49)

4.

1

-.45
(.21)

3.23
(3.14)

5.

1

-.61
(.33)

8.01
(6.65)

6.

1

-.26
(.27)

-1.51
(5.56)

#

m-m*

1.

(e+m*-m)

-1

.67
( .11)

.57
(.21)

= const

1974/3 - 1978/~

(r - r*)
L
L

const.

Rho

SER

OW

1.13
( .10)

.97

.021

1.28

9.12
(4.38)

1. 24
( .09)

.97

.021

1.41

10.27
(3.18)

.46
(.20)

.53

.018

1.94

1.13
( .12)

.97

.022

1. 36

29.55
(3.52)

1.44
(.03)

.65

.029

1. 79

13.37
(6.33)

.60
(.31)

.58

.018

1.90

+ a (e+m*-m)_l + a (y-y*) + a 2 (r -r;) + a 3 (rL - r~)
o
S
1
where all variables are defined in the text. Equations 1-3 were estimated using a correction for first order
serial correlation. Equations 4-6 were estimated using Fair's method with production, the lagged right and
left hand variables and time as instruments. Standard errors in parentheses.
Notes:

The estimated equation is:

e+m*-m

- 36 -

be matched by depreciation to generate an offsetting expectation of
appreciation.

Changes in the longterm interest differential, by contrast,

are a proxy for changes in longterm inflation differential.

Increased

inflation thus raises longterm interest rates and leads to a depreciation
of the spot rate.
3.

A Criticism of the Monetary Model:
A serious criticism of the monetary approach would start from the

recognition that PPP does not hold as any direct test will show.

Therefore

an equation like (6), which explicitly relies on PPP, cnanot be derived
or expected to hold.

This leaves expectations as the only direct link

between exchange rates and the monetary sector.

The argument returns us

to equation (lS) , written for convenience in logs:

1

(15) ,

where the prefix denotes the time at which expectations are formed and
where tdt+l denotes the one period interest differential starting at time t.
We now want to sketch what the implications for empirical testing
of an expectations based approach would be.
from (lS) ,

last

For that purpose we subtract

period's exchange rate:

2

1 Equalizing the expected return from an investment at home and abroad we
have the.following relation between the dollar returns:
(l+r*}E/E = (l+r)
where E is the exchange rate at which we anticipate to convert foreign
exchange earnings~ We can rewrite this equation as: E = E(l+r*}~l+r) or,
taking logs, e = e - d where d :: log (l+r> I (1+r*) IX r-r*.
.
2 For subsequent reference we als9 define the log of the two period interest
rate starting last year:t_ld t + l :: t-ldt + t-1Vt+l where t-1Vt+l is the
expected one period rate differential between t and t+l, expectations being
formed at t-l.With these definitions we can define the term n :: tdt+l -.t-1Vt+l
as the unanticipated change iri the one-period interest rate., The term
Et :: tet+l - t-let+l represents new information about the future exchange rate.

- 37 -

where t_ldt+lis the two period interest differential:

(21 )

et

=e

t _l

=e t _ l

e) -

+( tet+l
- t-l t+l

+ e: t + t-l d t -

n
'I

t d t+l + t-l d t+l

t

Thee;planation for our equilibrium exchange rate as written here will
rely on the rational use of information.

I

will argue that today's

equilibrium exchange rate is equal to last periods' adjusted for the
one-period interest differential that prevailed between last period and
this period.

The remaining determinants of the exchange rate are white

noise or fresh news or unanticipated events.

They represent respectively

the change in the expected future spot rate between last period and this
.period, e: , and the reassessment of the one period interest differential
t
starting today, that is news about the term structure, Tl • 1
t
The emphasis on exchange rate movements as embodying new information
is of course an essential aspect of assets market theories of the
exchange rate.

This is particularly recognized in the work by Mussa

(1976, 1977).
In this formulation the exchange rate will depreciate today relative

to its previous level for one of three reasons:
(a) the depreciation was anticipated and already reflected in the
one period interest differential t_ldt which in this case would have
been positive.

lA closely related question, the' efficency of the forward market, has been
extensively tested by running regressions of the fo~ e t = a o + alft~l + u t
where f
is the forward rate at t-l.The test involves ehe Joint
hypothe~I~ of a =0 and al=l. See Levich (1978) • The focus of interest here,of
course, is that°the serially uncorrelated innovations should be explained in
terms of a structural model.

- 38 -

(b) There is news about interest rates.

The one-period differential,

starting"today, had been incorrectly predicted and the reassessment of
the interest differential leads to a depreciation in the one period rate
starting today is above the rate that was implicit in last periods two
period differential.

An unanticipated increase in interest rates with

unchanged expectations about future exchange rates will lead to a
appreciation of the spot rate.
(c)

The last piece that leads to a change in the exchange rate is

news about next periods equilibrium exchange rate.

Again here we look

solely at a change in expectations due to new information.
that rationality requires that E and

n be

It is apparent

serially uncorrelated. l

i Since n t j s observable there may be a temptation to run an equation
e t = e t _ l + t-ldt + nt + Et' treating Et as the error term. The procedure
is not appropriate since the revision of interest rates is likely to be
correlated with E as the case of unanticipated money, for example, makes
t
clear.

- 39 -

This model of the equilibrium exchange rate draws attention to the
right variables in an exchange rate equation.

-The right variables, in

addition to the lagged rate and the one period differential and change of
differential are the unanticipated components of the variables that
systematically affect exchange rates.

Thus an unanticipated, permanent

increase in money will depreciate the exchange rate in the same proportion
if interest rates remain unaffected and more than proportionately if
interest rates transitorily decline.

A change in the terms of trade,

with unchanged price trends and output will immediately depreciate the
exchange rate in the same proportion.
From the perspective of the monetary approach this formulation suggests
that we need both a structural model that will tell us about longterm
determinants of exchange rates and the dynamics of the economy and we need
a model of the unanticipated component of the exogeneous variables.

The

model differs, of course, from the monetary approach since the latter
could be written as:
e

(6)"

where the

~

t

= e t-l

+ a

~(m-m*)

o·

-a

1

~(y-y*)

denotes first differences.

+a

2

~(r

5

-r*)
5

In contrast to (6)" we have in

(21) the unanticipated components of these first differences but we have
in addition other structural determinants of exchange rates as they
arise in a world not bound by strict PPP.

To implement an equation like

(21) the procedure clearly parallels work on interest rates or·ou:tput
determination where the implications of rational expectations have
started to be tested.
4. The Portfolio Balance Model
The portfolio balance model has received relatively less attention
than the simple monetary model.

This is due, in part, to the data

requirements and in part to the fact that the theory is less structured

- 40 -

in its predictions.

Nevertheless, drawing on work by Branson, Halttunen

and Masson (1977) and Porter (1977) we can report some results for the $/DM
exchange rate.
We recall from equation (14)' that the equilibrium exchange rate is
determined by relative asset supplies.
in the ratio of money to domestic assets

More particularly, an increase
w~ll

lead to a depreciation

as will an increase in the ratio of domestic assets to foreign assets.
The tests that have been performed have excluded domestic assets entirely
and thus focus

on~y

on money and net foreign assets where the latter are

optained by cumulating current account surpluses.
In the Branson-Halttunen-Masson (BHM) model the $/DM exchange rate
is estimated for the period 1971:8-1976:12:
(22)

where

E

= -4.85

- .06l8M + .09M* + .6758F - .3976F*
(-.1)
(-1.7)
(2.8)
(1.7)
(-1.9)

Rho=.87

R

2

=.94

t-statistics are given in parenthesis, and where M, M*- F arid F*

denote German and

u.s.

monimal money stocks and net external assets.

The equation supports the theory in that the coefficients of
money and foreign assets have the correct signs.

The corresponding

elasticities are respectively: -.73, 1.85, .05 and -.22.
These elasticities with respect to money very broadly support a
monetary view•. The interesting novelty, however, is the inclusion of
net foreign assets which here have an unambiguous effect.

A current

account surplus, by leading to accumulation of external assets, gives rise
to an appreciation •. This is an important link tha~ had been neglected by
earlier asset market views and for which support is therefore all the more
important.

DW=1. 35

- 41 ...

I see the chief interest of the

portfolio model

as a direction of

research that moves exchange rate theory away from money and PPP toward
a perspective that

emphasi~es

increasingly real variables: relative asset

suppliesJexchange rate expectations, the terms of trade and the current account.
5. The Impact of Traded Goods Price Movements
In this section we study briefly the impact that movements· in traded
goods prices exert on the economy.

Two questions concern us here.

One

is the extent to which an increase in import prices increases consumer
prices and the GNP deflator.

That question is important because it

measures the inflationary impact of exchange depreciation as brought
about, for example, by expansionary monetary policy.

The second question

concerns the responsiveness of trade flows to relative price changes.
That question is of interest because it measures the extent to which
depreciation induced movements in competitiveness create net exports and
thus aggregate demand.

B9th que~t~Qns. ~~e e~sent~al ~s~ects o~ the

dynamic extension of the Mundell-fleming model in section 5 above.
i.

The Inflationary Impact of Import Prices:
An exchange rate depreciation will, for given world prices raise the

domestic price of imports.

There is thus a direct impact on consumer

prices to the extent that the CPI includes importables.

There are

additional effects, however, to the extent that prices of closely
competing goods will tend to rise.

Finally there may be a more time

consuming adjustment as money wages rise in response to the induced

- 42 -

CPI inflation.

We have tried to capture all these effects in a rough

way by a price equation that relates the rate of CPI and GNP deflator
inflation to their own lagged levels,

.

rate and import price inflation, Pm.
using

u.s.

the prime male unemployment, u,
Table 4 summarizes these results;

quarterly data for 1965/I-1977/IV:
Table 4:

Price Index

THE IMPACT OF IMPORT PRICE INFLATION IN THE US

const

P- l

l/u

CPI

.002
(.003)

.43
(.14)

.007
(.005)

GNP Deflator

.004
(.002)

.40
( .10)

.004
( .003)

Note:

0

2
R

DW

.15
( .03)

.64

1.92

.15
(.02)

.78

1.96

P

m

The inflation rates on the right hand side are one year moving
averages. Standard errors in parenthesis.
The equations strongly support the idea that an increase in import

prices spills over into increased domestic inflation.

In the shortrun

an increase in import price inflation of two percentage points will
raise domestic inflation by about a third of one percent.
effect is about double that figure.

The longrun

It is perhaps interesting to note that

the maqnitude of the short and longrun effects of import prices substantia~y

exceed the share of imports in GNP or expenditure and thus

demonstrate that there is substantial spillover.
The impact of import prices on domestic prices can thus be determined
with considerable accuracy.

The harder question is the impact of

depreciation on import prices.
across commodities.

Here we have substantial differences

A reasonable approximation would be to assume that

an across the board one percent depreciation in the effective exchange
Orate would raise import prices by between a third and a half percentage

- 43 -

point.

The difference is made up in part by a decline in prices abroad

and in part by a reduction in foreign profit margins.
If we combine these numbers with those in Table 1 we conclude that
a five percentage point depreciation in the effective exchange rate
would in the shortrun raise inflation by about four tenths of a percent
and in the longrun by about double that amount.

For the US there is

thus clearly an inflationary impact but it really is not very substantial
in magnitude.
The experience of Germany, Switzerland or Japan is of course quite
different.

With substantially more open economies import prices exert

a more sizeable effect on domestic prices.

Accordingly the large.

appreciations which these countries have experienced have made a large
contribution toward stabilization of inflation.
of consumer
of Japan.

Table 5 shows inflation rates

and import prices for these countries.

Chart 3 looks at the case

With import prices actually declining there is a powe;r:ful check on

domestic wage and price movements and thus a possibility of reducing inflation
without a major recession.

TABLE 5:

DOMESTIC AND IMPORT PRICE INFLATION

GERMANY

SWITZERLAND
Domestic
Import

Import

11.9

7.6

0.4·

9.3

6.0

1.3

1.2

8.1

-4.2

1.4

-10.0

3.6

-17.0

Import

1975

5.9

-1.7

6.7

1976

4.5

6.7

1.7

1977

3.9

1.5

1977/78

2.7

-6.5

-9.8

Note: Domestic inflation is measured by the CPl.
correspond to the period 1977/I1 to 1978/II.
Source:

JAPAN

Domestic

Domestic

The 1977/78 data

International Financial Statistics and Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis.

- 44 -

120

110

100

90

80

70

1975

1976

1977

1978

Source: International Financial Statistics
CHART 3

CONSUMER PRICES AND IMPORT PRICES IN JAPAN
U975

= 109>

- 45·-

iL

The Responsiveness of Trade Flows:
To complete our framework of reference we briefly look at the

responsiveness of trade flows to changes in relative prices.

We noted

earlier that an expansionary monetary policy will depreciate the exchange
rate and thus change relative prices.

There is of course a wide body of

in net exports can be expected.
empirical studies to draw on.

We now ask how much of a change

We limit ourselves here to some recent

estimates by Deppler and Ripley (1978), Goldstein and Khan (1978) and
Hooper (1978).
Table 6 summarizes the elasticities with respect to relative prices
that emerge from these studies for the case of the
Table 6:

us:

TRADE ELASTICITIES

Cumulative

Shortrun
EXPORT DEMAND
Total:

a.
b.

Manufactures:

-2.32
-1.26

-2.12

-0.29

-1.52

IMPORT DEMAND
Manufactures:
Total
~ote:

~on-Oil:

·1.92
.92- 1.15

On the export side estimates a. and" b. are from Goldstein and
Khan (1978). The estimates for manufactured goods are from
Deppler and Ripley (1978). The shortrun for the former is a
quarter, for the latter a year. The non-oil import elasticity
estimates are from Hooper (1978) using equations without a
time trend.

- 46 -

The table reveals two by now well established facts.

First, that

there is substantial longrun adjustment to relative price changes.

The

cumulative response of world demand to a reduction of five percent in
the relative price of US export goods is about ten percent.

Similarly on

the import side we have evidence for substantial elasticities in the
longrun response.
The second fact concerns adjustment lags.

These lags are very

pronounced as can be seen from the difference between shortrun and
longrun elasticities.
to determine with

The exact time shape of the response is very hard

any precision but can readily be summarized by saying

that full adjustment is a matter of years, not quarters.
The evidence then suggests that a reduction in the relative price
of OS goods will increase net exports and thus improve the current account
and add to demand.

In this direction there is some compensation for

the inflationary effect of monetary policy through increased prices.

It

is important to recognize, though, that the trade adjustment is slow
and that accordingly this channel of monetary policy may be a poor instrument
of cyclical stabilization policy.

- 47 -

III.

CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS

The theoretical framework and the empirical evidence allow us to
form some tentative conclusions about the determination of exchange rates
and the scope for monetary policy under flexible rates.

The conclusions

must remain tentative because the theory itself remains very much in flux much as the domestic counterpart in macroeconomics, and because the empirical
evidence is! only starting to come in and to receive proper scrutiny.
With these caveats in mind here are some conclusions:
A first conclusion must concern the "right" model of exchange rate
determination.

I take the evidence, theoretical and empirical, to reject

the monetary approach in the narrow way in which it has been empirically
implemented.

The portfolio approach is important because it draws

attention to the current account but the empirical work remains largely
to be done.

My own preference remains with an extended Mundell-Fleming

mOdel that recognizes the determination of exchange rates in assets
markets, the differential speeds of adjustment of assets and goods markets
and the central role of expectations of the future exchange rate in
influencing the current rate.

PPP in this model is a longrun tendency,

although of course the terms of trade may have to change secularly to
accomodate biased growth.patterns.

Given such a framework, what are our

conclusions about monetary policy?
(i). Monetary policy under flexible rates and high capital mobility
works not only by affecting the interest sensitive components of
aggregate demand but also by increasing net exports.

Expansionary

monetary policy will depreciate the exchange rate and thereby, at least
temporarily, improve our competitiveness.

- 48 -

(ii)

Will expansionary monetary policy improve the current account?

The gain in competitiveness that is at least transitorily gained by an
expansionary monetary policy will no doubt by itself improve net exports
and thus add to aggregate demand.

There is, however, a potentially

Offsetting increase in imports arising from the domestic expansion in
demand due "to lower interest rates and thus higher investment and consumption spending.

The net effect on the current account remains uncertain

since it depends on the relative magnitudes of the decline in interest
rates and the response of aggregate demand to interest rates and the
composition of spending to relative prices.

It is certainly not a

foregone conclusion (except when interest rates cannot at all decline

-

from the world level) that monetary expansion and depreciation must
.

improve the current account.

To the extent, though, that the interest

rate effects in the first place affect construction one would not expect
the adverse absorption effects on the current account to' arise early
compared to the relative price effects.

- 49 -

(iii)

Monetarr policy has an immediate effect on exchange rates.

A change in the nominal quantity of money in the shortrun is a change
in the real quantity of money which will bring about a change in interest

rates.

With changed interest rates and unchanged expectations spot

rates have to move to maintain yields in line internationally.

If

monetary policy affects exchange rate expectations then the exchange
rate adjustments have to be even more pronounced.
(iv)

The instability or volatility of exchange rates arises from

two sources.

The first is the very low interest elasticity of money

qemand which implies that fluctuations in the demand or supply of money
produce large fluctuations in interest rates and therefore require
large movements in exchange rates to maintain yields internationally.
The second source is instability in the exogeneous variables--there is
plenty of news.
(v)

Movements in exchange rates affect the level of import prices

directly and spillover into consumer, wholesale and producer prices.
The extent and speed of this spillover
the perspective of monetary policy.

~s

an essential question from

While the incz:ease in import prices

is helpful in establishing a gain in competitiveness it of course hurts
from a point of view of inflation.

The more rapid and the more substantial

the spillover of import prices into domestic prices the more inflationary
is monetary policy and the less effective it is with respect to
aggregate demand.
(vi)

The-empirical evidence indicates that the changes in real

exchange rates and competitiveness induced by nominal exchange rate

- 50 -

movements persist for a considerable length of time.

The reaction of

trade flows and direct investment to these changes in relative prices
are, however, slow to come about so that the net export channel cannot
be. counted upon as one of the more rapid responses to monetary policy.
Having reviewed in a broad manner the implications of theory and
evidence for the role of monetary policy under flexible rates we conclude
with another aspect of the same question:

to what extent do monetary

factors account for the ongoing depreciation of the dollar?

There is

a worrying temptation, in this connection, to look to monetary factors
as the dominant explanation.

Thus the Wall Street Journal in a

continuing public education effort has reminded us once more:
" ••• And surely the price of the dollar depends on supply
and demand for the dollar. It declines because the
Federal Reserve supplies more dollars than are demanded.
For all the talk of swap networks, gold sales and so on,
the only way the decline will be reversed is for the Fed
to constrict the supply of dollars."l
Table 7 summarizes monetary growth rates for M for some of the major
I
industrialized countries and the US.

The table also shows the

behavior of the effective dollar exchange rate.

Note that for the

last five quarters the dollar has been depreciating, although US
monetary growth has been among the lowest.

Note in particular German

monetary growth which surely must be reckoned high.

No doubt the

lesson of the monetary approach--the exchange rate is the relative
price of two moneys--must have been overlooked.

l'
See Wall Street Journal, August 30, 1978 "The Counsel of Surrender".

- 51 -

TABLE 7:

MONETARY GROWTH AND DEPRECIATION
(%

Annual Rates)

MONETARY GROWTH

EFFECTIVE $ RATE

Germany

Japan

1976

10.3

14.2

11.4

5.1

-5.0

1977

8.3

7.0

21.5

7.1

1.1

IV

12.6
6.0
12.7
10.3

4.2
-3.0
16.9
7.0

13.4
15.9
29.5
29.7

7.2
8.6
8.3
7.7

2.7
2.7
10.0

1978 I
II

25.3
6.5

9.7
13.2

17.3
n.a •.

6.3
10.3

13.2
5.7

1977 I
II
III

US

UK

Note:

The quarterly data show quarter to quarter changes at annual rates.
The last column shows the annual rates of change of the effective
dollar exchange rate. A minus sign indicates an appreciation of
the dollar.

Source:

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, International Financial
Statistics and OECD Economic.outlook.

If monetary factors do not account for the full extent of the
depreciation what factors should we look to for an explanation?

Of

course we should remember that real factors do have an impact on
exchange rates.

Suppose a given trend of monetary policies in the US

and abroad and therefore a given trend of prices.

Suppose now that a

current account deficit arises and that there is no expectation that
it will close in the near future of itself.

A change in the terms of

trade will be required to restore competitiveness and thus help
achieve full employment current account balance.

A deterioration

of our terms of trade, of course, with a given path of prices will
require a depreciation of the exchange rate.
Now let me argue why I believe this story to be the major
explanation for the dollar depreciation.

I see two main reasons for

- 52 -

a "structural"

u.s. current account deficit. One is the medium-term

reduced growth rates in other industrialized countries, in particular
Japan and Germany.

This implies that with .unchanged

u.s. growth (I take

it a 3.5-4% growth path will be maintained) and given the evidence on

u.s.

and foreign income elasticities in trade there will be continuing

if not growing imbalance.
The second and possibly more important reason is the growing competitiveness
of LDCs in manufacturing trade.

These countries have achieved substantial

industrialization in their domestic markets and have to look to the world
market for continuing growth.
in the

They have already shown impressive performance

u.s. market as evidenced by the fact that their share in our manufactured

imports in the last five years has risen from 15% to more than 20%.

I

suspect that this trend will be substantially accelerated as the large
European and Japanese direct investment in these countries starts to
bear fruit.

The U.S. market will increasingly prove to be the testing

ground for newcomer's export drives.

The resulting effect for our

current account is unquestionably a deterioration unless we manage to
outpace with new products and innovations the rate at which the rest of
the world imitates

u.s. techniques.

At present there is no evidence of a restructuring of the economy
toward a dynamic., trade oriented stance.

Accordingly there is no surprise

that the market should anticipate deteriorating terms of trade and ongoing
depreciation.

The anticipation of course translates into an immediate

depreciation.

The depreciation

p~esents,

of course, a conflict.

It is

directly and immediately inflationary and to that extent interferes
seriously with an attempt to contain inflation.

At the same time, though,

it contributes to a restoration of U.S. competitiveness and thus helps

- 53 -

maintain or increase aggregate demand.

Since the medium term deterioration:

in the terms of trade is largely inevitable it is important not to interfere
with the depreciation but rather to concentrate on a more basic macroeconomic
reorientation toward fiscal restraint for an improvement in the current
account combined with monetary and fiscal policies conducive to investment
and growth.

- 54 -

REFERENCES

Abel, A., Dornbusch, R., Huizinga, J., and Marcus, A. (1977) "Money
Demand During Hyperinflation", forthcoming, Journal of Monetary
Economics.
Artus, J. (1976) "Exchange Rate Stability and Managed Floating:
Experience of the Federal Republic of Germany",

!ME'

The

Staff Papers, July.

Basevi, G•. and De Grauwe, P. (1977) "Vicious and Virtuous Circles"
European Economic Review, 10.
Bilson, J. (1978a) "The Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate:
Empirical Evidence",

!ME'

Some

Staff Papers, March.

Bilson, J. (1978b) "Rational Expectations and the Exchange Rate" in
Frenkel, J. and Johnson, H.G. (eds.)

The Economics of Exchange

Rates, Addison Wesley, 1978.
Bilson, J. (1978c)
An

"The Current Experience with Floating Exchange Rates:

Appraisal of the Monetary Approach"

American Economic Review, May.

Black, S. (1977) Flexible Exchange Rates and National Economic Policy,
Yale University Press.
Boyer, R. (1977) "Devaluation and Portfolio Balance", American Economic
Review, March.
Branson, W. <l977) "Asset Markets and Relative Prices in Exchange Rate
Determination" Sozialwissenschaftliche Annalen, Band I,

Branson, W., Halttunen, H. and Masson, P. (1977)
Short Run."

"Exchange Rates in the

European Economic Review, 10.

Deppler, M.C. and Ripley, D.C. (1978) "The World Trade Model:
Trade"

Merchandise

!ME' Staff Papers, March.

Dooley, M. and Isard, p. (1978)

"A Portfolio Balance Rational Expectations

Model of the Dollar-Mark Rate. If
Governors of the Federal Reserve.

Unpublished Manuscript, Board of

- 55 -

Dornbusch, 'R. (1976a)

"Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics", Journal

of Political Economy, December.
Dornbusch, R. (1976b) "Capital Mobility, Flexible Exchange Rates and
Macroeconomic Equilibrium" in E. Claassen and P. Salin (eds.) Recent
Issues in International Monetary Economics.
Dornbusch, R. (1975) "A Portfolio Balance Model of the Open Economy"
Journa,l of Monetary Economics, May.
Dornbusch, R. and Fischer, S. (1978) "Exchange Rates and the Current
Account".

Unpublished Manuscript, Massachusetts Institute of

Technology.
Fleming, J.M. (1962) "Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and
Flexible Rates", IMP Staff Papers, November.
Flood, R. (1976) "Asset Trading, Exchange Rate Determination and Exchange
Rate Dynamics", Unpublished Manuscript, LSE.
Frankel, J. (1978) "On the Mark", Unpublished Manuscript, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology.
Frenkel, J. (1976) "A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate:

Doctrinal

Aspects and Empirical Evidence", Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 2.
Frenkel, J. and Clements, K. (1978) "Exchange Rates in the 1920's:
Monetary Approach."
Frenkel, J

~

(1978)

A

Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.

"Purchasing Power Parity" ,Journal of International

Economics, May.
Girton, L. and Roper, D. (1977) "A Monetary Model of Exchange Market
Pressure Applied to the Postwar Canadian Experience", American
Economic Review, September.
Goldstein, M. and Khan, M.S. (1978) "The Supply and Demand for Exports:
A Simultaneous Approach," Review of Economics and Statistics, May.

- 56 -

Henderson, D. (1978) "The Dynamic Effects of Exchange Market Intervention
Policy:

Two Extreme Views and a Synthesis."

Unpublished Manuscript,

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
Henderson, D. and Girton, L. (1974) Central Bank Operations in Foreign
and Domestic Assets under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates" in

Hodrick, R. (1978) "An Empirical Analysis of the Monetary Approach ts>
the Determination of the Exchange Rate", in Frenkel, J. and
- Johnson, H.G. (eds.) The Economics of Exchange Rates, Addison Wesley.
Ho'oper, P.

(1978) "The Stability of Income and Price Elasticities in

u.S. Trade," International Finance Discussion Papers, No. 119,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
Humphrey, T. (1978) "The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rates:

Its

Historical Evolution and Role in Policy Debates," Economic Review
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, July/August.
Isard, P. (1978) Exchange Rate Determination:

A Survey of Popular Views

and Recent Models, Princeton Studies in International Finance,
No. 42.
Y-.;hlhagen,·S ••
M ('1978) "The Behavior of Foreign Exchange Markets-A

SMJ

Critical Survey of the Empirical Literature,"

New York University,

Series in Finance and Economics.
Kouri, P.

The Theory of Exchange Rates (1975), Unpublished Doctoral

. Dissertation, M.I.T.

- 57 -

Kouri, P. (1976a)

"The Exchange Rate and the Balance of Payments in

the Short Run and in the Long Run:

A Monetary Approach."

Scandinavian Journal of Economics, No.2.
Kouri, P. (1976b)

"Foreign Exchange Market Stabilization and Speculation

under Flexible Exchange Rates."

Unpublished Manuscript, Ulliversity

of Stockholm.
Kouri, P. and Braga de Marco, J. (1978) "Exchange Rates arid the International
Adjustment Process."

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Kravis, I. and Lipsey, R. (1978) "Price Behavior in the Light of Balance
of Payments Theory," Journal of International Economics, May.
Krugman, P. (1977) Essays on Flexible Exchange Rates, Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
..,....... ._...

~"I""x.vr

~

... _ _..

Laidler, D. (1977) "Expectations and the Behavior of Prices and Output
under Flexible Exchange Rates," Economica, November.
Levich, R. (1978) "On the Efficency of Markets. for Foreign Exchange" in
R. Dornbusch and J. Frenkel (eds.) International Economic Policy:
Theory and Evidence, Johns Hopkins University Press.
Mundell, R.A. (1967)

International Economics, MacMillan.

Mussa, M. (1976) "The Exchange Rate, the Balance of Payments and Monetary
and Fiscal Policy under a Regime of Controlled Floating" Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 2.
Mussa, M. (1977) "Exchange Rate Uncertainty:

Causes, Consequences and

. Policy Implications", Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.

- 58 -

Nichans, J. (1977) "Exchange Rate Dynamics with Stock/Flow Interaction."
Journal of Political Economy, December.
Officer, L. (1976) "Purchasing Power Parity Theory of Exchange Rates:
A Review Article," IMP Staff Papers.
Porter, M. (1977) "The Exchange Rate and Portfolio Equilibrium"
Unpublished Manuscript, Monash University •
. Rodriguez,

c.

(1978) "The Role of Trade Flows in Exchange Rate Determination:

A Rational Expectations Approach."

Unpublished Manuscript, Columbia

University.
Sachs, J. (1978) "Wage Indexation, Flexible Exchange Rates and Macroeconomic
Policy", Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University.
Sargen, N. (1977) "Exchange Rate Flexibility and Demand for Money,"
Journal of Finance, May.
Schadler, S. (1977) "Sources of Exchange Rate Variability:

Theory and

Empirical Evidence, IMP Staff Papers, July.
Whitman, M. (1975) "Global Monetarism" Brookings Papers, 3.
Willett, T. (1978) Floating Exchange Rates and International Monetary
Reform, American Enterprises Institute.

