                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            A NOTE ON STOCHASTIC RATIONING MECHANISMS



                          Takatoshi Ito



                      Working Paper No. 313




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138
                           January 1979




The author wishes to thank Seppo Honkapohja, Jerry Green, and
Kenneth J. Arrow for stimulating conversations. Financial sup-
port from NSF Grant SERT6—17502 is gratefully acknowledged. The
research reported here is part of the NBER's program of research
in Economic Fluctuations. The opinions expressed are those of
the author and no those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper 313
                                                                    January 1979


                                   ABSTRACI'


                  A Note on Stochastic Ration Mechanisms


       There are a couple of well-}aiown unsatisfactory properties in the
notion of effective demand defined by Benassy and one by Dreze. This
is why recent authors in disequilibrium analysis study the stochastic
rationing mechanism. Douglas Gale proved the existence of the equilibrium
with stochastic rationing mechanism. However, Gale 's rationing mechanism
requires an economic agent to know all the individual effective demands
from the other agents. This creates the informational problem. Green
examined a rationing scheme which depends only on the individual effective
demand and the aggregate signals. However, he did not consider conditions
on rationing iichanisms to show the existence of temporary equilibrium.
      The purpose of this paper is to show a couple of sufficient condi-
tions for the existence of temporary equilibrium preserving all properties
Green considered on rationing mechanisms. We also discuss the possibility
of   balancing   demand and supply in   realization instead of in the mean.




                                                 Takatoshi Ito
                                                 National Bureau of Economic Research
                                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                 Caithridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                                  (617) 868_392L
                                    1—1



1. Introduction

       The non-Wairasian (or quantity-constrained) equilibrium has been

studied since Drèze (1975) and Benassy (1975). Since both of them have

some difficulties in their concepts [explained, for example, by Grandmont

(1977), Green (1978) and Svensson (1977)1, stochastic rationing mechanisms

have recently been the focus of attention.

       Svensson (1977) shows, in a two-market example with a special

rationing scheme, how the Dreze and Benassy effective demands are different

from the effective demand with stochastic rationing. He did not proceed

to examine whether there exists a consistent trade in a market under his

stochastic rationing scheme. Douglas Gale (1978) gives the existence proof

of market equilibrium consistent trades) in an economy where continuum

traders face a stochastic rationing scheme. He does not specify the sto-

chastic rationing scheme an individual would face but just assumes that the

expectation of rationing depends on a vector of all individual effective

demands in an economy. He also gives a mathematical condition for non-

trivial equilibrium, but it is not apparent what kind of economy would

satisfy the condition. As for specifying the rationing mechanism, Green

(1978) shows that with some reasonable conditions on rationing mechanisms,

the individual ration can be represented as a product of the individual

effective demand and the stochastic rationing proportion. The latter is a

stochastic function of the individual demand and the aggregate signals of

demand and supply in the market. Green does not have a market equilibrium,

since an image set of the demand correspondence "maya be non-convex because
                                     1-2


of the effect of the individual effective demand through the stochastic

rationing proportion. Since Green requires that a stochastic rationing

mechanism is balancing demand and supply "in expectation (or in the mean),"

his mechanism might violate "in realization." Honkapohja and Ito (1978)

construct an economy to show the existence of non-trivial equilibrium with

a set of assumptions similar to Green's and an additional assumption that

the rationing proportion is dependent only on the aggregate signals. The

last assumption is totally consistent if all the agents are identical (as

they assume for firms in an industry). However, if there is no restriction

on a vector of the individual effective demand, then it is impossible to

construct a stochastic rationing mechanism which guarantees balancing in

real ization.

        The purpose of this note is to further discuss the Green-type

rationing mechanism (i.e., the individual effective demand times the sto-

chastic proportion dependent only on the individual effective demand and

the aggregate signals of demand and supply). Specifically, we will show

the following: (i) to give an example of rationing mechanism which is

stochastic to individuals and in accordance with Green's assumption but

also satisfies balancing in realization with certainty in a case that all

the individuals are identical; (ii) to discuss the possibility of requiring

a condition of balancing in realization when individuals are not identical;

and (iii) to give an example where the rationing proportion depends on the

individual effective demand but still gives the convexity of an image set

of demand correspondence. The example also satisfies balancing in realiza-

tion.

        The next two sections are adopted (with slight modifications) from

Honkapohja and Ito (1978).
                                      2-1


2. Framework and Notations

       We will consider in the following an economy where there are H

consumers;      I different types of consumption goods; F firms in each of

the consumption-good industries (no joint-production); and one type of

labor. The production technology of each industry is characterized by a

well-behaved neo—classical production function f'(.).      The prices of the

consumption goods, (p1,p2,. ..,p1), and the nominal wage, w, are fixed
within a period.

       The economic agents are asked to submit a vector of individual

effective demands and supplies which are guaranteed by the purchasing power

or the production technology and input quantity constraints. Let us denote

by 4 the     effective demand for the i-th consumption goods from household

h;   by y the effective supply of the i-th consumption goods from firm f;

by h the effective labor supply from household h 3nd 4 the effective

labor demand from the f-th firm in the i-th industry.1

       The government (or "lottery-auctioneer") assigns a vector of "realized

trade" which an individual has to obey. The process of assignment is

called "stochastic" if the assignment to an "individual" is stochastic.

This does not preclude the possibility that the "realized trade" is non-

stochastic in aggregate. ,,2
                 II                               .f
                               Let us denote by   y, the stochastic assign-
ment of realized supply from firm f in the i-th industry. The rationing

(or assignment) mechanism is known to all the economic agents.


       Assumption 2.1: [Rational Expectation of Rationing]3.

       An economic agent knows a mechanism of the stochastic realization

of trade and calculates the probability distribution of stochastic

tion for him.
                                    2-2


      Now we are ready to describe how the economic agents decide their

effective demands and supplies. Consumers are assumed to maximize their

expected utility function with the "budget constraint in realization."

That is, they have to end up with somewhere in the defined consumption

set with probability one.   Specifically they have to plan that they do

not go bankrupt even in the worst case.

       A firm is assumed to be risk-neutral and to maximize its expected

profit. Its production plan has to be feasible with probability one. We

will discuss the possibility of bankruptcy of firms later.

       All the markets meet simultaneously.4

       We did not so far specify a stochastic rationing mechanism. In

general, the probability measure for an individual in one market,   i,


depends on all other agents' effective demands in all other markets. There-
fore, we have to consider the mapping from the space of all individual

effective demands to the probability measures. Equilibrium with rationing

is defined as the set of effective demands and supplies which "reproduce

themselves" through the mapping of probability measures and optimal deci-

sions of economic agents. This is a framework and a notion of equilibrium

that Gale (1978) works out and proves the existence.5

       Although Gale's economy preserves most generality, it is too vague

to examine the rationing mechanism, and its effect on economic agents.

Moreover, it contains the informational difficulty: how could an economic

agent obtain all the information of other agents' individual effective

demands?

       At this point in our argument, one may recall the elegant general

equilibrium theory a la Arrow—Debreu because it only requires an economic

agent to know the market signals, i.e., the prices.
                                       2—3


          Green (1978) constructs an economy where aggregate signals in terms

of quantity in addition to prices are available and it is enough for an

agent to watch the aggregate signals to have the rational expectation.

In the following we trace the avenue prepared by Green.

          The government publishes the aggregate signals of demand and supply

for each market, {}                  (L,LS)}. The statistics are available to

all economic agents free of charge. We introduce an assumption of signal-

takers.



          Assumption 2.2: [Signal-taker]

          An economic agent takes the aggregate signals ct}   as given and

does not think his individual behavior changes the aggregate signals.


This assumption may be approximately justified in a large economy.


          Assumption 2.3: [Independence Across Markets]

          The rationing mechanism in a market is independent from the

     signals    and effective demands (or supplies) in the other markets.



       Assumption 2.4: [Rationing Mechanism]

       The rationing mechanism is designed in such a way that the rationing

probability to an economic agent depends only on his own effective demand

and the aggregate signals.


       Assumptions 2.1 and 2.4 imply that an economic agent is required to

have only the signals and his own effective demand to know the probability

distribution.
                                          2-4


       Since the probability distributions of rationing for an economic

agent are dependent on the aggregate signals, we will have the correspon-
                                                                             21+2
dence rorn   the properly defined subset of the signals space. K C IR÷

to the space of individual effective demands. Let us denote this correspon-

                                                                   K ÷ 2K•   Now we
dence by +'(ct) =
                    {ip(c),   p(c); 4(cL), 4(c)}, where q':

can define the temporary equilibrium if there exists a "self-reproducing"

signal. Formally, it is defined as follows:.


       Definition 2.1:        [Temporary Equilibrium with Stochastic Rationing]

       An economy is said to be in a temporary equilibrium with stochastic

rationing, if *} =       (yd*ys*)      Ld, LS},

                              d* Hh
                          Y. =y                   '' *   Ff          vi

                          Ld*=       f
where f p(*), h ip?(ct*), f (ct), ,h


       Definition 2.2: [Temporary Equilibrium Signals]

       A set ofgregate signals           {ci.*}    is called a set of temporary

equilibrium signals if the economy is in a temporary equilibrium with

chastic rationing.


       It is an immediate observation that we need (i) the upper-lower

continuity and convex-valuedness for each image set of 's and (ii) K is

a compact and convex set to assert the existence of a temporary equilibrium

with stochastic rationing. The purpose of this paper is to show what kinds
                                    2—5


of stochastic rationing mechanisms satisfying a certain set of axioms give

the above conditions for existence. A set of axioms for the stochastic

rationing mechanism is explained in the next section.
                                                     3—1



3. Stochastic Rationing

        Let us focus on a single market, say, the i-th market of the consump-

tion goods. Other markets, including the labor market will be treated

symmetrically because of Assumptions 2.3 and 2.4.

        We will discuss the axiorns that a stochastic rationing mechanism

should satisfy, following Green (1978):

        From the assumptions in the preceding section, we have the rationing

to economic agents h and f in the i-th market,                          and      respectively

depends on his effective demand and the market signals in that market:


                              -h =
                                      i('i'
                                       h h
                                            ' Y)     d       s


(3.1)
                              -f =        f f        d       s
                                      u(y,           Y., Y)

where
          4   > 0, y > 0,        >   0,         >    0; p's are stochastic functions; 's

are realized (or assigned, rationed) trade; y's are effective demands

(and supplies).

        From the definition of equilibrium, we have the following equilibrium

condition:


                                              yi =

(3.2)
                                          F
                                               f         s
                                          yj=vj
Let us omit a subscript i in the following:


        Axiom 1:   [Anonimity]

        The distribution of          is the same if the effective demands are the

same:
                                                      3—2


                               3J
                                    h
                                        =j       h'
                                                        if .       h
                                                                  y =y
                                                                         h'


(3.3)
                                 f
                                        =1
                                                 fi
                                                        if
                                                        •          f
                                                                  y =y
                                                                        fi




        Axiom 2:   [Voluntary Exchange]

        Rationing does not chaflge the side of the market, i.e., a demander

remains buying the goods, and a supplier selling the goods. An agent is

not forced to buy (or sell) more than the effective demand or supply he

announces:


                         o   <h         <       ,h     with probability one

(3.4)

                         o <            < yff          with probability one.



        Axiom 3: [Balancing in the Mean]

        The rationing mechanism balances in the mean, i.e.,

                         F                      H
(3.5)                    '   E()            =
                                                     E()

        Axiom 4: [Weak Continuity]

        The distribution of j           is      weakly Continuous in its arguments.


        Axiom 3 is a weaker requirement than an alternative axiom of balancing

in realization.


        Axiom 3A: [Balancing in Realization or Feasibilityj

        The rationing mechanism balances in realization, i.e.,


(3.6)
                             Ff
                              y = Hh
                                   y                           with probability one.
                                            3-3


        As Green noted Axiom 3A implies that the rationing mechanism for

individuals is functionally related to each other. Green commented that

"this restriction might come into conflict with the first condition."

However, it is important to ask what kind of rationing mechanism would

satisfy or not satisfy Axiom 3A in addition to Axiom 3, which is a main

focus in the next section of this paper. As also noted by Green, the differ-

ence in Axioms 3 and 3A becomes approximately negligible in a large economy.

        Now we are ready to state Green's theorem (1978):


        Theorem 3.1:    [Green (1978)]

        With Assumptions 2.1 -   2.4,    and Axioms 1, 2, 3, and 4, equation (3.1)

can be written in the following form:



                 u(4, Y, Y) 4 (4 Y, Y)
(3.7)

                 j!(y, Y, Y) =      y1!           Y, Y)

where       (or !) is   a random function whose mean is independent of 4

respectively).
                                       4-1


4. On Green's Theorem

     Green's theorem gives the convenient characterization of the individual

rationing probability distribution. However, he does not show a condition

that the demand correspondence has the characteristic that each image set

is convex, so that the fixed point theorem works.          It is of great interest

to investigate possible restrictions on ,       to   give this property.

     In the following we are going to discuss (i) the sufficient conditions

on     to preserve the convexity of each image set; (ii) the possibility of

imposing the axiom of balancing in realization instead of balancing in the

mean; and in the next section we will give examples which give the
                                                                           convexity
of each image set and the axiom of balancing in the mean with the finite

number of economic agents.

     Although the mean of      is independent of 4, the individual effec-
tive demand, the probability distribution of           may change preserving the

mean constant when 4 changes. Therefore, in general "the objective

function may be non—concave in the 4,"       as noted by Green. Let us explore
further restrictions on the rationing mechanism to preserve that the objec-

tive function is concave in the 4.

     The first thought would be that            has properties not only that
the mean is linear in 4 but also that the additive noise is independent

of 4. Because this preserves the desired feature of concavity, let us

consider this case in the following.         can be decomposed into two parts

with properly defined stochastic functions           and
                                                   4-2




                                =
                                    c5(Y, Y).y! +        5(Y,   Y)
(4.1)

                              E6() =    0



(similarly for                omitted hereafter).


        However (3.7) and (4.1) imply that


                                =
(4.2)
                                    5(Y,    Y) +   S(Y,    Y)/y'

We remind you of some of the axioms in the preceding section in terms of s.

        Voluntary exchange requires


(4.3)                        0 <       <1          with probability one for all 4   > 0.

        Balancing in the mean and anonimity requires


(4.4)                        H.E(y .   )
We   are going to examine (4.2) in two cases:


Case 1:           =   {0}.
        Suppose         is independent of           i.e., a stochastic function        in

(4.2) is degenerate at {0}. Then
                                           4-3


 (4.3)                             =
                                              Y)
 There are three subcases to consider:

         (1-a). If in&Ivjdu1s are identical, then the rationing scheme (4.3)

 is consistent with the rest of assumptions and axioms. We are also able to

give an example of a rationing mechanism which balances in realization.

This will be given in the next sections.

         (1-b). () degenerates     at a point,. i.e.,           is not a stochastic

function. In this case, it is easy to have an example satisfying all the

assumptions and axioms. See Green's Corollary.

      (1—c). If individuals are not identical and                 is not a deterniinis—

tic, then it is impossible to construct a rationing mechanism which satisfies

the axiom of balancing in realization.
                                                 Suppose        and Y are given and

           . . ,) is   a vector of realization of stochastic proportion. It is

still stochastic for individuals and the realization is deterministic in

aggregate because of random ordering of households and sampling without

replacement from an urn where the sum of numbers on tickets is constant.

It is impossible to find a vector,         {s} which is not constant (because
it is created from the non-degenerate
                                            process) and satisfy
              H                                        H
                  •y! = constant       ,    4>             4=
and


                                                            h
                                   is independent of
                                                           y.


The examples in the next section will make it easier to understand this point.
                                       4-4


Case 2:       {O} but          is deterministic.


     There are two subcases.

     (2-a). If there is the lower bound on 4 such that y >           > 0,
maybe from the definition of the consumption set, such that the minimum

subsistence level of nutrition, then it is possible to construct an example

to satisfy all the assumptions and axioms including balancing in realization.

This is illustrated in Example 2 in the next section.

     (2-b). If 4 is not bounded away from zero, it is clear from (4.2)

that as 4 ÷ 0,       -    and violates the axiom of voluntary exchange, (4.3).



     We do not have any examples for non-linear cases. Although it may be

possible to derive general conditions on rationing mechanisms to preserve

the desired property, it will be left for further research.
                                            5—1



5. Examples


Example   1



     We   will give examples which we promised in the preceding section.

We will consider firm f in the i-th industry. We will explain the indi-

vidual rationing expectaton              first and give the mechanism which

guarantees balancing in realization with probability one and creates the

explained                for individuals through rational expectation.

     We will give an example of a rationing scheme in a market where all

agents are identical and the             are independent of y. The following

rationing scheme preserves rational expectations on the quantity rationing

scheme, the randomness for individuals; and balances of the aggregate demand

and supply not only in the mean but also in realization with probability one.

     Take the representative firm in the i-th consumption good market: his

stochastic realization of supply, ,               is   now the effective demand multi-

plied by a stochastic "rationing number"                    which depends only on the

market signals.              is distributed uniformly between              and    in the

following manner: (we omit the obvious subscript i hereafter):


                 =   1                       if

                 =   1/2 + (yd/2y5)          if        (1/2) <   d1s   < 1


                 =   3d12s                  if         0 < yS1yS <   1/2


              s = min(Y'/Y,      1)         d1s >       0


where S       iS the mean of s} ;
                                               5—2


              =   1                              if


              = -(1/2)        +   3d12s         if       (1/2) <   d1s    < 1


              =                                 if        <         <   1/2

     are defined in the symetrical manner, i.e., substituting the super-

script f by h and d1s by s1d The idea is illustrated in                                Figure 1.

     Observe the axiom of voluntary exchange, i.e., 0 < s <               1     with probability
one is preserved.

     Here the short side agents in the market is assumed to realize their

effective demands (or supplies) with probability one. The long side divides

the amount in the short side in such a manner that agents draw the lottery

of "rationing proportion" without replacing lottery tickets, where the sum

of the lottery is equal to the disequilibrium index yd/yS                 (or yS/yd)
The assumption of identical agents guarantees that the sum of realization

is equal to the amount in the short side. The following is the formal des-

cription of how to set up the lottery.

     We also need one technical assumption. There is an even number of firms.

Now we explain the procedure of rationing. Suppose the market signal

       is less than one. (I) First stage is to make the lottery tickets

stochastically: We are going to create F (an even number of firms) tickets.

For the first ticket, draw a random number between             s and .           The second
ticket is s + (s                  where
          m           ml
                       -n )               n
                                           1
                                               is the number of the first ticket.

Sepeat this process F/2 times. (II) The second stage is the drawing to

decide the ordering of firms to draw the prepared tickets.                (III) The third

stage is that the first fipin decided by the second stage draw randomly one

ticket from the urn prepared by the first stage, and the drawn ticket is
        5-3




1




          1l
               ii
    Figure 1
                                       5-4


removed from the urn. Repeat the process F times to exhaust finns and

tickets.

       By the first stage, the sum of the rationing tickets add up to

SmF
        F d1s with certainty. Each firm is assumed to submit the same

effective demand y. That means that the actual rationing is Fy d1s

From the definition of temporary equilibrium with stochastic rationing,

Fy = yS•    Therefore, the aggregate realization of rationing is always

That is, the rationing scheme balances the aggregate demand and supply in

realization with probability one. However, from the individual point of

view, the rationing is stochastic and the distribution of rationing number

is exactly explained above. Although the third stage of drawing means that

a distribution of rationing tickets is dependent on other drawings, the

second stage erases this problem. Hence the identical distribution of

rationing with anonymity as a whole system is preserved.


Example 2

       Consider consumer k in the i-th market.       In this example s are

not independent of 4.     It   is clear from the argument in the preceding sec-

tion that




Now, the trick is similar to Example 1.       Consider the following bounds

within which y' denotes that the minimum order that the i-th agent is

required to order, y >                >      > 0. This may come from the

restriction on the consumption set. Suppose the short side rule holds again.

Then
                                                  5—5


            s =      1                                                 s d
                                                               when l<Y/Y

                 =
                     s1d    +
                                          s)(m1n/h)            when   o <   s1d < 1

where


           a <            yS) <      -                 with   probability one


             (S(yd y5 = o            ,     where (S are real realizations.


We create the tickets in the same manner as Example 1. Observe                        <   < 1

with probability one


                         h ;h =          (yS/yd)yh + (yd yS)
                                              H
                                =
                                    (yS/yd)       yh


                                =ys

The randaii element (S plays the role of tickets whose sum is equal to zero

in the urn with certainty.

     The idea in this example is that when an agent draws this ticket, the

absolute amount the agent is assigned is that the disequilibrium rate in

aggregate times his effective demand plus the random noise whose mean is

equal to zero. Obviously, a large demander is facing a smaller deviation

relative to his size of his demand but this
                                                              is required to preserve the axiom
of balancing in realization.
                                       6-1



6. Individual Behavior and the Existence of Non—trivial Equilibrium

        In the previous sections, we have shown that there exista rationing

mechanism in such a way that the utility function is concave In the indi-

vidual effective demand and it balances in the realization. Therefore,

the convexity of the image set in demand correspondence should be preserved,

unlike Green commented in the last section of his paper. Therefore, we have

the following existence theorem.


       Theorem 6.1:

        (i) Suppose there is the positive minimum bound in the consumption

set,         >   > 0.   Other characteristics of the consumer are the sarie as

those     in Green (1978). Suppose a stochastic rationing mechanism which

satisfies all the assumptions in the previous section and Axioms 1 ,    2,   3A

and 4; and which preserve the concavity of utility function in y!; for

example, the rationing mechanism in Example 2 in Section 5.

        (ii) Suppose all the firms are identical in an industry. Suppose also

a stochastic rationing mechanism which satisfies all the assumptions in the

previous sections, and Axioms 1, 2, 3A and 4; for example, the rationing

mechanism in Example 1 in Section 5. This is the same with the firm division

problem in Hankapohja and Ito (1978).

       Then there exists the temporary equilibrium with stochastic equilibrium.


        Proof: The upper-hemi continuity in consumers in demand correspondence

is explained in Green (1978). The convex—valuedness is explained above in

this section of the paper. The upper-hemi continuity and convex-valuedness

for firm's demand correspondence is explained in Honkapohja and Ito (1978).
                                              6-2


     Gale (1978) gives the condition that there exists a non-trivial equili-

brium, which includes positive trades. Honkapohja and Ito (1978) showed

a sufficient condition for the existence of non—trivial equilibrium which

is essentially the same with Gale's argument but in terms of utility func-

tions and production functions.



     Theorem 6.2

     (i) Suppose the consumer has enough initial noney.holdinqs so as to

be able to buy the minimum vector of consumption sets even in a case where

he is totally unemployed.

     (ii) The production function in each industry is "well-behaved," i.e.,

f'(O) =   , f'(co) = 0,    f(0) =     0, and f'(Q) > 0, f"(z) < 0    for > 0.
     (iii) If        >    0,   then       >   0.    Then, there exists a non-trivial

temporary equilibrium with stochastic rationing.



     Proof: Honkapohja and Ito (1978).
                                     7—1



 7. Applications to Disequilibrium Macroeconomics

      It is of interest to note how our concept of effective demands will

 be applied to a macroeconomic model in the near future. In this section

we will review the existing disequilibrium macroeconomic models and point

out some of their difficulties which would not arise in our framework.

Although this section is not a complete argument, this will give some

directions we are aiming at after proving the existence of temporary

equilibrium.

     Clower (1965), Barro and Grossman (1976), and Malinvaud (1977) give

a rationale and importance of the concept of effective demands as a tool

of (Keynesian or Keynes') macroeconomics. They show the classification of

fixed price vectors into several regimes where the impacts of changes in

policy variables are different. Since they have used the Glower-type

effective demands, as opposed to the Drze—type ones, it is not too diffi-

cult to trace the dynamic path of price adjustments responding to the excess

effective demands. However, we have to hastily add that the dower-type

effective demands are not jointly feasible. Therefore it is not obvious

why prices will respond to the Ciower—type excess effective demands. On

the other hand, it is well known that the Drze-type equilibrium

providus with no excess effective demand or supply.

     Our approach using the concept of temporary equilibria with stochastic

rationing suggests a new framework for disequilibrium macroeconomics. It

gives us the excess demands in signals and in realization (they coincide if

we take the assumptions of rational epectations and of a rationing mechanism
                                     7—2


with balancing in realization). It would be possible to trace the dynamics

of prices in our framework, if we show the uniqueness of temporary equili-

brium signals given the price vector. If there are multiple equilibria,

then we have a comparable situation to Hahn's idea (1978) of Non-Wairasian

equilibria at the Wairasian prices. Even if the prices are "correct," there

are also non—Wairasian equilibria in addition to the Wairasian equilibrium.

A story goes as the follo"iing:   If people expect rationing in their supply

of labor, then they cut downexpenses.      This in turn can create such a

signal of effective demands that the firms shrink their employment plan,

which confirms the expectation of rationing in labor supply. This story

can be applied to our stochastic rationing model as well as Hahn's model,

which is based on the oncept of the Drèze—type effective demands. It is

difficult that one extends his model to a dynamic framework.

     Varian (1977) gives a simple macroeconomic model with expectations on

the effective demand. His treatment of the (point) expectation and its

effect on the production decision is ad hoc.

     Our framework may give better understandings than the existing models.

However, the detailed investigation of applications of stochastic rationing

to disequilibrium macroeconomic models is left for further research.
                                    8-1


8. Concluding Remarks

     We have shown examples of stochastic rationing mechanisms to prove

the existence of temporary equilibrium. Non-triviality comes from positive

money balance, positive lower bound in rationing and constraints on con-

sumption and production sets. One may wonder if this economy continues to

exist since a firm 'may' go deficit from hoarding too much labor. Since

the origin is included in the production possibility set, an expected profit

maximizer would not plan the production plan with expected profit loss, but

it does not prevent some firms from suffering from deficit with positive

probability. Honkapohja and Ito (1978) assumed an economy where the govern-

ment owns the firms; therefore the government does not suffer from losses

with probability one if we assume Axiom 3A. In the same manner, we can

think of an economy where each firm is shared by all consumers with an

equal proportion, and the profit is distributed at the end of the period.

Then with Axiom 3A, consumers always receive the positive aggregate profit,

and an economy continues.

     We conclude this note with suggesting several topics to be explored in

the near future:

     I)   [Short-run Stability]

          Although the existence of temporary equilibrium signals is proved,

the uniqueness convergence (stability) of an equilibrium signal has not been

discussed. This is an interesting question to be studied.

     II) [Long-run Dynamics]

          We may be able to trace the disequilibrium dynamics or a sequence

of temporary equilibria over time in our economy by some stochastic processes.
                                                FOOTNOTES



      11n Honkapohja and Ito (1978), there is the qovernment as a demander

of consumption goods.


           simple example is a sampling without replacement. Suppose two

 individuals are drawing an assignment of household works through drawing

two tickets: one of them says one hour of scrubbing the floor and the

other says two hours of laundry and ironing. The individuals are facing

the stochastic rationing mechanism, although the mechanism assigns three

hours labor with certainty.


     3me name of rationa1 expectation is inherited from Gale (1978).

     4Futia (1977) coniders a model with sequential markets.

     5Although Gale (1978) works in a framework of continuum traders, his



mapping :      r
economy can be translated in our framework as follows: Let us denote the

                   - MOR),         r =       2(H+IF) or

                     ji:
                             ('' '
                               h         f     f    h       h   f
                                                          (y1, yi,
                                                                     f- h


where M() represents the set of all probability measures on the measurable

space r 3(r)) where B(") denotes the family of Bore] sets. There is

a natural topology on M(]gr) known as the topology of weak convergence. An

equilibrium is defined as (y,9) such that


                                     (y*,9*)


                                     (y*,*) c

where ip    represents     the correspondence of effective demand or supply decisions.
                                 REFERENCES


Barro, Robert J. and H. I. Grossman, (1976), Money, Employment and Inflation,
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Benassy, J.-P.,, (1975), "Neo-Keynesian Disequilibrium in a Monetary Economy,"
     Review of Economic Studies, Vol. XLII, No; 4, October, 503-524.

Clower, Robert W, (1965), "The Keynesian Counter-Revolution: A Theoretical
     Appraisal," in The Theory of Interest Rates by F. H. Hahn and
     F. Brechling (eds.), Macmillan.

Dreze, J. H., (1975), "Existence of an Exchange Equilibrium under Price
     Rigidities," Internajonal Economic Review, Vol. 16, 301-320.

Futia, C., (1977), "Excess Supply Equilibria," Journal of Economic Theory,
     Vol. 14, 200-220.

Gale, Douglas, (1978), "Economies with Trading Uncertainty," Economic Theory
     Discussion Paper No. 5, Department of Applied Economics, Cambridge
     University.

Grandmont, Jean-Michel, (1977), "Temporary General Equilibrium Theory,"
     Econometrica, Vol. 45, No. 3, April, 535-572.

Green, J., (1978), "On the Theory of Effective Demand," H.I.E.R. Discussion
     Paper No. 601, Harvard University, January (Revised July, 1978).

Hahn, F., (1978), "On lion—Wairasian Equilibria," Review of Economic Studies,
     Vol. XLV, February, 1-17.

Honkapohja, S. and T. Ito, (1978), "Non—trivial Equilibria in an Economy
     with Stochastic Rationing," mimeo, Harvard University, December.

Malinvaud, E., (1977), The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered, Basil Blackwell.

Svensson, Lars E. 0., (1977), "Effective Demand and Stochastic Rationing,"
     Institute for International Economic Studies, Seminar Paper No. 76, March.

Varian, (1977), "Non-Walrasian Equilibria," Econometrica, Vol. 45, No. 3,
    April, 573-390.
