            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF SOCIAL SECURITY ON PRIVATE SAVING:
            THE TIME SERIES EVIDENCE



                Martin Feldstein




             Working Paper No.     314




      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
               Cambridge MA 02138

                 February 1979
                                                         NBER Working Paper 314
                                                                  February 1979




                                    Summary


             The Effect of Social Security on Private Saving:
                          The Time Series Evidence


                                Martin Feldstein



      This paper reviews the studies by Barro, Darby and Munnell as well as

my own earlier time series study and presents new estimates using the revised

national income account data.     The basic estimates of each of the four studies

point to an economically substantial effect that is very unlikely to have

been observed by chance alone.     Although including variables like the govern-

ment surplus (Barro) or a measure of real money balance (Darby) can lower the

estimated coefficient of the social security wealth variable, this paper

explains their inappropriateness in the aggregate consumption function.     Use

of the new Department of Commerce data on national income and its components

improvesmy earlier estimates and shows that the unemployment variable does

not belong in the consumption function once the level of income and its rate

of change are included.



                                        Martin Feldstein
                                        National Bureau of Economic Research
                                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, Mass. 02138
                                        (617) 868-3905
             The Effect of Social Security on Private Saving:    The

                             Time Series Evidence


                              Hartin Feldstein*


        It is now well known that private pensions represent a substantial

part of total saving, accounting for some 25 percent of personal saving during

the past decade.    Less generally recognized, but of great importance, is the

common practice known as "integrating" private pensions and social security.

A private pension plan is said to be "integrated" with social security when

the private pension benefits to which an individual is entitled are reduced

by the amount (or some fraction of the amount) of his social security bene-

fits.     The extent of such integration is of course taken into account in

pension funding with less funding required in more fully integrated plans.

The tax laws and ERISA rules explicitly recognize and permit this substitu-

tion of social security for private pensions.       Thus "integration" provides a

specific mechanism by which social security depresses pension saving and

therefore total p:i:ivate saving.

        Of course, social security can depress private pensions even when there

is no formal integration procedure.     For a worker who has had median lifetime

earnings and who retires at age 65 with a dependent spouse, social security

now provides benefits that replace approximately 80 percent of final years'

after-tax earnings.    This high level of benefits leaves little incentive for

any substantial additional private pensions or direct personal retirement

saving.

      *President, National Bureau of Economic Research, and Professor of
Economics, Harvard University. The views expressed here are my own and should
not be attributed to any organization. The research reported is part of the
NBER's research program in Social Economics and its special study of Capital
Formation. This note is a reply to the comments of Esposito (1978) and will
be published in the Social Security Bulletin.
                                        - 2 -



         Common sense and everyday observation make       it clear that many middle

income and lower-middle income families do not provide for their retirement

because they expect to depend primarily on social security.            This remains true

despite the doubling of real per capita incomes that has occurred in the past 30

years because social security has more than kept pace with that income growth.

Only families with incomes substantially above         ~verage,   whose social security

benefits replace only a relatively small fraction of the income lost at

retirement, generally save a significant fraction of their income.            It is not

the real income level, but the level of income relative to future social

security benefits, that appears to determine the extent of household savings.

         I think the real issue is therefore not whether social security reduces
                                                1
saving but by how much it reduces saving.           The potential impact is very

large.       Social security taxes in 1977 were $91 billion       while personal savings

were only $67 billion.       If the money paid in social security taxes would

otherwise have been saved, the magnitude of the current social security

program implies that personal saving would otherwise be more than double what

it was in 1977.       Even if half of the money paid in social security taxes

would otherwise have been saved, the volume of personal saving would have
    •
increased by       68 percent.

         Economists are now using different ·bodies of data to estimate the impact

of social security on saving.       Aggregate time series for the economy as a

whole was       the first type of data to be used.    What can we hope to learn with


         1
       Theoretical arguments can be adduced that imply th~t the effect of
social security on saving is ambiguous, e.g., Barro's (1974) theory of
induced bequests or Feldstein's (1974) theory of the saving effect of induced
early retirement. There is little reason to believe that these theoretical
possibilities are powerful enough to alter the common sense conclusion that
social security discourages private saving.
                                      - 3 -



this type of information?    During the late 1930's and the succeeding war

years, there was a general expectation among economists that the saving rate

would continue to rise as people became more affluent and a widespread fear

among economists that the difficulty of absorbing this extra saving would

prevent full employment.     That increase in saving did not materialize.     Even

as incomes rose very substantially in the 1960's, the savings rate did not

increase significantly.     This was also the period in which social security

was introduced and in which it grew rapidly. One possibility, predicted by
                                                   l                                   2
some of the early Keynesians like Seymour Harris       and even by Keynes   himself,

is that the growth of social security precluded the growth of private saving.

      Multiple regression analyses of time have been used to evaluate

the extent to which the introduction and expansion of social security have

influenced the patterns of savings and consumption over time.       There are two

basic difficulties in using time series data for this purpose.       The first

problem is finding an adequate measure of the public's expectations of the

social security benefits that they will later receive.       Surveys confirm that

individuals do not have precise estimates of the likely value of their future

social security benefits.    Although legislative changes create benefit entitle-

ments immediately, these new benefits are only recognized slowly by the indi-

viduals affected.   There is no completely satisfactory solution to this

problem.   In practice, all of the researchers have used the variable "social

security wealth," i.e., the present actuarial value of the future benefits to



      lSee S. Harris (194D.
      2
       My colleague, Richard Musgrave, recalls the occasion when Lord Keynes
visited the u.S. Treasury and commented that the new u.S. Social Security program
would prevent the excess saving that many economists then feared.
                                     - 4 -


                                             l
which the working population is entitled.        This overly precise measure cannot

provide an accurate picture of year to year variations in the public's percep-

tion of the extent to which they can rely on social security but, hopefully,

it does capture the broad sweep of changes including the original introduction,

the major extensions of coverage and the provision of dependents' benefits.

        The second basic problem with time series analysis is that many variables

move closely together over time.     Even if an equation is correctly specified,

i.e., has the correct variables and only the correct variables, it may not be

possible to estimate the coefficients with useful precisioh because the varia-

bles are too closely interrelated.     This "multicollinearity" problem is more

severe when there are relatively few observations and when there is relatively

little independent movement of the variable of interest.       This is a problem
    ,
for attempts to estimate equations describing consumer expenditure based on

only about 40 annual observations.     The problem is particularly severe when

the sample is restricted to the postwar period with less than 30 observations

and much less independent variation in the social security      variabl~   (i.e.,

variation that is not just proportional to income).       When the equation is

misspecified by adding variables that do not belong, it is even harder to

estimate the'coefficients of the correct variables.

        The importance of these problems is illustrated by the estimates that I

presented in my 1974 paper.    For the period from 1929 through 1971, the coef-

ficient of the social security wealth variable was rather precisely estimated

as 0.021 (with a standard error of 0.006), implying that an extra $100 of

social security wealth reduces private saving by $2.10.       But when the unemploy-

ment rate was added to the equation, there was too much intercorrelation to


      lThe idea of "social security wealth" is introduced and described in
Feldstein (1974).
                                      - 5 -



make any precise statements:   the coefficient of the social security variable

fell to 0.010 while its standard error rose to 0.011 and the coefficient of

the unemployment variable was 1.17 with a standard error of 0.89.      When the

sample was restricted to the postwar period, there was even less information

and the coefficient of social security wealth was, as a result, less than its

standard error.   This is primarily a reflection of the fact that social

security wealth has much less independent variation when the sample is

restricted to the postwar period.

      In his review, Esposito emphasized the fact that adding the unemployment

variable to the equation (with the full sample from 1929 through 1971) made

the coefficient of social security wealth much smaller and not significantly

different from zero at conventional probability levels.       Esposito implicitly

rejected my argument that the theoretical case for including the unemployment

rate is much weaker than the case for including social security wealth and

therefore that its insignificance implies that it should be omitted.

      Without new data or a new approach, the analysis of the time series data

would be stalled at this point.     Fortunately, shortly after the publication

of my 1974 paper, the Department of Commerce published revised estimates of

national income and its components which embody a number of improvements over
                                        1
the information previously available.       Analysis with this new and better data

supports my original conclusion more strongly and substantially reduces the

ambiguity introduced by unemployment.

      Equation 1 presents the estimate of my preferred specification of the

consumption function based on the revised national income accpunt data:



      l"The National Income and Product Accounts of the United States:
Revised Estimates, 1929-74," in U.S. Department of Commerce, Survey of Current
Business, vol. 56 (January 1976), pp. 1-38.
                                      - 6 -



      C = 0.604 YD + 0.111 YD 1 + 0.194 RE + 0.006 W 1
       t          t          t-           t         t-
         (0.061)    (0.040)      (0.076)    (0.005)

           + 0.024 SSWGl t + 338
            (0.009)          (80)

                                                   1929-40, 1947-74
                                                   -2
                                                   R = 0.99

                                                   D.W.S. = 1.45

where C is consumption, YD is disposable income, RE is corporate retained

earnings, W is wealth, and SSWGI is social security wealth.

      The social security wealth coefficient of 0.024 is clearly statistically

very significant and is quite. close to the estimate of 0.021 in my 1974 paper.

The earlier estimate is thus affected hardly at all by extending the sample

period (which previously ended in 1971) and using the newly revised national

income account data.

      As I noted above, including the unemployment rate (RU) in this equation

in my 1974 paper had the effect of cutting the coefficient of the social

security wealth variable by half (to 0.10) and to less than its standard

error while the coefficient of the unemployment variable was greater than its

standard error.   With the new Commerce Department data, the inclusion of the

unemployment rate has a much smaller effect on         ~he   social security wealth

coefficient, and the unemployment variable is itself completely insignificant:


      C= 0.619 YD + 0.127 YD 1 + 0.236 RE + 0.005 W 1
       t         t          t-           t         t-
         (0.070)   (0.053)      (0.118)    (0.006)

           + 0.019 SSWG1 + 1.033 RU       + 289
                                      t
            (0.013)        (2.212)         (133)
                                                     1929-40, 1947-74
                                                     -2
                                                     R = 0.99
                                                     D.W.S. = 1.43
                                                  - 7 -



      In his own study of the time series evidence, Robert Barro (1978) made

the useful suggestion that the unemployment rate should be specified as

changing the marginal propensity to consume (that is, as a multiplier of YD )
                                                                           t
rather than as a separate linear term.                    That is quite sensible since the

linear specification of equation 2 has the implausible implications that a

one percentage point change in the unemployment rate altered per capita

consumption by the same real dollar amount during the 1970's as it did in

earlier years when incomes were very much lower.                        With this suggested modifi-

cation, the equation becomes:


      C
       t
           = 0.606    YD
                           t
                               + 0.116 YD
                                            t-
                                                 1 + 0.205 RE
                                                                t
                                                                    + 0.006 W 1 + 0.023 SSWGI
                                                                             t-               t
            (0.063)             (0.049)             (0.105)          (0.006)     (0.Q12)

            + 0.162 RUt YD t + 327
              (1.078)                 (108)
                                                                    1929-40, 1947-74
                                                                     2
                                                                    a  = 0.99
                                                                    D.W.S. = 1.44

      The social security wealth coefficient is almost identical with its

value in equation 1, while the coefficient of the unemployment variable is

small and not significantly different from zero.                        This evidence with the new

Department of Commerce data thus unambiguously supports the conclusion that

social security substantially depresses private saving.                        To be more precise,

the value of social security wealth (SSWGl) of the population in 1972 was

$1.85 trillion (Feldstein and Pellechio, 1977a); a coefficient of 0.024

implies that social security increased consumption (and thereby depressed

private saving) by $44.4 billion.                  In 1972, total personal saving was $49.4

billion while corporate retained earnings were $25.9 billion; total private

saving was therefore $75.3 billion.                  The reduction in saving of $44.4 billion
                                       - 8 -



implied by the data is thus equivalent to 59 percent of actual saving in 1972.

To state this same figure in a different way, the estimates imply that,

without social security, saving would have been $119.7 billion (i.e., $44.4

billion plus $75.3 billion) and that this $119.7 billion was reduced 37

percent by social security.

        Esposito also discusses time series studies by Munnell (1974), Barro

(1978) and Darby (1978).      As Esposito notes, Munnell's basic equation found

a coefficient of social security wealth of -0.030 with a standard error of

0.019     in a study using personal saving as the dependent variable.   The size

of the coefficient relative to its standard error indicates that the odds are

greater than 15 to 1 against finding such a substantial coefficient by chance

alone if the time coefficient were zero or positive.      Munnell's coefficient
            1
is larger       than my own estimate of 0.021 for approximately the same period

and data because she includes a measurement of retirement in the equation and

thereby calculates the "gross" effect of social security before netting out

the increased saving due to earlier retirement.       She also presents equations

in which current social security taxes are used to represent expected benefits;

the statistical insignificance of this tax variable should be regarded as

evidence that social security wealth is a better measure than the tax variable

and not, as Esposito suggests, as evidence that social security may not affect

saving.     Munnell also attempts to isolate a component of personal saving that

she calls "retirement saving" and that .excludes such things as the values of

stocks and bonds and residential real estate; she finds that social security

has a statistically significant depressing effect on this component of saving



      lMunnell's coefficient is negative because she uses savings rather than
consumption as dependent variable. If she had used consumption, her coefficient
value would be exactly the same but with the reversed sign.
- 9 -
                                     - 10 -



collections and therefore increasing the government surplus.      This interpre-

tation is confirmed by dividing the surplus variable into its two components

(government expenditure and tax receipts); the government expenditure variable

is then insignificant and only the tax receipts variable is significant.

Moreover, the correlation between cyclical variations in consumption and in

tax receipts explains why including the surplus variable also changes the

statistical significance of the unemployment variable.

      Darby (1978) experiments by adding measures of real money balances and

other variables to the specified    consumption function.    With one measure of

money supply (Ml), his estimated SSWGI coefficient is raised above my own

(to 0.024) while with a broader money supply variable (M2) the coefficient is

reduced somewhat (0.017).    The evidence is thus quite compatible with my own

findings.   However, there seems no reason to regard the real money balances

as an exogenous variable to be included on the tight hand side of a consump-

tion function:    the households choose their desired level of such balance

while the money balances of firms is totally irrelevant in the consumption

function.   It is also difficult to imagine how to interpret an equation that

includes both the interest rate and real money balances among the repressors.

      My summary of the evidence is thus quite contrary to Esposito's.       I

find that the basic estimates of each of the four studies points to an econ-

omically substantial effect that was very unlikely to have been observed by

chance alone.    Although including variables like the government surplus (Barro)

or a measure of real money balances (Darby) can lower the estimated coeffi-

cient of the social security wealth variable.       I have explained their inappro-

priateness in the consumption function.       The availability of the new Department

of Commerce data on national income and its components has improved the

earlier estimates and has shown that the unemployment variable does not belong
                                    - 11 -



in the consumption function once the level of income and its rate of change

are included.

      Data for the postwar period alone appear to be incapable of providing

useful information on the effect of social security.   In all of the studies,

the standard error of the coefficient of the social security wealth variable

is so large that no economically interesting hypothesis can be rejected.

This reflects not only the shorter period but also our inability to measure

accurately enough the perceived changes in the public's expectations about

future social security benefits.   This inadequacy of the postwar data makes

it important to examine other types of information, including studies of the

time-series data for other individual countries, cross-country studies and

cross-sectional data on individual households.   The evidence of this type
                                                                      l
that is becoming available tends to confirm the time series conclusion , but

the importance of the impact of social security on savings suggests that we

will see many more studies on this subject in the future.




      1
       I have reported cross-country evidence in Feldstein (1977, 1979) and
evidence on household wealth accumulation in Feldstein (1976) and Feldstein
and Pellechio (1976b).
References
Feldstein, Martin and Anthony Pellechio (1977b), "Social Security and House-

      hold Wealth Accumulation:   New Microeconomic Evidence," NBER Working

      Paper No. 206, forthcoming in the Review of Economics qnd Statistics.

Harris, Seymour (1941),   The Economics of Social   Sec~.rity.   New York:   McGraw-

      Hill, 1941.

Munnell, Alicia (l974a), The Effect of Social Security on Personal Saving,

      Ballinger Publishing Company, 1974.

Munnell, Alicia (1974b), "The Impact of Social Security on Personal Saving,"

      National Tax Journal, December 1974, pp. 553-567.
