NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS OF DIVIDEND RELIEF

Charles E. McLure, Jr.

Working Paper No. 317

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
February 1979

The research reported here is related to NBER programs of
research on Business Taxation and Finance and on
International Studies and to the Bureau's special project on
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic·
Research.

NBER Working Paper 317
February 1979

International Aspects of Dividend Relief

SUMMARY

This paper examines international aspects of the provision of
relief from the double taxation of dividends that now occurs under
the "classical" American system of taxing corporate income to both
corporations and shareholders.

It begins with reviews of the recent

American debate over integration and dividend relief, the systems of
dividend relief now being used in Europe, and corrnnonly accepted standards for jUdging international tax policy.

These standards are employed

in the appraisal of existing arrangements in Europe, possible alternative
systems for international taxation in a world of dividend relief, and,
using the European-American situation as an example, relations between
countries with dividend relief and those with classical systems.

Charles E. McLure, Jr.
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
617/868-3906.

INTERNATIONAL ASPECTS OF DIVIDEND RELIEF
by
CHARLES E. MCLURE, JR.
National Bureau of Economic Research*
and
Rice University
I. INTRODUCTION

Few topics in fiscal affairs have received the concentrated attention
that has been devoted to integration and dividend relief over the past
five years. l

During that time, the United Kingdom reversed its earier

decision to abandon an imputation system in favor of the classical system,
Germany considered seriously adoption of complete integration before converting its split-rate system to a hybrid form of complete dividend relief
which employs both a split rate and a shareholder

cr~dit,

Italy adopted

complete dividend relief, and the United States flirted casually with
integration and more seriously with dividend relief. 2

Though the

United States is hardly alone in its adheranceto the classical system,
its position may become increasingly uncomfortable. 3
The purpose of this paper is to examine .international aspects of
dividend relief.

Until recently these have received relatively little

attention in American discussions of integration and dividend relief.
They have, of course, been more important in the European debate
because of the relatively greater reliance on foreign trade and international
capital flows in Europe.

A substantial part of the paper is devoted to

discussion of European approaches to these problems.

A working acquaintance

with systems of dividend relief employed in European countries now or in the
recent past is essential for at least two reasons.

First, if one is familiar

with such systems, he does not need to "reinvent the wheel."

Instead, he can

copy the best features of other systems and avoid the worst.

Second, any

country considering adopting dividend relief will naturally want to design a
system that can be coordinated with those in other countries.

Moreover,

through careful design it may be possible to increase the country's bargaining
position in international tax negotiations.
In order to allow full attention to be devoted to international

European common market.

Section VII considers the effects of dividend relief

from the perspective of European countries dealing with the United States,
which still uses a classical system.

But this section is of more general

relevance because in considering dividend relief the United States would
confront other countries with classical systems, as well as those with dividend relief (for which Section V is more relevant).
II. THE U.S. POLICY DISCUSSION
American interest in integration and dividend relief seems to have
had its genesis in at least three influences.

The earliest, but not

necessarily the strongest, is the academic infatuation with integration,
based on the Haig-Simons definition of income for tax purposes and reinforced by the analysis and conclusions of the Royal Commission on Taxation
in Canada (1966).

Academic advocates of integration have ordinarily stressed

its distributional advantages and its neutrality toward corporate financial policy and the allocation of economic resources.

Interestingly, they

have seldom mentioned the second, and perhaps the most influential, argument
made for dividend r.elief in the recent debate:
mation.

stimulus to capital for-

Those who favor dividend relief as a way to encourage saving and

investment implicitly base their argument upon the questionable assumption
that revenues lost in dividend relief would not be made up in a way that
maintained the progressivity of the income tax.

A final impetus to

American interest in dividend relief was European activity in the field.
As was true earier when the countries of Europe where adopting the tax on
value added, some American observers seem to have believed that the United

(4)
States should follow the European path.

Presumably this desire for emula-

tion was based at least in part on perceived economic advantages; but part
of the attraction may also have been the

~stique

of the relatively unknown.

The United States has, of course, not adopted either integration or
dividend relief.

It has, however, come closer to doing so than at any

time during the four decades since it repealed the tax on undistributed
profits levied briefly during the 1930's.

In 1975 the Secretary of the

Treasury, William Simon (1975), presented Congress with a proposal for the
complete elimination of double taxation of dividends similar to that now
in effect in Germany.

Subsequently the Treasury Department issued

Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform (1977), a white paper which argued that
full integration was both desirable and administratively feasible and presented dividend relief as an attractive second best solution if full
integration were rejected.

Coming at the end of the Ford administration,

Blueprints resulted in no direct political action.

It did, however, add

important weight to the academic arguments for integration and stimulated
considerable further discussion.

There was a widespread expectation that

President Carter, goaded in part by the perceived need to do something for
capital formation, would propose a system of partial dividend relief in
his 1977 tax message.

When Carter did not do so, Chairman Al Ullman of

the House Ways and Means Committee (1978) introduced legislation which
was said to be patterned closely after the treasury proposals rejected by
the White House.

The 1978 tax act did not contain dividend relief.

And

given that it did contain important provisions reducing the taxation of
long-term capital gains, pressure for fiscal stimulus to capital formation

and interest in integration and. dividend relief may have subsided.
It is interesting to speculate on why efforts to obtain integration
or dividend relief were not successful.
ficulties must surely be one reason.

Perceived administrative dif-

Difficulties of implementing full

integration had been known for at least 30 years 5 and the Canadian
Royal Commission on Taxation and Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform did not
fUlly dispel fears that full integration could not be administered.

Of

course, dividend relief is a reasonable fallback position for advocates of
integration, and European experience provides evidence that it could be
implemented. 6

But the existence of. tax preferences creates administra-

tive problems and raises policy issues that had been only imperfectly perceived in earlier discussions, including those of the Royal Commission on
Taxation, in Blueprints, and perhaps in Europe. 7

Decisions must be

made on whether tax preferences are to be passed through to shareholders
or nullified when preference income is distributed.

Moreover, regardless

of which decision is made, it is necessary to have stacking rules (at least
implicit in the law) for the determination of the presumed order in which
income is paid from fully taxed and various types of preference income. 8
Some ways of treating preference income are easier to administer than
others; these are not, unfortunately, the ones for which the most
pelling case can be made on grounds of public policy.

co~

And, in any event,

feelings run high about the appropriate way to treat tax preferences under
dividend relief.

Finally, international flows of dividends add an addi-

tional layer of complexity to the administration of dividend relief, especially when combined with tax preferences.

(6)

administrative difficulties and uncertainties of economic effects mentioned above.

Given this, it is hardly surprising that dividend relief

has no strong and influential allies and that those seeking to use the tax
system to stimulate capital formation have returned to more traditional
approaches such as the preferential treatment of long-term capital gains.
III.

ALTERNATIVE EUROPEAN APPROACHES TO DIVIDEND RELIEF
This section 4escribes briefly the systems of dividend relief now

being used in France, Germany, and the United Kingdom, the split-rate
system used in Germany until 1977, and the approach to dividend relief contained in the 1975 draft directive of the Commission of the European
Communities. lO

Only the basic structure of the systems is given; pri-

mary emphasis is devoted to description of the taxation of international
flows of dividend income.

This, of course, involves taxation of

dividends paid by domestic firms to foreign shareholders and
of dividends received from abroad by domestic shareholders.

a)

b) taxation
Because the

two cannot be treated in isolation, withholding taxes collected on dividends paid to foreigners, as well as corporate taxes, are considered briefly.
A. Germany (Post 1976)11
Germany is the only member of the European Common Market to provide
full relief from double taxation of dividends.

It does so by employing a

hybrid system which combines a split rate with a shareholder credit.
particular, the basic corporate tax rate is 56 percent.
porate income is retained, this is a final tax.

In

So far as cor-

If, however, such income

is distributed" the corporation receives a tax credit equal to 20 percent
of the gross income, so that the net corporate tax on distributed earnings
lS only 36 percent.

The shareholder grosses up his cash dividend and

(8)

takes credit for the 36 percent corporate tax imputed to him.

If dividends

are paid from tax-preferred income the corporation must pay enough supplementary tax to bring the total tax rate paid at the corporate level on such
income to 36 percent.

In this sense, tax preferences are nullified if pre-

ference income is distributed.

But the presumptive rules for the stacking of

tax preferences are such that preference income is deemed to be the last to be
distributed and preferences tend to be preserved.
The imputation credit is available only to German shareholders in
domestic corporations.

Thus German individuals who hold shares in foreign

corporations are not allowed to take advantage of imputation credits on dividends received from abroad.

The same is true of corporations making portfolio

investments abroad and receiving dividends.

Dividends received from abroad

enter the tax base of both individuals and corporations making portfolio
investments outside Germany, but without gross-up and credit for either
foreign or domestic taxes.

Credit is, however, allowed for foreign with-

holding taxes.
Profits of foreign branches and dividends received by German parent
corporations from foreign subsidiaries are either tax-exempt under tax
treaties or are taxable, but eligible for foreign corporate tax credit
against the German tax.

But Germany does not recognize the foreign

corporate tax for purposes of calculating imputation credits.

Rather, if

foreign-source income that has not been subject to German tax is distributed, the German parent firm must pay a supplementary tax just as if it
had distributed preference income.

That is, the exemption of foreign

source income and foreign tax credits are useful only to the extent that

foreign income is not distributed.

Foreign source income, like preference

income, is assumed to be distributed only after all fully taxed domestic income
has been distributed.

These provisions create an important incentive for

German firms (given their dividend payout policies) to have the proper mix of
fully taxed and tax preference income and of foreign and domestic income in
order to avoid liability for the supplementary tax and can therefore stimulate
industrial concentration.
In that the corporate rate is reduced to 36 per cent on distributed
earnings, dividend relief extends to that degree to all shareholders in
German firms.

But the additional relief provided by the imputation cre-

dit is available only to German shareholders; it does not extend to
foreign shareholders, who must look to their countries of residence for
relief. 12

The United States, for example, would allow American firms

with direct investment in German firms foreign tax credit for the unrelieved portion of· the German corporate tax on distributed earnings as
well as for German withholding tax. 13

Individual shareholders and cor-

porate portfolio investors resident in the United States would obtain no
such relief, except for the credit for withholding tax.

Rather, they

would be taxed on their net dividends from Germany without credit from
either Germany or the United States for corporate taxes paid on distributed corporate earnings.
In summary, Germany does not extend the imputation credit to either
German investors in foreign firms or foreign investors in German firms.
Nor does it show any inclination to do so.

It does, however, as noted

above, allow some benefit to foreign investors in Germany through the

partial use of the split rate.

(The parallel question of using the

split-rate approach to provide relief to German shareholders in foreign
firms is essentially meaningless.)

Finally, in tax treaties negotiated

before its 1977 adoption of full dividend relief, Germany obtained from
several countries the nonreciprocal privilege of using a 25 per cent
withholding rate on dividends so long as the differential in its two
rates of corporate tax was at least 20 per cent. 14

Whether these

treaties are valid under the new system is open to debate.
B.

France
France levies a 50 percent corporation income tax but allows a

shareholder credit equal to half the corporate tax paid on dividends.
When preference income is distributed, a supplementary tax equal to
the amount of the shareholder credit, called a precompte mobilier (or
simply precompte), is levied.

Thus, as in the German system, tax pre-

ferences are nullified if preference income is distributed; but again preference income is assumed, in general, to be distributed after fully taxed
income. 15
Like GermanYo,France does not provide imputation credits to domestic
investors in foreign corporations.

Individuals and corporate portfolio

investors pay tax on net dividends received from abroad, with no relief
from double taxation (except for withholding taxes) •

Foreign-source

income from direct investment is tax-exempt to the French parent.

But as

in Germany, such exempt foreign-source income is treated like preference
income and subjected to the precompte i f distributed.
Under French law the imputation credit is not automatically available

to foreign investors in French firms.

Several French treaties do,

however, provide that the shareholder credit is available to shareholders
in treaty countries who are taxable on French dividends in their country of
residence and do not benefit from foreign tax credits for the French corporate tax.

In practice this means that foreign individual shareholders and

corporate portfolio investors are allowed the French imputation credit in
treaty countries, but foreign direct investors are not.
C.

United Kingdom
Since returning to the imputation system in 1973 the United Kingdom

has provided relief from approximately half the double taxation of dividends.

(Relief is currently 33/67 of the corporate income tax.)

A key

administrative feature of the British system is the advance corporation
tax or ACT. Any time a British firm pays a dividend, it must pay ACT at a
rate equal to the rate at which the imputation credit will be allowed.

If

dividends are paid from taxable income, the ACT is merely credited against
the firm's corporate tax.

If, however, preference income is distributed,

the ACT serves much the same purpose as the French and German precompte.
That is, it insures that shareholder credit is not allowed for taxes not
paid.

But unlike those systems, under the British system it is not

necessary to have explicit rules in order to provide that preference
income is, in effect; presumed to be distributed after taxable income.
As in France and Germany, British shareholders are not allowed imputation credits on dividends received from abroad.

Moreover, as in

Germany, taxes paid to foreign countries by foreign subsidiaries of
British firms are ignored in application of the imputation credit.

The

British parent receives a foreign tax credit for corporate taxes paid
abroad, but the credit is allowed only against the so-called "mainstream
corporate tax" (the net corporate tax liability after deduction of ACT);
credit cannot be taken against that part of the corporate tax offset by
ACT.

Thus, as in the case of preference income, the ACT serves a purpose

similar to that of the precompte.
British legislation allows the imputation credit only to domestic
shareholders, but under double taxation treaties the credit has been
granted to foreign portfolio investors in the United Kingdom.

Unlike

other countries, the United Kingdom has recently shown a reluctant
willingness to extend through treaties an imputation credit to foreign
corporate direct investors in the United Kingdom equal to one half the
credit available to domestic investors.
D. Germany (Pre-1977)
Though the predominant form of dividend relief in Europe is the imputation approach, there are good reasons for believing that an alternative
approach is superior on at least some grounds.

This approach involves

allowing corporations a deduction for dividends paid or, what is equivalent, applying a different rate to retained and distributed corporatesource income.

Though Germany retains a split rate in conjunction with

its imputation credit system, a better example of this alternative
approach is the system used in Germany before 1977.

Under that system a

tax of 15 percent was levied on income used to pay dividends but retained
income was subject to a rate of 51 percent. 16

Dividend relief provided through the split-rate system automatically
extends to foreign shareholders in domestic firms.

Germany was, however,

as mentioned above, able partially to ameliorate this disadvantage (and
avoid the Auslaendereffekt mentioned in footnote 14 above) by negotiating
nonreciprocal withholding rates with some of its treaty partners.
Dissatisfaction with the automaticity of the relief provided to foreigners
and American recalcitrance against more general use of nonreciprocal withholding rates were among the reasons for the German shift to primary
reliance on the imputation approach as a means of providing dividend
relief.
The split-rate system does not lend itself to the mitigation of
double taxation of dividends received from abroad.

Dividends on foreign

portfolio investments were therefore taxed to German shareholders, with no
relief from the foreign corporate tax.

(The lower rate of tax was, of

course, applied to redistributed earnings of corporate portfolio
investors.)

Dividends from foreign subsidiaries were ordinarily ~xempt;

in such a case the lower rate of tax was not applied to earnings redistributed by the parent •. Where not exempt under treaty, dividends on foreign
direct investment were fully taxed to German parents, though the double
tax burden would be reduced by foreign tax credit.
E.

The E. E. C. Draft Directive
The twists and turns taken by proposals for harmonizing company taxes

in the European Economic Community are rather incredible. 17

The Neumark

Committee proposed that harmonization be based on a split-rate approach.
Then van den Tempel, placing heavy weight on international considerations,

(14)
proposed that member countries employ a "classical system" (and perhaps
coined the term in the process).

Most recently, the Commission of the

European Communities based its proposal for harmonization on the imputation approach.

Given that this last proposal has not been accepted, one

can only guess what will be proposed next.

It seems worthwhile, however,

to summarize and appraise the approach recommended in the 1975 draft directive.
The draft directive can be described as patterned closely after the
French approach to dividend relief.

That is, it provides that all members

of the European Economic Community would levy corporate income taxes at
rates varying from 45 to 55 percent and that between 45 and 55 percent of
the corporate tax burden on income distributed to shareholders would be
removed through the use of a gross-up and credit.

A precompte or advance

corporation tax would be used to prevent shareholders from taking credit
for taxes not paid at the corporate level.

Rules similar to those

employed in France would be used to determine the presumptive order of
sources of income from which dividends are paid for purposes of determining liability for precompte.
Under the scheme for dividend relief proposed in the draft directive
the imputation credit would be based on the tax rate paid in the source
country.

This would be achieved by having the distributing company pro-

vide individual and corporate portfolio shareholders with vouchers stating
the amount of tax credit attached to dividends received.

The shareholder

would submit this voucher with his tax return in his country of residence in
order to claim credit.

The fiscal authority of the

shareholder's state of residence would collect from the treasury of the
country of residence of the corporation paying dividends the amount indicated on vouchers for which it had given shareholders credit.
Under the draft directive parent firms receiving dividends from sUbsidiaries would not pay tax on such dividends; nor would they be able to
claim imputation credit for corporate taxes paid by the subsidiary.

As

under other European imputation schemes currently in existence, distribution of tax-free income would ordinarily trigger liability for precompte
or ACT.

But when

tax~free

dividends received from subsidiaries were

redistributed by the parent firm, the imputation credit "attached to"
such dividends could be used to offset the parent's precompte or ACT.

Of

course, the parent company's shareholders would take the normal shareholder credit that accompanies dividends.

As a result, the source

country would obtain revenues from taxes levied on income retained by the
subsidiary and on income distributed to the parent but retained there.

But

through a "clearing house" arrangement similar to that described above
for portfolio dividends, it would bear the fiscal cost of integrating its tax
into the imputation system of the country of residence of the parent. 18
IV. OBJECTIVES OF INTERNATIONAL TAX POLICY
Economists often appraise fiscal relations on the basis of equity and
neutrality.

Though complicated enough in a closed economy context, appli-

cation of these concepts is particularly difficult in the international sphere.
This section describes several norms by which international fiscal relations can be judged.

In addition, two concepts which are more or less

(16)
unique to the international area are described.

Finally, ease of compliance

and administration is taken to be an important goal, through it is seldom
discussed explicitly.
Economists commonly place economic neutrality high on their list of
objectives for tax policy, because if certain stringent conditions are met
a neutral tax system can be expected to result in the maximization of
welfare. 19

Of course, in the international arena when one discusses

maximization of welfare, it is necessary to decide whose welfare is to
"count" in the maximization.

Maximization of world economic welfare

(sometimes called worldwide efficiency) can be achieved when taxes do not
distort the allocation of capital between countries, that is, when taxes
exhibit capital-export neutrality.

Under a classical system, capital-

export neutrality is usually said ,to be achieved either if the source
country exempts corporate income from tax or if the country of residence
of shareholders allows a foreign tax credit for corporate taxes paid to
other countries. 20 'In either event foreign-source income IID.lst be taxed
by the residence country as it is earned, rather than merely when
repatriated, if capital-export neutrality is to be achieved.
Analyzing capital-export neutrality from the perspective of a classical system is basically inconsistent with the intellectual foundation of
integration, under which the corporation is seen only as a conduit through
which income passes to its ultimate recipients, the shareholders of the
corporation.

Thus in what follows capital-export neutrality is judged

from an integrationist viewpoint.

That is, aggregate corporate and per-

sonal liabilities are considered in determining whether foreign and

domestic investments are taxed equally.
The welfare of a capital exporting country is maximized if the total
return to the country, including tax revenue, is independent of where
investment is made.

In a classical system such a condition, often

referred to as national efficiency, is said to be achieved if the residence country allows deduction of foreign taxes in calculating taxable
income.

Because capital-export neutrality involves equal net (after-tax)

returns in all countries and national efficiency requires equal gross
returns, the two principles are generally inconsistent.

Capital-import

neutrality is also generally inconsistent with integration and dividend
relief that extends to foreign-source income.
Capital-import neutrality occurs if all capital invested in the same
country is taxed ident,ically.

While this concept appeals to many busi-

nessmen, it has little attraction from the point of view of welfare maximization.

In a sense, it is the opposite of capital-export neutrality.

It can be

achieved in a classical system if capital importing nations allow credit for
taxes paid in residence countries or if capital exporting countries exempt
foreign-source income.

It, too, is inconsistent with integration and dividend

relief.
Tax equity among persons involves questions of both the equality of
taxation of given types of income at a given income level and systematic
differences in tax rates levied across income levels.

If horizontal

interpersonal equity is defined only in terms of taxes levied by the
taxpayer's country of residence (national equity), it is governed by the
same considerations as is national efficiency.

If, on the other hand,

(18)
equity is defined in terms of taxes imposed by foreign countries, as well
as the taxpayer's country of residence (international equity), it is
governed by the same factors as capital-export neutrality.

In either

event, interpersonal equity need not be discussed further.
In addition to questions of interpersonal equity, and perhaps more
important for the present discussion, are those of intercountry equity.
These involve international division of income, including the division of
tax revenues between national treasuries. 21 Though questions of the division of revenues among source countries may be as important as those of the
distribution of revenues between countries of source and residence, we concentrate on the latter.

The definition of this type of international

fiscal equity depends upon several factors, including relative levels of
per capita income and levels and types of public services.

If, for

example, one country provided substantial benefits to corporations but
another did not, it would seem appropriate that the first should receive a
relatively larger share of revenues from taxes on corporate income than the
second.

Similarly, most would feel that some degree of redistribution from

rich to poor countries might be justified.

Moreover, it can be argued that

countries with substantial natural resources have a right to revenues from
exploitation of such resources.

Finally, if one country is a heavy net

debtor and the other an equally heavy net creditor the distribution of tax
revenues will depend crucially on the split of tax revenues between
countries of source and residence.
Two important principles guiding tax treaty negotiations have been
nondiscrimination and reciprocity.

Under the first of these, host

countries cannot discriminate in the taxation of domestic and foreign
firms.

The second requires that withholding rates should be "mirror

images" of those applied by treaty partners.

Taken together, these two

conventions place countries using split rates at a severe disadvantage
relative to those with classical systems.

In the extreme case a country

,(ith a split-rate system of full dividend relief might collect only a 15
percent withholding tax on income distributed to American shareholders
whereas the United States would collect the 46 percent corporate income tax
s.nd a 15 percent withholding tax on the gross distribution from the net
income of

54. Whether these rules, which have developed in a world of

classical tax systems, are appropriate in a world of dividend relief is
hotly debated.

Advocates of "effective reciprocity" argue that the total

(corporate and withholding) tax burden levied on corporate income in the
source country should be the basis for determining whether reciprocity is
realized. 22
V. INTERNATIONAL APPRAISAL OF ARRANGEMENTS FOR DIVIDEND RELIEF 23
If we ignore full integration as being administratively infeasible
and treat the split-rate and dividend-paid deduction systems as equivalent, we can imagine three approaches to the taxation of corporate-source
income:

a classical system, a split-rate regime, and an imputation

approach, and six alternative combinations of fiscal systems between two
trading partners (classical with classical, classical with imputation,
etc.).

Moreover, international investment in corporations can be imple-

mented in at least four distinct ways:

individual portfolio investment,

corporate portfolio investment, corporate direct investment in foreign sub-

(20)
sidiaries~

and corporate direct investment in foreign branches.

To attempt

to examine systematically the tax treatment of each type of investment for
each of the pairs of tax systems would be

unmanageable~

ignore international differences in definitions of
of tax

preferences~

even if we were to

income~

and the degree of dividend relief.

the treatment

In what follows

we therefore limit consideration primarily to individual portfolio
investment in foreign shares and corporate direct investment in foreign
subsidiaries.

Morover~

we devote primary attention to a comparison of

two means of providing dividend relief employed in both nations:
split-rate system and an imputation approach.

a

Subsequently problems

created by the coexistance of systems of dividend relief and a classical
system are considered briefly in Section VII.
One principle is absolutely clear.
upon taxes collected in the country of
in the country of residence of
is to be achieved.
too

small~

If it is

Dividend relief must be based
source~

shareholders~

not~

rather than on the tax rate

if capital-export neutrality

relief will generally be either too great or

and exactly correct only by accident.

This being the

case~

foreign

investment in high-tax countries would be discouraged and that in low-tax
countries would be stimulated artificially; in either
neutrality would not be achieved.

event~

capital export

As explained below, administrative con-

siderations suggest that relief should be provided initially by the source
country in the case of portfolio investors; for direct investment relief provided by the country of residence of the parent may be more appropriate.
country bears the fiscal cost of dividend relief could, it
question.

seems~

Which

be a separate

A. Portfolio Investment
Except in a very simple world without tax preferences, it would be

c~

bersome, and perhaps impossible, for residence countries to provide imputation credits based on taxes paid to source countries, without assistance
from source countries.

While the source country's statutory rate could be

used by the residence country to calculate grosH-up and credit in the
absence of tax preferences, its use generally produces neither exact passthrough of preferences nor exact nullification of preferences.

Nor can

effective rates generally be used satisfactorily to nullify preferences.
Only if a precompte is levied on distributed preference income will gross-up
and credit based on the statutory rate result in washout of preferences.
And to achieve pass-through of preferences, taxable income and exempt income
must be reported separately, with only the former being subject to gross-up
and credit.

Moreover, tax credits must be reported separately so the share-

holder can utilize them on his personal return.

It is generally not

possible to provide this information to shareholders accurately on a timely
basis.

(See McLure, 1978 and forthcoming, 1979, Chapter 4.)

The first questions, then, are whether preferences are to be passed
through or nUllified, the order in which preference and taxable income is
assumed to be distributed, and which country is to make these decisions.
most cases it seems that the source. country is in command.

In

It determines

whether or not to nullify preferences when it either levies a precompte or
does not, and it would be difficult for the residence country to levy a precompte or use a variable-rate gross-up and credit based on source-country

taxes.

Moreover, since the distributing corporation is under the fiscal

control of the source country, there seems to be no way the residence
country could apply any stacking rules besides those of the source country.
Similarly, if the source country does not require separate reporting of
taxable income, exempt income, and credits, there is no way the residence
country could pass through source-country credits, and trying to allow
residence-country credits in such a case seems ridiculous.

In short, the

treatment of preferences must be determined by the source country.
Dividend relief based on source-country taxation is provided automatically by the dividend-paid deduction and split-rate systems.

It could be

achieved, though not so easily, if the source country provided imputation
credits to foreign shareholders.

One potentially useful approach would be

that incorporated in the E.E.C. draft directive.

That is, the country of

residence of portfolio shareholders would allow credits for foreign corporate taxes paid based on vouchers issued by the foreign firm; it would
then be reimbursed by the source country for amounts shown on the vouchers.
Because it would stand to suffer the revenue loss entailed by falsified
vouchers, the source country would have the incentive, as well as being in a
better position, to scrutinize vouchers issued to shareholders by domestic
firms.

(It might even be thought worthwhile for the source-country fiscal

authorities to certify the validity of vouchers in advance.)
Under such an approach the proper treatment of tax preferences becomes
an interesting issue.

In the absence of preferences complete dividend

relief based on source-country taxes would result in capital-export

(23)

neutrality~ at least so far as distributed income is concerned. 24
if tax preferences

existed~

But

the achievement of capital-export neutrality

would depend on the treatment of preference income. 25

In particular~

if both countries allowed identical preferences and stacked them in the
same

way~

but one country passed preferences through and the other Washed

them out~ capital-export neutrality would not generally be achieved. 26
Similarly~

if both countries treated preference income deemed to be

distributed

identically~

but had different stacking

neutrality would generally be violated.
passed preferences

through~

If~

for

capital-export

rules~

example~

both countries

less tax would be paid on dividend income

originating in the country that stacks preferences first.

If~

other

taxation of

preferences were washed out in both

hand~

countries~

on the

dividends would be independent. of the the stacking rules applied.

But in

both these cases retained earnings would be taxed differently in the two
countries. 27

Finally~ if whatever tax preferences existed were treated

identically in the two

countries~

but different preferences were allowed

in the two

countries~

capital-export neutrality would generally be

destroyed~

and the arguments above apply a fortiori if all the potential

differences mentioned above exist simultaneously.
It might be thought that this problem arises because foreign and
domestic. investors are treated identically by the source country ~ whereas
capital-export neutrality requires that treatment be equal across
domestic investors.
capital-export

It might appear adequate for the achievement of

neutrality~

for

example~

to pass preferences through to

domestic shareholders but wash them out on

dist~ibutions

to foreigners.

(24)
But besides being difficult to administer and blatantly discriminatory,
such an approach would win only half of the battle; it would also be
necessary to pass the same preferences through to domestic shareholders in
foreign firms - a clearly nonsensical idea.

This makes it clear that tax

preferences allowed domestic investors to stimulate domestic saving are
consistent with capital-export neutrality, whereas preferences to stimulate
domestic investment are not.

Given the prevalence of tax preferences

intended to stimulate investment, the prospects for a system which is truly
neutral with regard to capital export look bleak.

To the extent that pre-

ferences are stacked last and washed out on distribution, as they commonly
are in Europe, the interference with capital-export neutrality in the taxation of dividends may be rather minimal.

But differences in taxation of

retained preference income are potentially quite non-neutral.
Two issues remain to be discussed:

partial dividend relief and the

division of the fiscal cost of dividend relief.

To the extent that

relief is only partial, because a deduction is allowed for only part of
dividends, because the split-rate applied to distributed income is not
zero, or because the gross-up and credit is less than the corporate tax
attributed to dividends, the income taxes are not integrated for distributed earnings.

Capital-export neutrality generally will not be realized,

even for distributed earnings, if corporate tax rates or the extent of
dividend relief differ across countries.

This is discussed further in sec-

tion VI.
If portfolio investment is roughly balanced between countries and
rates of return and corporate tax rates are comparable across countries,

it makes relatively little difference whether the source or residence
country provides dividend relief.

If, however, investment is not balanced

it can be expected that capital-importing countries would object to an
arrangement under which they provided dividend relief, as under the
scheme outlined above, and bore its fiscal cost.

Thus whether the source

country reimbursed the residence country completely for credits claimed
on vouchers originating in the source country would seem to be a reasonable topic for negotiation.

Certainly in fiscal relations with developing

countries it might be deemed appropriate that developed countries should
bear a relatively large share of the fiscal cost as source countries, but
not a correspondingly small share as residence countries.

To the extent

that dividend relief is partial, this discussion would apply only to the
extent that "integration" is achieved.

On the part of dividends subject

to double taxation, as well as on retained earnings, the source country
would obtain all revenue from the corporate tax.
B. Direct Investment
Where direct investment through subsidiaries is concerned, the proper
solution is not nearly so clear as in the case of portfolio investment.
Suppose that both source and residence countries have
dend-paid deduction systems.

split~rate

or divi-

If the SUbsidiary's earnings are not taxed

to the parent until they are distributed to it, the subsidiary's retained
earnings bear tax at the rate prevailing in the source country.
Dividends paid to the parent would be taxed only at the rates applicable
in the country of residence of the parent.

Earnings distributed by the

parent would not be taxed at the corporate level, but would bear tax at the

(26)
marginal rate of individual shareholders.

Income retained by the parent

would be taxed as such in the parent's country of residence.

Though at

first glance this solution seems reasonable enough, further examination
reveals a serious flaw. 28

Suppose that the foreign subsidiary in this

example is owned by a parent (or first-level subsidiary) chartered in a tax
haven country.

In such a case income distributed by the subsidiary and

retained by the parent would go tax-free and we would have in accentuated
form the "Auslaendereffekt" familiar from previous experience with the
old German split-rate system.

The same problem could occur if both

countries employed the imputation system and the source country provided
the imputation credits for tax paid by the subsidiary.
Among closely associated countries, such as those of the European
Common Market, an approach such as that proposed for direct investment
under the E.E.C. draft directive might provide a workable solution, and
such an approach might even be followed in bilateral tax treaties with
other countries.

But, as will be noted more fully in Section VI, this

approach may not be workable if either degrees of dividend relief or corporate tax rates are not equal between two countries.

Thus an alter-

native solution may need to be found, at least for relations·outside the
E.E.C.
One possible solution under the imputation approach would be for
source countries to differentiate between direct investment through subsidiaries and portfolio investment, with the burden of providing dividend
relief being left to the country of residence of the parent in the former
case.

This result could be achieved if

a) imputation credits otherwise

provided by the source country were denied foreign direct investors and

b)

the residence country allowed credit for the corporation income tax of the
source country, without nullifying the credit when foreign source income
was distributed.

In the case of wholly-owned subsidiaries denial of the

preferential rate for dividends paid to parents in a split-rate system
would be the equivalent of provision (a); where subsidiaries are less than
wholly owned the denial of the benefit of the split rate would presumably
be shared by other stockholders in the subsidiary.

Its effects could, in

principle, be duplicated by a special withholding tax on distributions to
parent firms. 29
The denial of imputation credits to foreign direct investors is, of
course, standard.

But the equivalent denial of the preferential rate on

dividends paid abroad, or the application of special withholding taxes on
such dividends, conflicting as it does with the principle of reciprocity,
has been fought bitterly, especially by the United States, and is not
common.

Nor have countries of residence of parent firms been willing to

integrate foreign corporate taxes into their own individual income taxes.
Rather, they have used the precompte to reverse foreign tax credits on
foreign-source income redistributed by parents.
Under the scheme outlined above, relief from double taxation of dividends, though based on tax paid in the source country, would be provided by
the residence country.

This has important implications for the division of

revenues between source and residence countries; as in the case of portfolio investment, international arrangements for the sharing of fiscal costs
might be in order.

(28)

In the absence of tax preferences the approach described above would
result in capital-export neutrality, at least for distributed earning.
a more realistic case, it would not.

In

Tax preferences would be available to

the parent firm so far as domestic income was retained; for distributed
earnings domestic preferences could be passed through to shareholders or
nullified, but the latter approach seems more likely.
In the absence of special provisions that seem to be politically
unlike~,

the approach outlined earlier would result in tax preferences

available in the source country being washed out to the extent that preference income was distributed by the foreign subsidiary to the parent
firm. 30

(To the extent that the source country followed common European

practice, this would be of little consequence; preferences are ordinarily
washed out via a precompte in the source country when distributed.)

Thus,

leaving aside differences in the basic corporate tax rates applied to
retaine4 corporate source income and differences in the availability of
preferences in the. two countries, we see that preferences would remain
intact on income retained by the source-country SUbsidiary and on domestic
income retained by the parent firm.

They would be nullified on income

distributed by the subsidiary, including that retained by the parent, and
probab~

on domestic income distributed by the parent.

that capital-export neutrality would be achieved.

It appears unlikely

As was noted above, so

long as preferences are based on investment, rather than on saving, capital
export neutrality cannot generally be achieved. 3l

(29)

VI. HARMONIZATION IN THE COMMON

~WffiKET

If all European countries had similar rates of corporate tax and
similar degrees of dividend relief, the methods of dealing with dividends
crossing international borders proposed in the E.E.C. draft directive
would be quite reasonable.

It is consistent with the principle announced

in the previous section that dividend relief must be based on taxes paid
in the source country.

(But if all corporate tax rates were similar,

adherence to this principle would be relatively unimportant.)

Moreover,

the approach suggested seems to be a sensible means of dealing with the
problem posed by dividends paid to parents by subsidiaries.
If, however, either corporate tax rates or degrees of dividend
relief differ significantly between member countries, the approach
suggested in the draft directive is severely deficient.

That this is

true is evidenced by Germany's refusal to approve the draft directive.
Germany, as noted above, is the only member country of the E. E. C. which
currently provides full relief from double taxation of dividends.
A.

Portfolio investment
The problem posed by unequal corporate tax rates or degrees of divi-

dend relief is easily seen.

Suppose first that corporate rates are

equal, but that different degrees of dividend relief are allowed. 32

In

such a case the country with the more fully integrated tax system would
be providing more relief for foreign shareholders in domestic firms than
its own shareholders in foreign firms were receiving.

Besides the reve-

nue cost to the country providing more complete dividend relief, such an
approach would violate capital export neutrality.

Portfolio investors in

both countries would be encouraged to invest in the country providing
greater dividend relief.

Of course, some countries might find the capi-

tal inflow stimulated by this distortion attractive and perhaps worth the
revenue loss it would entail, but those losing potential investment would
probably object.
If tax rates in member countries are different, the situation can be
even worse, unless all countries provide full dividend relief.

(If divi-

dend relief is complete, the corporate tax rate cannot matter, except for
retained earnings.)

Suppose that all countries in the E.E.C. allow

shareholder credits for half their corporate taxes, but that corporate
tax rates differ substantially.

Portfolio investment in high-tax

countries would be discouraged because of the differences in aggregate
taxation of distributed earnings, as well as because of those on retained
earnings.

The combination of unequal corporate tax rates and unequal

degrees of dividen.d relief would create complicated counterforces about
which generalization is difficult.

But so far as portfolio investment is

concerned it appears essential to the success of any effort toward harmonization that effect.ive corporate tax rate and the extent of dividend
relief be similar across countries.
B.

Direct investment
Because the draft directive's approach for direct investment is

based on exemption for foreign-source income that is not distributed by
the parent, rather than on the use of a foreign tax credit, it is more
nearly consistent with capital-import neutrality than with capital-export
neutrality.

Of course, if all income were distributed by subsidiaries and

redistributed by parents and all countries allowed full relief from double
taxation of dividends, capital-export neutrality would be achieved.

But

failure to achieve capital-export neutrality would occur to the extent
that income retained by either subsidiaries or parents was effectively
taxed at different source-country rates.

As is the case of portfolio

investment, harmonization of corporate rates seems essential.
Given the constraints just described an approach such as that of
Section V may be preferable to that outlined in the draft directive.
Under it, to review, double taxation of portfolio dividends would be
relieved much as under the draft directive.

But residence countries,

rather than source countries, would provide dividend relief for direct
investment. -Besides requiring more complete crediting of foreign taxes,
this approach would require that precompte not be levied when foreignsource income is distributed by the parent firm. 33
VII. EUROPEAN RELATIONS WITH THE UNITED STATES
If the United States decided to adopt dividend relief, it would need
to work out new international fiscal relations with other countries.

If

those countries already allowed dividend relief, the discussion of Section
V would be relevant.

But the U.S. would also confront countries that

retained classical systems.

This is, of course, basically the position in

which European countries find themselves in dealing with the United
States. 34

For this reason, as well as for the intrinsic independent

interest of the subject, it is worthwhile to consider fiscal relations between the U.S. and Europe.

The United States, with it classical system, is the extreme version
of a country providing a low degree of dividend relief.

Experience has

shown that the United States will not gladly acquiesce in the denial of
shareholder credits to its residents on foreign portfolio investment.
But countries following common European practice (the approach outlined in
the draft directive) of extending the shareholder credit for its corporate tax to American portfolio investors can expect an inflow of portfolio investment and a corresponding revenue 10ss.35
So far as direct investment through European subsidiaries of American
parents is concerned, there may be somewhat more latitude for negotiations, since the United States has wrung agreement to shareholder
credits for dividends paid to American parents from only the United Kingdom.
Here the incentives are much more lopsided than in the case of portfolio
investment, for there may be a substantial revenue loss to the European
treasuries, but perhaps little stimulus to capital inflow.

The incentive

for capital inflows to take advantage of the tax credit does not occur
because much of the benefit of dividend relief accrues to the U.S.
Treasury through reduced foreign tax credits, rather than to American
investors.

It thus seems likely that European countries are forced to con-

tinue to deny the imputation credit to direct investment from the United
States even if they allow the credit to portfolio investors.
Lacking any provisions for dividend relief, the United States does
not allow any imputation credits for European investors in the United States.
Thus there is no corresponding revenue transfer from America to European
investors or to European fiscs.

And since European imputation credits are

not allowed European portfolio investors for corporate taxes paid in
America - a practice which, for good reason, no country has chosen to
follow - capital export neutrality is commonly violated in Europe.

But

through the substitution of a foreign tax credit where exemption is presently used, capital-export neutrality could be achieved on foreign direct
investment.
Given the environment in which the question is asked, there is no
simple answer to whether a given European country should provide dividend
relief and how much relief it should provide.

So long as the United States

maintains a classical system it will be difficult for any other country to
adopt a system of dividend relief that is totally satisfactory.

Yet the

case for dividend relief is strong, even in countries that are small and
open to capital f16Ws. 36
American intransigence on the question of mirror-image withholding
rates may rule out use of the split-rate and dividend-paid deduction
approaches to dividend relief.

Even worse, if the United States decided

to argue in treaty negotiations that failure to provide shareholder
credits to American direct investors constituted a de facto withholding tax,
all European countries using the imputation approach might find it
necessary to renegotiate tax treaties with the United States.

If the

European Economic Community were to negotiate collectively, progress
might be

ma~e

against the American position.

This appears to be

appropriate since, as argued earlier, it seems that residence countries
should be responsible for dividend relief on direct investment.

If,

however, a single small European country were to try to negotiate alone
against the United States, it would have considerable difficulty.
Even if the American influence on the issue could be ignored, the
future of dividend relief in the European Economic Community is far from
clear.

The primary problem is that the same amount of dividend relief is

not provided in all countries.

One can imagine blocs developing within

the Common Market based on the extent of dividend relief allowed in
various countries.

Those countries providing relief from roughly half

the corporate income tax on distributed earnings could agree to implement
the provisions of the draft directive on a bilateral or multilateral
basis.

But so might other countries join with Germany in a similar

arrangement based on complete relief from double taxation of dividends.

Footnotes

*A slightly different version of this paper was prepared for a conference at Erasmus University, Rotterdam, November 24, 1978.

This paper is

related to NBER programs of research on Business Taxation and Finance and
on International Studies and to the Bureau's special project on Capital
Formation.

It has not undergone review by the Board of Directors of the

National Bureau of Economic Research.
lThroughout this paper the term "integration" is used to refer to
tax schemes under which the entire income of a eorporationwould be attributed to shareholders and taxed to the latter

~;

the marginal tax rates

applicable to them, whether distributed or retained.

By comparison,

"dividend relief" extends the concept of integration only to distributed
corporate-source

e~uity

income.

That is, distributed income is free of

corporate tax and is taxed only to the shareholder; so far as retained
earnings are concerned the corporation income tax remains a final tax, as
in a classical or unintegrated system.

"Dividend relief" is meant to be

descriptive, rather than pejorative; it allows one to avoid such ambiguous
terms as "partial integration" and the monstrous "partial partial
integration," which is sometimes used to refer to systems of partial dividend relief.
2Some further definition of terms may be in order.

A "classical"

system is one in which corporate-source inCOlue is taxed to the firm and

dividends are a component of the taxable income of shareholders; at most
modest efforts are made to relieve double taxation of dividends.

Under

the "imputation" system the corporate income tax is treated as a withholding tax to the extent it is levied on corporate source income
resulting in dividends.

It is therefore imputed to the shareholder and

included in his income for tax purposes; a shareholder credit is then
allowed for the tax imputed to the shareholder.

Under full integration, if

the corporate tax is retained it is only as a withholding device.

Under a

"split-rate" system a lower rate is applied to distributed corporate source
income than to such income which is retained.

It is equivalent to a

"dividend-paid deduction," under which the corporation pays tax only on
income which is retained.

In both of the last two systems the shareholder

simply includes cash dividends in his income for tax purposes, as under the
classical system.

For further elaboration of these systems, see McLure

30ne must, however, have considerable sympathy with the following
statement from Bird(1975, p.3l4):
"What has been done in other countries, or what may be done there in
the future, is really not very relevant to what must or should be
done in the United States. References to foreign experiences, when
they support a position one has adopted for other reasons are standards (sic) tactics for any good advocate; but this does hot mean they
are relevent •. Given the degree of observed flexibility and adaptability which the international econornlf has demonstrated in recent
years, any argument that a minor change in tax structure will have a
major or irreversible impact on international capital flows does not
carry much weight. In this, as in other areas, the United States is
more or less free to make its own mistakes."
4For a discussion of the supposed advantages and disadvantages of
integration and dividend relief, see McLure (forthcoming, 1979 chapter 2).

On the administrative feasibility of integration and dividend relief, see
McLure (forthcoming, 1979, Chapter 5) and, for a more condensed summary,
McLure (1978).
5For an excellent exposition of the administrative difficulties of
integration and dividend relief dating from the early post-war period, see
Goode(1946).
6It is sometimes thought that the distributional and neutrality
advantages of full integration could be achieved without incurring the
substantial administrative burden involved in integration if dividend
relief were combined with a reduction of the top personal tax rate to the
level of the corporate rate.

According to this argument, no shareholder

would have a tax incentive to prefer retained earnings over dividends and
most would have fiscal reasons to prefer dividends.

If these incentives

were strong enough; all corporate income would be distributed and therefore taxed only at the marginal tax rates of individuals, as under full
integration.

There are, however, several flaws in this argument.

First,

one important attraction of full integration, neutrality toward corporate
financial policy, would be sacrificed.

Second, if tax preferences were

treated as in Europe (assumed to be the last element of income distributed
but subject to a supplementary tax on distribution), it is most unlikely
that distribution of corporate source-income would be complete, because the
cost of dividends in terms of sacrificed retained earnings would be too
high.

Third, if dividend relief is partial, rather than complete, the

incentives to distribution just described might not be strong enough to
insure complete payout.

7Tax preferences can be defined as any provisions which reduce tax
liability to less than it would be if the standard corporate tax rate were
applied to economic income of the corporation.

Preferences can be deduc-

tions which artificially reduce taxable income to below economic income,
preferential rates, and credits which further reduce tax calculated by
applying actual rates to taxable income.

Understanding of the European

discussion of tax preferences is hindered by barriers of language and must
depend in large part on descriptions provided by Gourevitch (1977).

8For further discussion of alternative ways of treating tax preferences under integration and dividend relief, see Warren (1977) and
McLure (forthcoming, 1979, Chapter

4).

9For a more detailed discussion of these political cross-currents
see McLure and Surrey (1977).
lOFor more detailed descriptions, see Ault (1976), Au1t (1977),
Hammer (1975), OECD (1973), Sato and Bird (1975), Snoy (1975), and McLure
(forthcoming, 1979, chapter 3).
llFor further details on the German system, see Au1t (1976).
l2Re lief is allowed foreign shareholders for the 36 percent corporate tax so far as it is foreign source income that is distributed.
l3The American foreign tax credit does not extend to German tax
attributed to income retained by the German subsidiary because under
United States law taxon such income is deferred until dividends are paid.
l4Germany was unsuccessful in negotiating such a provision with the
United States, which demanded reciprocal 15 percent withholding rates.

The

United States does) however) allow application of the 25 percent rate
where profits of German subsidiaries distributed to American parents
are reinvested in Germany) in order to prevent the "Auslaendereffekt".
This effect occurs when dividends paid to foreigners) being taxed at the
preferential German rate on distributed income and then reinvested in
Germany) are subject to lower taxation than income retained by a German
corporation.

For further discussion of this effect see Biehl and

Juettemeier (1976).
15In fact) dividends paid from income earned more than four years
earlier are treated as preference income.
It may be worthwhile to point out an important definitional question
which arises if dividend relief is not complete.

In the German system

nullification of tax preferences is unambiguous.

The supplementary

tax brings the effective tax rate paid on all distributed preference
income up to the statutory 36 percent rate applied to ordinary taxable
corporate income and allowed as a shareholder credit.

Under the French

system of partial dividend relief the precompte equals the shareholder
credit) but not the rate of tax levied on ordinary corporate income.
Thus in France preferences are nullified in the sense that no credit is
given for taxes not paid; but they are not nullified in that they are not
taxed like ordinary income.
16The income used to pay the tax on distributed earnings was subj ect to the tax on retained income.

Because of this "shadow effect" the

total rate of tax applied to income resulting in dividends was actually
23.5 percent.

(40)
Dividend income received from subsidiaries was exempt to the parent
firm, if it was redistributed by the parent.

If such income was retained

by the parent a 36 percent supplementary tax called the "Nachsteuer" was
levied to bring the total rate of tax up to the 51 percent rate applied to
retentions.
l7See Neumark Report (1963), van den Tempel (1970), and Commission
of the European Communities (1975).
l8If the shareholder credit in the nation of the distributing parent
firm exceeded the credit for taxes paid to the country of residence of the
subsidiary, precompte or ACT would be collected from the parent; if, on the
other hand, the credit available from the source country exceeded that
allowed shareholders, no adjustment would be made.
19 These conditions are, of course, not actually met.

But it

is fairly certain that satisfying the conditions for neutrality described
below would produce higher welfare for the target group than would a tax
system involving substantial distortions.

Beyond that, various concepts of

neutrality have advocates whose support is not conditional upon satisfaction of the conditions for welfare maximization.
20The requirement that foreign tax credit be allowed for foreign
taxes is totally unrealistic in the case of portfolio investment.

For a

discussion of several reasons why foreign tax credits may not result in
capital export neutrality, even in the case of direct parent-subsidiary
investment, see Hufbauer (1975).

For a further discussion of neutrality

in international fiscal relations, see Musgrave (1969).

At this point we

abstract from benefits of public services rendered to corporations.

(41)
Strictly

speaking~

the argument in the text and those which follow apply

only to the extent that taxes exceed the value of public services provided to corporations.
21For a more complete discussion of issues of equity~ see Musgrave
and Musgrave (1972).
22See Sato and Bird (1975).
23The discussion in the remainder of the paper relies heavily on
Ault (1978) and McLure (forthcoming~ chapter 6).
24Complete capital-export neutrality would be achieved only if
retained corporate earnings were taxed identically in the two countries.
25It is assumed that under the imputation method a precompte would
be used if preferences were to be washed out; for the

reasons~

which are

even more compelling in the present case~ see ~~Lure (forthcoming~ 1979~
Chapter 4~) and McLure (1978).
26An important exception is~ of course~ the case in which preferences are stacked last and no dividends are deemed to be paid from
preference income.

Given the assumed difference in treatment of preference

income and the implied incentives to retain and distribute preference
income~

it is unlikely that preference income

would~

in

fact~

be left

equally untouched by distribution policy in the two countries.

For more on

these incentives~ see McLure (forthcoming~ 1979~ Chapter 4).
27This argument can~ of course~ be turned around in the case of
both countries passing preferences through.

In that case retained ear-

nings will generally be taxed differently in the two countries.

This helps

to emphasize how deficient an analysis of capital-export neutrality is if

(42)
it ignores the treatment of retained earnings.

But any system short of

full integration in all countries is generally doomed to be non-neutral.
28For further elaboration, see McLure (forthcoming, chapter 5) and
Sato and Bird (1975).
29Suc h withholding taxes, together with the corporate tax, should
be governed by "effective reciprocity" in the opinion of Sato and Bird

30It is assumed here that the country of residence of the parent
would require reporting of profits without benefit of foreign tax preferences.
31Contrary to the suggestion in Bird (1975), elimination of
deferral would not produce capital-export neutrality if preferences of
the subsidiary and those applicable to the parents' domestic income were
treated differently.
32It seems likely that the currently common practice of washing
out tax preferences on distribution would continue, since it is sanctioned by the draft directive and there appears to be no tendency to
deviate from it.

Of course, differences in preferences could still

distort the allocation of capital within the E.E.C., even if they were
available only on retained ea.rnings.

These differences can be subsumed

under differences in corporate rates, to be discussed below.
33For an assessment that agrees in part with that presented here
see Bird (1975, p. 313).
34Among the reasons the analogy is not total are a) Europe is facing
a large country with a classical system; the U.S. would not; b) its past

treaties tend to lock the U.S. into an inflexible position on reciprocity
and non-discrimination; other countries with classical systems would
probably have more lattitude.
35This capital inflow might be small, given American reluctance to
make foreign portfolio investments.
36This view may appear to be inconsistent with that expressed,
for example, in McLure (1978), that dividend relief may appropriately be
delayed until administrative problems are resolved.

Among the differences

that account for this apparent inconsistency are a) the United States is
not involved in an economic community with countries providing dividend
relief and b) tax preferences are said to be less prevalent in Europe
than in the United States.

(44)
References

Ault, Hugh J., "Germany: The New Corporation Tax System," Intertax,
1976/8, pp. 262-75.
Ault, Hugh J., "International Issues in Corporate Tax Integration,"
Law and POliC~ in International Business, vol. 10, no. 2
(1978), pp. 4 1-94.
Biehl, Dieter and Juettemeier, Karl-Heinz, "German Experience with an
Integrated Corporate Shareholder Tax System," a report to the
Office of Tax Analysis, U.S. Treasury Department, 1976.
Bird, Richard M., "International Aspects of Integration," National Tax
Journal," Vol.28 (Septemebr 1975), pp.302-14.
Commission of the European Communities, "Proposal for a Directive of the
Council Concerning the Harmonization of Company Taxation and of
Witholding Taxes on Dividends," reproducted in European Taxation,
Vo1.16 (February-April,1976), pp.52-121.
Goode, Richard, The Postwar Cor oration Tax Structure (Washington:
Government Printing Office, 1946 •

U.S.

U. S• Government
Hammer, Richard M.; "The Taxation of Income from Corporate Shareholders:
Review of Present Systems in Canada, France, Germany, Japan, and
the U.K.," National Tax Journal, vol. 28 (September 1975), pp.
315-34. .
Hufbauer, G.C., "A Guide to Law and Policy," in Hufbauer et al., U.S.
Taxation of American Business Abroad: An Exchange of Views
(Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1975), pp. 1-6.
McLure, Charles E., Jr., "Integration of the Personal and Corporate Income
Taxes: The Missing Element in Recent Tax Reform Proposals,"
Harvard Law Review, vol. 88 (January 1975), pp. 532-82.
McLure, Charles E., Jr., "A Status Report on Tax Integration in the
United States," National Tax Journal, Vol. 31 (December 1978).
McLure, Charles E., Jr., "Integration of the Income Taxes: Why and How,"
Journal of Corporate Taxation, vol. 2 (Winter 1976), pp. 429-64.

McLure, Charles E., Jr., Can Corporate Income be Taxed Once?
The Brooking Institution, 1979).

(Washington:

McLure, Charles E., Jr. and Surrey, Stanley S., "Integration of
Corporation and Individual Income Taxes: Issues for Debate,"
Harvard Business Review, vol. 55 (September-October 1977), pp.
169-81.
Musgrave, Peggy B., United States Taxation of Foreign Investment Income
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Law School International Tax
Program, 1969).
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Company Tax
Systems in OECD Member Countries (Paris: OECD, 1973).
Report of the Fiscal and Financial Committee (Neumark Committee)," The
EEC Re orts on Tax Harmonization (Amsterdam: International Bureau
for Fiscal Documentation, 19 3 •
Royal Commission on Taxation, Report (Ottawa:

Queen's Printer, 1966).

Sato, Mitsuo and Bird, Richard M., "International Aspects of the Taxation
of Corporat ions and Shareholders," Internat ional Monetary Fund
Staff Papers, vol. 22 (July 1975), pp. 384-455.
Simon, William E., Testimony Before the House Ways and Means Committee,
July 31, 1975.
Snoy, Bernard, Taxes on Direct Investment Income in the EEC:
Economic Analysis New York: Praeger, 1975

A Le al and

Ullman, Al, Congressional Record, House, 95th Congress, Second Session,
February 2, 1978, pp. H640-42 and March 22, 1978, pp. H2337-38.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Blue rints for Basic Tax Reform
(Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 197
Warren, Alvin C., Jr. ,"Integration of the Indi-yidual and Corporate Income
Taxes," a paper presented to an ALI-ABA conference on federal
tax simplification, Warrenton, Virginia, January 1978.
van den Tempel, A.J., Corporation Tax and Individual Income Tax in the
European Communities (Brussels: Commission of the European
Communities, 1970).

