                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CORPORATE FINANCIAl1 POLICY, TAXES, AND
                 UNCERTAINITY: AN INTEGRATION


                       Alan J. Auerbach

                              and

                        Mervyn A. King


                    Working Paper No. 321k




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138
                           March   1979




The   research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program   in Business Taxation and Finance. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
NBER. Financial support of the NBER is gratefully
acknowledged.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper 32
                                                                            March 1979


  CORPORATE FINANCIAL POLICY, TA)S, AND UNCERTAINTY: AN INTEGRATION



                                        Summary




          In this paper, we present a simple general equilibrium model of the
portfolio behavior of households and institutions, paying particular atten-
tion to the influence of differences in tax          rates and attitudes toward risk.
Under the Dlausible assumptions that households are more risk averse than

institutions and possess a greater relative "tax preference" for equity

versus    debt, we are able to characterize the          equilibria   which   may result
when debt is subject to ban).iptcy risk.

          Among the issues which we study are the effects of tax              rate changes,
changes in risk, and      changes   in firm   leverage   on the relative asset holdings

of the two    types   of investor and   the   rates of return   earmed on equity and
debt.      Numerical sinu.ilations provide additional understanding of             the

model' s characteristics.




Alan J. Auerbach                                     Mervyn A. King
National Bureau of Economic     Research             The University of Birmingham
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                            Deparbnent of Economics
Cambridge, MA 02138                                  Birmingham       Bl5   2T1'
                                                     ENGLAND
                                                                   January 1979
                                                                                   1




I.   Introduction

     The relationship between the ownership of corporate securities (both

debt and equity) and the financial policy of the company is complex, and causa-

tion runs in both directions. Given the tax rates paid by its shareholders,

the firm will be able to calculate the optimal financial policy, and given the

policy of the firm, market equilibrium will determine a certain pattern of

shareholdings. To analyze how alternative tax systems will affect portfolio

decisions of both firms and investors, we need to solve the complete general

equilibrium model. A further reason for wishing to look at the general equili-

brium is that, provided the conditions necessary for the Modigliani-Miller

theorem to hold are satisfied, although the debt-equity ratio of an individual

firm may be a matter of indifference, there may exist an equilibrium aggregate

debt-equity ratio for the corporate sector as a whole.

     Most work on taxation and share ownership has assumed that investors pay a

common tax rate on each form of income. If we extend this to a world in which

investors pay different marginal tax rates then, under perfect certainty, we

obtain an equilibrium with investors specializing in those securities which are
                                  1
optimal, given their tax rates.       Mixed portfolios requires, in general, the

existence of uncertainty. We wish to focus on a model in which investors face

different tax rates but still hold diversified portfolios. To do this, we

need a model which allows for both taxes and uncertainty.

     In this paper, we describe and analyze a simple general equilibrium model

with taxes and uncertainty. The rate of return on capital is random, and we

wish to know how the claims on the return will be divided between debt and equity.

The equilibrium will be characterized by the interest rate offered on corporate

debt, the debt-equity ratio, and the relative holdings of debt and equity by

different investors.
                                                                                         2




        The usual portfolio approach to investor behavior, which utilizes the capital

Asset Pricing Model2, cannot be applied directly here because the variances and

covariances of securities are endogenous to the model. Furthermore, the possi-

bility of bankruptcy means that the model is rather difficult to handle mathemati-

cally.




II. The Model

        We consider a two-period model with two types of investor, a household

sector (H) which is risk averse and an institutional sector which comprises a

large number of tax-exempt institutions (I), such as pension funds, which are

risk-neutral. Households and institutions allocate fixed initial wealth among

two    types of asset, corporate equity (E)   and   corporate debt (D) .   If we denote
      as the value of sector i's holding of asset j,     then   the balance sheet con-
straint implies

                         =
                             v v
                              +                          i = H, I                 (1)




The total market value of security j is



                     v. =    v v
                              +                          j = D, E                 (2)



and total wealth is normalized to unity:



                     wH +wI =1                                                    (3)




       We shall assume that households and institutions are quite distinct and

we shall ignore any links between the two groups. The portfolio decisions of

households are made independently of the way any money which may have been
                                                                                3



invested by institutions on their behalf is invested by the managers of such

institutions. The reaction of the level of private household saving to changes

in institutional saving can be modeled by varying the relative levels of initial

wealth. We believe this to be a reasonable way to model the role of pension

funds. More debatable perhaps is the assumption that institutions are risk-

neutral, but it is useful in showing how the model behaves when households

are more risk-averse than institutions, and without it the model is much less

tractable. Relaxing the assumption would not alter the qualitative nature

of the results which we present below.

     Wealth in this economy is held in the form of financial claims on the real

capital stock which is the sole input to production. We assume that there is

a single firm in the economy which we may think of as representing the corporate

sector. In the first period, the firm decides on the fraction of the value

of claims which will be sold in the form of debt and the fraction to be sold

as equity. In other words, it decides on the debt-equity ratio. It has no

decision to make about real variables. Given this decision, households and in-

vestors will allocate their wealth between the two securities. In the second

period, profits will be realized and will depend upon the state of the world.

We shall assume that there are only two possible states of the world. In the

first state, profits (before tax) are M1, and in the second, M2(M2 >
                                                                       M1)
The probability of the favorable outcome, state 2, is agreed by all investors

to be p. For ease of notation we may let the rate of return on capital in state

o be described by 0. If the nominal interest rate on corporate debt is R then,

given the assumptions of limited liability and tax deductibility of interest

payments, the rate of return on equity is given by
                                                                                                   4

                                            (1 —   t c) (8—      RvD)
                              rE(8) =                                             if 8
                                                           E
                                                                                           >RvD

                                                       0                          if 8< RvD       (4)


where t is the corporate tax rate. Similarly, the rate of return on corporate

debt is:

                               rD(8) = R                                          if 8 >Rv
                                            8
                                                                                  if      8<RvD
                                            VD                                                    (5)



 where allowing for taxes, personal and corporate, and assuming zero bank-

 ruptcy costs, the consumption of the two groups is given by

           cH(e) =
                        rD(8)vD(l
                                        -
                                            t)     +
                                                           rE(O)vE(l
                                                                        -
                                                                            te)                   (6)


           C1(8) =                 +                                                              (7)
                        rD(O)vD        rE(O)vE

where

                 =   rate    of personal tax on interest income


           te =      rate    of personal tax on equity income, which may be thought of

                     as an average of the tax rates on dividends and capital gains;

                     hence, we assume t
                                       e
                                                       is      strictly less than t
                                                                                      p

        In period one, investors allocate initial wealth among the two assets in

order to maximize the expected utility of second-period consumption. Since

institutions are risk-neutral they will maximize the expected value of (7) and,

hence, will allocate all their wealth to the asset with the higher expected

rate of return, except in the case where the expected rates of return are equal,

when they are indifferent. Households are assumed to maximize the expected

utility of a concave utility function defined on consumption as given by (6).

Both groups of investors will take the interest rate R and the debt-equity
             vD
ratio l      -
                      ) as    given.
                                                                                 5



     In addition to the balance sheet constraints given by (1), we shall

place some non-negativity constraints on the value of security holdings. Since

institutions are risk-neutral, we need some constraints to rule out infinite

holdings and short sales, ans so we shall assume throughout that


                   v >0                                      j   = D,   £      (8)




     It may or may not seem reasonable to rule out short sales of equity and debt

by households, and we shall discuss the implications of imposing such con-

straints later.

     At this point, we should explain the relationship between our model and the

assumptions of the Modigliani -   Miller   theorem. We have assumed that all wealth

in the economy is invested in a single firm, and, thus, by definition the value

of the firm is always unity. In this trivial sense the value of the firm is in-

dependent of the debt-equity ratio. But, more fundamentally, we may ask

whether an investor's expected utility is a function of the debt-equity ratio.

In our model investors are indifferent to the choice of debt-equity ratio provided

that there are no taxes and no binding non-negativity constraints on the levels

of security holding. This is true even though bankruptcy may occur. The reason

is that debt and equity provide two linearly independent assets which span

the consumption possibility set given by technology because we have only two

states of the world. If we were to add a third state of the world, the debt-

equity ratio would matter even in the absence of taxes and constraints.

     For investors to engage in "homemade diversification", they must be able

to sell short either debt or equity as circumstances require. If we rule Out

short sales, the debt-equity ratio may matter and, of course, the introduction

of taxes means that investors have preferences over the choice of debt-equity
                                                                                 6



ratio. As we shall see, it is likely that investors will disagree about the

optimal debt-equity ratio for the firm.

     The system we have described contains seven unknowns, corresponding to

the four values of security holdings v, the total values of debt and equity,

and the coupon rate on corporate bonds. The first-order conditions for port-

folio optimization give two independent equations, and there are four accounting

constraints in (1) and (2) .   The remaining equation needed to close the sys-

tem describes the behavior of the firm. It has to determine the value of bonds

which it will sell which is equivalent to choosing the debt-equity ratio.

Although, one might argue that this will be chosen "in the interests of the

shareholders," such a criterion is ambiguous here because, in general, house-

holds and institutions will disagree as to what constitutes the "optimal" debt-

equity ratio. We shall discuss later the various criteria which might be used

to determine the value of the debt-equity ratio, but for the moment we shall

proceed on the assumption that it is given.



III. Types of Equilibria

     At this stage we shall describe the types of equilibria which are feasible

and characterize them in terms of the relative holdings of the two assets by

the two types of investor. We shall then explore how changes in taxation and

uncertainty affect the outcomes. There are three types of "super-regime"

which are characterized by:


       (a) riskless debt debt                   RvD <


       (b)   risky debt                            <          <
                                                        RvD       M2



       (c)   "pseudo-debt"                      M2 <    RvD
                                                                               7



     The last case is one in which so much debt is issued that the firm goes

bankrupt in each state of the world, and the return to equity is always zero.

Debt has effectively replaced equity as the sole security in the economy and

possesses the risk attributes of complete equity financing. Since interest

payments are deductible against the corporate income tax, such an outcome has

the attraction that no corporate tax is ever paid, and would appeal to

institutions which are exempt from personal but not corporate taxes. House-

holds, however, would not welcome such a financial policy for tax reasons unless3



                   (1 -
                          t)       >    (1       -
                                                      tc)(l   -
                                                                  te)        (9)




     If this inequality constraint is satisfied then in the absence of un-

certainty both households and institutions could choose a debt-equity ratio

sufficiently high to ensure that the profits of the firm were always distri-

buted in the form of payments to bondholders. We describe this case as one of

"pseudo-debt". This "super-regime" is degenerate in that it contains a single

equilibrium described by



                   H       H                I          I
                  VD=W         ,        VDW ,VD                    1



                   H =     I =                  = 0
                  VE      VE           VE



                   R>M2                                                       (10)
                                                                                    8




     Even if households prefer debt to equity for tax reasons, they may wish

to move away from all-debt financing in order to be able to diversify into

another security, namely equity. Only if the tax advantage from debt was

sufficiently large would they be happy to forego the benefits of diversification.

If condition (9) does not hold, then, considerations of both tax and portfolio

diversification would lead households to prefer an interior solution for the

debt-equity ratio. It is clear that households and institutions may disagree

over whether or not pseudo-debt is a desirable regime, and the outcome will

depend on which group has control of the firm. Each group will compare their

expected utility level under the regime of pseudo-debt with the maximum levels

attainable under the two other super-regimes. Expected utility of institution

may be measured by the expected value of their consumption which, with pseudo-

debt, is



                     E(c1(e)) =     w'{(l      -
                                                   p)M1
                                                          +                        (11)



    We shall assume, henceforth, that households display constant relative

risk aversion and the degree of relative risk aversion is unity, which implies

that household utility may be written



                      H H = log       C
                                         H                                          (12)
                     u (c )



    The expected utility level of households in the pseudo-debt case is



           E(uH) =   log(l    -
                                  t)wH
                                          +   (1   -
                                                       p)log   M1 +   p   log M2     (13)
                                                                                                                          9



        Further consideration of the probability of pseudo-debt occurring will

be postponed until we have characterized the other regimes.



IV. Risky Debt

   A. Characterization

        The intermediate "super-regime", that of risky debt is the major

subject of focus in this paper. It is in many ways the most interesting case,

and perhaps the most instructive about observed financial behavior. In this

regime, the firm goes bankrupt in the first state of the world, and the

returns to both debt and equity are risky. Because households are risk-averse,

they will generally diversify and will always hold at least some debt.4 Using

(4), (5), (6) and (12), we write the expected utility which households seek to

maximize as


   H
         = (1   -
                    p)log
                              H M1                                                            M-Rv
                                                                                               2
                                                                                   -
E(u )
                             [vD         (1 -               +
                                                                                       v)(       yE
                                                                                                       D)(1 - te)(l   -
                                                                                                                          t)
                                                                                   +      H
                                                                                         vDR(l
                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                      t)]                     (14)


Through use of the accounting identities (1) and (2), the first-order condition
for household expected utility maximization with respect to v may be written5

                                                -       I
                                                            -
                                                                (1   -   p)w
                                                                              H
        R =                              (vD        vD)
              TM2
                      (1 -           -              +                             - (1
                             vD)         v)             TvD[ (vD -       v)               -
                                                                                              p)wH]                            (15)



where

               T = (1   -   t)(l - t)/(l - t)
                                                                                                      10



   may be viewed as the household's absolute "tax preference" for equity

   (see (9)).


Note that, given VD (15) is an expression of one unknown variable, the interest

rate R, in terms of another, the institutional holdings of bonds, v.

     Unlike households, institutions are risky-neutral and will specialize in

which ever asset yields a higher expected return. They will hold only debt

if E(rD) >            only equity if E(rD) <                           and diversify only if these
             E(rE),                                           E(rE),
expected returns are equal. Using (3), (4) and (5) , we may summarize each of

these three "sub-regimes" of the risky-debt "super—regime" by one equation and

one inequality constraint in the unknown variables:



Regime 1: Institutions Specialize in Debt

                         I                 H
                        VD=l_W                                                                  (16.1)




                        R > R*                                                                  (17.1)


Regime 2: Institutions Specialize in Equity

                        V =      0                                                              (16.2)




                        R < R*                                                                 (17.2)


Regime 3: Institutions Diversify

                        R = R*                                                                 (16.3)



                        1 - wH       >vD >0
                                           I
                                                                                                (17.3)


     where
                                                        1-vD
                                 2
                                               -
                 (1 -                -
                             c
                                          (1       P)    VD
                                                               M

                                         1 -
                                               tcVD                                            (18)
                                                                                   11



 Under each regime, we have two equations, (15) and (16), in two unknown

 variables, v and R, plus an inequality constraint, (17), in one of the two

unknown variables.

        There exists an equilibrium in a particular regime for a specific value

of VD if a solution to the relevant system of equations satisfies the
                                                                           inequality
constraint which applies. For an equilibrium with institutions specialized in

debt, the value of R obtained from (15) for v = 1 -       must exceed R*, which
is not a function of v;for one in which institutions hold only .equity, setting

v =     0 and solving (15) for R must yield a value below R*; for an
                                                                     equilibrium
in which institutions hold both assets, there must exist a value of v between

its extreme values at which (15) yields a value of R equal to R*.


      B. Description of Equilibria

       Aside from the relevant inequality constraint (17), any solution must be

one in which debt is risky; otherwise, the equations used to determine the

equilibrium are inapplicable. By the definition stated above, debt is risky

if and on if


                     M1 < RvD < M2                                              (19)



       Thus, on a graph of R versus VD3 in Figure 1, the feasible region for

risky debt is the band between the two rectangular hyperbolas RvD =        (labeled
                                                                      M1

m1 and RvD = M2 (m2). We may subdivide this region into feasible regions for

each of the three risky-debt sub-regimes outlined above. Defining R*(vD) from

(18), Regime 1 is feasible if R > R*, Regime 2 if R <   R*, and Regime 3 if
R =   R*.   Since
                                                                                                             12


                                      -

                     ——
                     dR* -
                     dv
                          D
                                 '-
                                      p
                                          2
                                              '
                                                      1
                                                          +tR*/(ltvciP
                                                            c
                                      VD

must   be positive in the relevant range, and since R* =                           at   VD =   1,   R*(vD)
can be represented by a curve such as the one labeled R* in Figure 1 and the

areas feasible for Regimes 1, 2, and 3 are labeled I, II, and II, respectively.

       To determine equilibria, we must consider the household portfolio balance

condition (15). Define R(vD, v) by the value of R obtained from (15) for

specific values of VD and vD. For any value of VD it is only necessary to

define R over values of vD sufficiently large that (vD -
                                                                                  v)    exceeds (1 -

so   that     both numerator and denominator of the term in (15)                     are   positive.6

Let R'(vD) =       R(VD,
                              1 - w') and R2(vD) =              R(vD,
                                                                        0) be the relevant functions for
Regimes 1 and       2, respectively. Any candidate                      (R, vD) for an equilibrium in

which institutions specialize in debt must reside in Sector I in Figure 1 and

satisfy R =                    Similarly, if a point is to be an equilibrium with insti-
                  R'(vD)
tutions holding just equity, (R, vD) must fall in Sector II and R must

equal R2(vD). An equilibrium of the third type must satisfy R* =
                                                                                               R(vD, v)
for some intermediate value of v. The behavior of the function R will

determine the pattern of equilibria; the following collection of results is

proved in the appendix.


Proposition 1:


        (i)       T<      0     forvD <1

       (ii)      R EM2 for VD =                   1
                                                                                       13



   (iii) For any given v, over the relevant range of vD, R is either strictly

           increasing, strictly decreasing, or increasing and then decreasing.

           In particular, if pT < 1, R1 is strictly increasing.



     Part (i) of the proposition merely states that the interest rate must

increase to induce households to wish to hold more debt. In conjunction with the

second part, this says that R pivots up around the point (1, M2) in (vD, R)

space as v declines. Part (iii) says that the lowest of these curves, R, is

positively sloped throughout as long as pT < 1, a condition which is hard to

interpret but is likely to be satisfied unless the favorable outcome is almost

certain, since T is unlikely to be much greater then unity.

     Now, consider the function Rm(vD) which chooses the median value from

among R'(vD), R2(vD) and R*(vD).7 This function traces out all risky debt

equilibria, as is now shown.



Proposition 2

     (i) A pair (vD, R) is a risky-debt equilibrium if and only if condition

           (19) is   satisfied and R =   Rm(vD)


    (ii)   If pT < 1, the locus of such points is     a continuous segment along
           which   R is increasing with respect to VD.


proof:

     (i)   It is clear that any solution must satisfy (19) .      It   remains to be

           shown that if this condition is met, there exists a unique equilibrium,

           given VD at R =               The proof is by cases.
                             Rm(vD).
                                                                            14



     a. R*       R1 < J. Equations (15) and (16.1) and inequality


             "1
         R = R    ,
                                               ...
         constraint (17.1) are satisfied by v = 1 -
                                                         .
                      so that a "Regime 1" equilibrium exists
                                   .
                                                              and
                                                                      "1
                                                              at R = R = R
                                                                          m

         By Proposition 1, any other value of R exceeds R", so that

        neither (16.2) and (17.2) nor (16.3) and (17.3) can hold

         simultaneously.



    b. R1 < R2 _R*. It follows in an analogous manner that there exists
                                          2   = Rin
        a unique equilibrium of R = R



    c. R1 < R* < R2. It is evident that neither (16.1) and (17.1) nor

         (16.2) and (17.2) can hold simultaneously, so that the only

        candidate for equilibrium is Regime 3. Since R is continuous

        R    R* for some value of VD between 0 and (1 - wH), so that

         (16.3) and (17.3) are satisfied and R = R* = Rm.



    Since these cases are exhausted, the proof of part (1) is complete.



(ii) Since R*, R1 and R2 are all continuous, so is Rm. What we must rule

    Out is that R passes Out of and then back into the region defined

    by condition (19). We can certainly do so once we show that Rm

    increases monotonically with respect to
                                                      VD.



     Since        > 0 and, for pT > 1,         > 0 , Rm will also be increasing
                                          VD
     with respect to zero unless Rm = R2 at a point where —< 0. But

     this can't happen. Were this so, then, by Proposition 1 2 would
                                                                                   15



        continue to decline until equalling M2 at v = 1.        Since        > 0
                                                       I)
                                                                        VD
        and R* also equals M2 at VD =    1, this would imply that
        R* < R2 at the current VD, implying that Rm         R2. Thus, Rm can
                                              2
        equal R only if, at that point,           > 0, which ensures the monotonicty
            m                                VD
        of R



     Typical representations of       and R2 are shown in Figure 2, along with

the curves m1, m2 and R*. The equilibria along Rm are shaded.

     Two additional comments are in order about the shapes of these curves.

First, although we shall, henceforth, assume it to be satisfied, the condition

that pT < 1, although not very constraining, is not very crucial, either. If

pT were greater than one, this would merely cause the equilibrium curve Rm

to peak at a value of VD < 1. The only complication that could occur might be

that for pT implausibly large, P.m might intersect m1 in more than one place.

The second point concerns the shapes of the curves R1, R2 and R*. As we have

drawn them in Figure 2, R1 and R2 intersect R* in at most one place other

than at VD =   l;were   R1 andR2 concave downward, and R* concave upward, we

could prove that each of R and R could intersect R* at most once, and that

at such intersections R* would be the flatter of the two curves. We are not

quite able to do this; however, numerous empirical simulations indicate that the

curves will behave in this way for any conceivable parameter values, and that the

regimes of equilibria occur in the order shown in Figur- 2. To be more specific,

suppose v is the value of vD at which Rm intersects m1. Then there will exist

values v and v, such that v < v < v < 1 and, for each value of VD between

v and 1, there will be a risky-debt equilibrium in which institutions


     (i) specialize in equity if v < VD < v
                                                                               16



       (ii) diversify if        v < VD < v

      (iii) specialize in debt if v <           <   1
                                           VD



     This result is in accordance with intuition and we shall assume it to be

valid in the following discussion. When debt is not very risky, institutions

hold none or little of it, even given their relative tax preference for it,

because they can obtain a higher return on the risky equity which households

do not wish to hold. As the leverage of the firm increases, debt gets

riskier, and households are less willing to hold it. This drives down the

return on equity relative to debt, and institutions shift into debt. What is

somewhat surprising is that, through all of the ownership shifts occurring as

vD rises, the interest rate R is a stable, monotonic function of vD.



  C. Effects of Changes in Risk or Tax Rates

    The equilibrium framework we have presented in this section lends itself

quite naturally to the study of the effects of parameter changes on the system.

By assessing the impact of these changes on the functions R1, R2 and R*,

we may depict these effects graphically. We consider first the effects of

changing the corporate tax rate, t, the household tax on interest, t,

and the household tax on equity, t. In all cases, we consider an uncompensated

change in the tax.8


     (i) Tax Rate Changes

    The effects of changes in t, te and t on R' and R2 are found by dif-

     ferentiating R with respect to the particular tax rate, for v =     1 -


     and   v = 0,   respectively. Since the numerator and: denominator of (15) are

     both positive at equilibrium values (see footnote 6), it is clear that
                                                                                 17



                                   I
            > 0 for all values of vD.     . .                  H
                                      specifically 0 and (1 - w ).   Thus, any
increase in T shifts R' and R2 upward; such an increase will occur if

t increases or t or t decreases. R* is not a function of either t
 p              c     e                                          e
or t .           Thus, an increase in t , or a decrease in te will have the
            p                          p
effect shown in Figure 3a. The rate of interest at each point will

either increase or remain constant, the range of values of

over which institutions specialize in debt (Regime 1) increases, and

the range of values of vD over which institutions specialize in

equity declines. To summarize these results, a tax change which

increases the household's tax preference for equity without affecting

that of institutions (which depends only on tc) will increase the

likelihood that institutions hold only debt or at least some debt and

will increase the coupon rate in some cases, having no effect in

others.

            This shift of institutions toward debt need not occur from a change

in tc, since the tax preference of institutions, as well as that of house-

holds, is affected. As shown in the preceding paragraph, a rise in T,

which could result from a decrease in the corporate tax rate, raises

R1 and R2.           Howver, we can see from (18) that R* also depends on
                                              dR*
t       .    A   simple calculation shows that —< 0, so that a decline in t
    c                                                                       c
                                              dtc
also raises R*. Thus, the effect of a decrease in tc,shown in Figure

3b,is certain to raise R at any given VDI but the effect on regime is

uncertain.
                                                                                 18



(ii)   Changes in Risk
           We must first define what we mean by "risk". We choose to con-

       sider an increase in risk to be any change in the parameters M1,

           and p which keeps the mean return to the firm



           p = pM2 + (1              -
                                             p)M1                              (20)



       constant, but increases the variance of this return,8



            2                            2
                =             -              p(l -   p)
                    (M            M1)


                =
                    (M2
                              -
                                   p)(p - M1)                                  (21)




       Thus, an increase in variance with mean constant can occur from an

       increase in M2, a decrease in M1, or both. We consider each of these

       cases.


          (a) M1 decreases, M2 fixed ("Catastrophe Risk")


                     From (20), it is clear that a 'decrease in M1 with mean

                constant and M2 fixed implies an increase in p. The chance of

                the bad state occurring is lower but its outcome is more

                ruinous. We wish to calculate the changes in R1, R2 and R*.

                     R is not a function M1 directly, but does depend on p.

                The partial derivative of R with respect to p is:

                                         H
                                  TM w
                          =                   (1 - vD)    (vD - vD)            (22)


                     where D is the denominator in (15).
                                                                                   19



                   I                       ..           .
   Since VD -    VD
                     >   0,          is positive and, since             is
                 -                                                131
   positive, .      > 0.          Thus, curves R' and R2 both shift up.

      Combining (20) and (18), we obtain:

                              -
                                   t) (+
                                             MD)]
                                              D
                                                    -
                                                            D
                                                             VD

        R*=                                                                        (23)
                                            cD

   so that this change in M1 and p holding p constant clearly in-

   creases R*.

       Thus, all three curves shift up. Like a decrease in the

   corporate tax rate, an increase in "catastrophe risk" increases

   the rate of interest for all risky-debt equilibria, but has

   an uncertain impact of the determination of regime. Unlike

   the previous case, the increase in R occurs because the

   expected return to debt, given R, decreases as                  decreases,

   due to limited liability.


(b) M1 decreases, M2 increases ("dispersion risk")


       For simplicity, we consider relative changes in                       and

      which keep p constant.

       It is clear that such an increase in risk increases R,

   since R depends positively on                arid is independent of M1.

   From (23), it also follows, that an increase in M2 with p and

   p fixed increases R*. Thus, as in the previous case, all

   three curves shift up, raising the interest rate at all

   risky-debt equilibria but having an uncertain effect on

   regime.
                                                                      20



(c) M1 fixed, M2 increases ("Sweepstakes risk")


        Such an increase in risk must, for       constant, be

    accompanied by a decrease in p. Thus, we may think of this

    increase in risk as a combination of an increase in         and

    a decrease in M1 with an increase in       of equal size and a

    decrease in p - an increase in "dispersion risk" coupled with

    a decrease in "catastrophe risk". Since these two types

    of risk have similar effects on R1, R2 and Rm, this combina-

    tion might be expected to have an uncertain total impact.

    Indeed, this hypothesis is borne out by an examination of the

    relevant derivatives, which indicate that the effects on R1,

    R2 and R* are all uncertain.

        The key to understanding why an increase in this type of

    risk has a different effect on equilibrium values of R lies

    in the fact that    declines in cases (a) and (b) ,   but   not

    here. For R constant, a decrease in      diminishes the actual

    return to debt in the bad state, Ml/vD ,   but has no effect on
    that in the good state. Thus, the expected return to holding

    debt decreases, and R must increase to compensate for this.

    This is not a risk premium, but merely an increased difference

    between the coupon rate and the actual expected return to hold-

    ing debt. Since     does not decline with an increase in

    "sweepstakes risk", no such effect is present.
                                                                                 21



   D. A Note on Household Non-Negativity Constraints

     As already shown above, any condition constraining households from

engaging in short sales of debt will never be binding when debt is risky.

The remaining issue concerns potential short sales of equity. Such a con-

straint would be binding if, at an equilibrium, total equity, yE. were

less than that held by institutions, or, using the accounting identities,



                    WH <DD     I
                                                                                (24)



     It is evident from (24) that the possibility of household short sales

diminishes as the fraction of wealth held by household increases. Neverthe-

less, it might appear that for large values of VD near one, such sales would

be inevitable. But here the pattern of equilibria described above becomes

relevant. Since institutions go from holding equity to holding debt as
                                                                           VD
increases, the right-hand side of (24) rises less rapidly than vD rises.

Thus, short sales need not occur at all, and the constraint may become

superfluous.

     Although our model could be adapted to account for a constraint on

household short sales of equity, our simulations indicate that short sales

are unlikely to arise even without a constraint and, hence, we do not attempt

such an exercise.



V. Riskless Debt

    The final regime we consider is that in which there is insufficient debt

issued for bankruptcy to be possible; debt's rate of return is certain and

equal to the coupon rate. The expected utility of households is
                                                                                                                     22




          E(uH) = (1 - p)          log{vR(l -
                                                          t)    +   (wH -       v)re(l)(l - tell
                + p log[vR(l -                 t)    + (wH -
                                                                    v)r(2)(1 - te)]                                 (24)




       The derivative of expected utility with respect to v may be rearranged

to yield:


        dE      =
                    C[(l t)R  -            -
                                               (1    -    t   )E(re)J + (1 - p) (C -              C) {(l    -   t)R - (lt)re(l)J
                                                                                                                    (25)

from which a couple of things may be observed. If the after-tax expected re-

turns to equity and debt are equal, households will choose to hold only debt,

an outcome one would certainly expect in a model such as this. This may be

seen by noting that in such a case, the first term on the right-hand side of
                                                                H                        H
(25) is zero, and       the       second has the same sign as (C2 -
                                                                                        C1)
                                                                                              .     Since
 H    H
C2 > C1
                    H
            when vD < w
                          H            H
                                  and C2 <
                                                    H
                                                         when VD > w
                                                                    H H.it  ,      follows that expected utility
                                                C1

                                  H
                    t
is maximized when v =                  and v = 0.

       Since t >          a case in which households have the same expected return on

debt and equity would correspond to one in which institutions would receive a

higher return on debt. No one would hold equity, and this possibility can be

dismissed since VD <          1. Thus, the expected return on equity E(r) must exceed
(1 -
       t)R/(l
                -
                    t).
       Beyond this, there are few limiations on the pattern of portfolio

holdings. It is possible to envision situations in which institutions

specialize in debt, equity or are diversified while households are either

diversified or hold only equity. The outcome will depend, in general, on

two factors. First, the greater is the inherent risk of the firm, the more

reluctant households will be to move into equity as its rate of return rises.
                                                                                  23


In a situation with the firm very risky, therefore, we would expect to see

households diversified, with institutions absorbing increases or decreases in

the supply of securities. At the other extreme, were             M1, households
                                                            M2
would shift their entire portfolio into equity as soon as the return to

equity rose slightly above (1 -
                                  t)R/(l
                                           -
                                               te)   but before it rose to R,

leaving institutions specialized in debt. This behavior corresponds to

that occurring in the absence of risk, not surprisingly. The second factor

influencing the pattern of holdings is the distribution of wealth between

households and institutions. Here, the fairly obvious point is that if

institutions hold only a small fraction of the wealth, it is unlikely we

will observe an equilibrium in which households specialize in equity, for

someone must hold the existing debt.

     Unfortunately, we are unable to produce for this regime the kind of

simple analytical results obtained in the previous case without imposing

more restrictive assuiriptions.




VI. Simulation Results

     To illustrate the results developed above for the cases of risky debt and

"pseudo-debt", we present two simulations of our model. In the first simu-

lation, we take the probability of success, p, to be .75, and the returns to

the firm in the two states, M1 and M2, to be 1 and 6, respectively. Household

wealth    is set at .75. We set the corporate tax, t, equal to .4, and

initially set the rates of personal taxation, t and te equal to .4 and

0, respectively. The results, listed in Table 1, show the security holdings

of households and institutions, the expected returns to equity and debt, the

expected utility of households, and the coupon rate on bonds.
                                                                             24



       The resulting equilibria follow the pattern shown in Figure 2. Debt

is risky as long as VD >   .33, with institutions holding only equity for
VD <   .36, diversified for .36 <VD .66, and holding only debt for all higher
values of VD. Households are diversified throughout, and hold the majority

of their wealth in equity for values of VD below .44.

       The results concerning the expected returns on securities and expected

utility of households are quite interesting. While the expected return

on debt increases steadily as debt gets riskier, the expected return on

equity does not, increasing with VD to the point at which institutions shift

entirely out of equity, and decreasing thereafter. Household expected

utility is not only nonmonotonic, but it has multiple peaks, one at the

point where institutions shift out of equity, and the global maximum at the

point where debt is least risky.

       These results highlight an important issue alluded to in the introduction.

Because of different attitudes toward risk and different tax schedules, house-

holds and institutions may differ as to what the "optimal" debt-equity ratio

is. In this example, restricted to the case where debt is not perfectly

safe, households would prefer the smallest leverage possible, while institu-

tions would prefer the greatest -   "pseudo-debt".   Since households are always

the majority stockholders, they can dictate the choice of VD• However, one

could imagine a situation arising in which each group's "optimal" debt-

equity ratio occurred at a point at which the other was in control of the firm.

In   such a situation, the choice of a debt-equity ratio "in the interests of

the stockholders" would be difficult indeed
                                                                                25


     The second simulation illustrates another issue raised in the introduction.

Here we increase both personal income taxes, setting     t = .549   and te =   .25,
leaving all other parameters the same as in the first simulation. The results

are shown in Table 2. An important point which we wish to illustrate here is

that even though both institutions and households have a tax preference for

debt (T = .998) they do not agree that a "pseudo-debt" equilibrium is optimal.

The gains from diversification made available as more equity is issued

outweigh any tax disadvantages that households suffer. In fact, households

again prefer the debt-equity ratio at which debt is least risky. As concerns

the incidence of these tax increases, household utility is reduced to less than

half of its original level at all values of VD as a result of the increases in

personal income tax rates. However, there is only a minor effect on the rate of

return earned by institutions. In fact, at the debt-equity ratio which would

be optimal from the households' viewpoint, VD =   .33,   the expected return of

institutions, who hold only equity, actually increases.



VII. Conclusions

     In this paper, we have presented a very simple general equilibrium model

of the portfolio behavior of households and institutions, paying particular

attention to the influence of differences in tax rates and attitudes toward

risk. Despite the restrictive nature of our model, it yields very complex

results, only some of which have been explored in the foregoing analysis.

A number of extensions might be suggested. First, greater attention should

be given to determining the pattern of holdings which arises when debt is

riskless. Second, an important policy issue is the general equilibrium effect

of tax changes on the welfare of different individuals. While we have

examined the influence of separate, uncompensated tax changes on the model's
                                                                             26



outcome, our results concerning incidence, though interesting, must be

considered merely illustrative. What is needed is the imposition of a govern-

ment budget constraint, through which the effect of shifting the burden

of assessment among different taxes could be evaluated.

     Another issue we have not adequately addressed here is the determination

of a firm's debt-equity ratio. As was illustrated in the numerical simulations,

different classes of shareholders may consider radically different debt-equity

ratios to be "optimal";a majority voting rule need not result in a stable

equilibrium, for the distribution of share ownership itself depends on the

financial policy chosen by the firm.

     A few words are also in order concerning the importance of some of our

more restrictive assumptions. We have ruled out the existence of a safe

asset unconnected with the firm, such as government bonds. If there were

such an asset, there would then be three assets in the model. Since there

are only two states of the world, only two of these assets are necessary to

span the opportunity set and no investor will, in general, hold all three

assets; we cannot tell which of the three an investor will hold, but two

will be adequate. Consequently, we would lose the diversification of port-

folios. This would be restored in moving to a model with three states of

the world, with households holding all three assets, but such a model would

be considerably more complex without affording a new dimension of insight.

     Replacing our one-firm model with one having several small firms would

also cause a proliferation of securities, and each investor could specialize

in the appropriate investment for tax purposes. Firms would specialize in

stockholders,and we would once again lose diversification, which would

reappear if the number of states of the world exceeded the number of firms.

It is this phenomenon we wish to model.
                                                                               27



     Finally, we recognize that the assuiription that institutions are risk-

neutral is not entirely appropriate. If instjtutions were mildly risk-

averse, it is hard to see how the qualitative nature of the results would

be seriously changed, although this would add great complexity to the

analysis.
                                                                                                                                  28



Appendix
        In this section, we present demonstrations of the various results listed

in Proposition 1 in the paper. For convenience, we restate each claim before

giving its proof.



(1)                 <0         for VD< 1
              vD


proof: Differentiating R as defined in (15) with respect to v yields:

                    TM2(l - p)wH

                                D
                                    2         •(l_vD)
         vD

                                   I                                              I
                                                                                       -         -         H]
where D = (1             vD)(vD - vD) + TvD[(vD                          -
                                                                                            (1        p)w
                                                                              vD)


(ii)          R E              for       vD = 1               -

                    M2



proof:     At vD =        1,
                               (1 -            -       (1 - p)wH
          R =                           vD)                                       =   TM2
                TM2
                                                   -          -
                                                                                       T         M2
                           T[(1 -                       (1            p)wH]
                                         vD)


(iii)      For any given v, over the relevant range of VD, R is either strictly

           increasing, strictly decreasing, or increasing and then decreasing.

              In particular, if pT <                     1,             is strictly increasing.



proof: Differentiating R with respect to vD yields


                =               P -     N[(l -         vD)
                                                                  -
                                                                       (vD
                                                                              -
                                                                                      v)   +
                                                                                               T(vD
                                                                                                       -
                                                                                                            v   -   (1 - p)wH) + vDT] }
                                                                                                                         29

where D is as defined above and N =
                                                               (vD
                                                                        -
                                                                                v)      -    (1 - p)wH.     Substituting

into this expression the expressions for N and D, and rearranging terms, we

find that          > 0 if and only if:
              D
                                      I                                         H
                        VD_VD                                 (l_p)w(l_vD)
                         I
              VD_VD_ (1 -p)w
                                                   H (vD_vD_ (1 -p)w)H2T>O  I




Differentiating          with respect to rD yields:


                             -      H                    1-v
              =    -   2(1       p)w          (1 +             D)
                                                          D
                                 D2


which is negative. Thus,                       ,   and, hence,
                                                     be always positive,                    will
                                             D
always negative, or positive for VD smaller than some value and negative

above it. This proves the first part of the above assertion. To prove the
                                                                "l
second part, we need only prove that                                    > 0 at VD =                  1, since it must then
                                                                    D
be positive for smaller values of vD. Evaluating                                                      at VD = 1 yields
                                                                                                 D


                                 2            (T     -   1)
                        =                 -                         -
                                                                        v)          +       (1 - p)wH]
             DvD=l

which is positive if and only if



            (1 —   p)w
                        H > T-l               (1 —
                                                          I
                                      T                  vD)


            I        H
which, for vD = 1 - w , reduces to the condition



            pT < 1
                                                                         30

Footnotes


1) Two examples of this type of result, arising from somewhat different
    theoretical assumptions, may be found in Miller (1977) and Auerbach
    (1979)

2) See Sharpe (1964) or Lintner (1965) for a treatment of this approach.

3) This condition is derived in King (1977), chapter 4.

4) This last result follows from the fact that equity has a zero return in
    state 1 and utility is logarithmic.

5) This assumes either that there are no short sale restrictions on households
    or that such restrictions as may exist are not binding at the optimum. It
    is clear from the previous footnote that the only restriction which might
    be relevant is one prohibiting short sales of equity. We shall return
    to this issue once this regime has been more fully explored.

6) No lower value of VD could be sustained as a risky—debt equilibrium. Since
   households always demand some debt v =
                                            vD   v
                                                 -    0. It follows that if
                                                      >

    the numerator in (15) were negative, either the denominator would be
   positive and R <   0, or else the denominator would be negative and RvD > M2;
    in either case, an equilibrium could not occur.

7) If one of these three values is not defined, choose the lower value of the
   two which are. It will never be necessary to define RTh in situations
   where more than one of Rm, 1 and 2 are not defined.

8) It would be useful to know the compensated effects of such changes, as
    well. However, this would be considerably more difficult to ascertain
    analytically and will not be attempted in this paper.

9) Since the returns M1 and M2 are certainly not normally distributed, the
    variance alone is not a perfect measure of "risk". Such a measure would
    need to take account of higher moments of the distribution of returns as
    well, but in a complicated way.
                                                                             31


References


Auerbach, A.J., 1979, "Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital,"
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

King, M.A., 1977, Public Policy and the Corporation (Chapman and Hall: London).

Lintner, J., 1965, "The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky
    Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets," Review of Economics
    and Statistics, February, 13-37.

Miller, M.R., 1977, "Debt and Taxes," Journal of Finance, May; 261-275.

Modigliani, F. and M.R. Miller, 1958, "The Cost of Capital, Corporation
    Finance, and the Theory of Investment," American Economic Review,
    June; 261-297.

Sharpe, W., 1964, "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium
    Under Conditions of Risk," Journal of Finance, September; pp. 425-442.
                   Figure 1

             Financial Policy Regimes




R                                            pseudo—
                                                 debt   I


        m1




                                        I


                                risky
                                 debt




                                                  II




        riskiess
          debt


M1.




    0                                                       I
                                            V0
                   Figure 2
            Risky-Debt Equilibria




      In1




P.O
                                    .1
                                      1
              Figure 3

        Tax Change Effects




R
                                 a. Increase in t
                                                p
              /                           or

         //                         Decrease in t

                                    (R1 2 shift up)

    /




                             1




R
                                 b. Decrease in t
                                                    c
                                    (All curves shift up)

          /




                             1
 C' C' C' C' C) C' C' C) C' C' C' C' C' C) C) C, C) C'                                                                                                 C) C) C' C) C) C'? C)
 .0-     .0- - .0- .0- .0-                                      0-0-0-0-0-0-0-0- 0- 0- NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ
                                             .0- C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl   C_Ti    C_fl C_fl CM C_fl
 F,) (.4 .0- C_TI 0-. NJ C, '-0 C' — F,) (.4 .0-C_nO- NJ C, '.0 C, — P.) (.4 .0- C_Il 0- NJ C, -0 C' — F.) (.4.4). CM
 C'C' C' C'C' C C' C' C'C'C'C' C' C' C' C' C C' C)C'C)C'C'C'C'C' C'C'C'C'C'C'C'C)
 C' C' C' C) C, C' C, C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C, C, C) C' C'C'C'C'C'C'C'C, C'C'C'C'C'C'C)C'
 F-.) F.) F,) I-,) F,) F..) F.,) F',) F.) F,) F-,) F.) F,,) F.)                               F.) F,)     F-,)   F,)   F-,)   F,) F.,) F.) F-,) F,) F..) F•,)            F.) F.) F..) F.) F.,)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 z
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cr4    rn
 C_fl F_fl C_I)   C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl CM C_fl C_fl
 C' C' C' C' C' C' C) C' C' C) C' C' C'
                                                                       C_fl   C_Il C_fl C_fl CM C_fl CM C_fl C_fl C_TI C_TI C_fl C_TI
                                                                              C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C) C' C' C' C' C'C'C'C)C'C'C)C'C,
                                                                                                                                                C_fl   C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl CM     -3     C,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -3
 C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C, C, C, C, C' C'   C' ? C' C' C' C' C' CC' C'? CC'                                                                                                      -3
    0- 0- NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ   C, C, C, C, C, C, C, C,         NJ                                                                       -00-0-0-0-0-oC'                                  C
'-4 co —.0 C'
C' C' C' C, C' C' C' C' C) C' C' C' C) C' — F-,) (.4 - C_fl 0.- NJ C, '.0 C' — F.) (.4 .0- C_fl 0- NJ .0 C'
                I-,) C.,) .0- CM 0—. NJ C,
                                       C' C' C' C' C' C' C'     C' C' C' C' C' C)C'C,C)C'C'C,C'C,
C' C, C'          C' C'?                                                      C)???C)C)C' C' C' C' C'?? C)C'C'?C'C'C'C'
0-4     (.1 04 04 F-,)
C..) F,) — C' '0
                               I-,) F.) F,) I-.) F...) F-.) F-,) F.)
                               C, NJ 0'. CJI — 0-1 F-.)
                                      C' —0 C, -.J 0— C_fl 0-                   CC'
                                                                              Frn,)  C'C'C' C, C)
                                                                                  0 CM .4)- (.4 F.) C,
C' C' 0 C' C' C, C' C' C) C' C) C' C' C'C'C'C'C'C)C) C' C) C' C) C) C) '-4      C'C,C'C'CC'C'c,
C'?C'?C'C' C) C' C' C)                                       C'??
                                                              C' C' C' C) C' C'
                                                                                ?C'C'C'C'C'C'?                                                                                                          rn
                                                                                                                                                                                                        .0
C' C' C, C' C' C' C, C' C' C' C'C' C' C'C'C'C'C'C'C' C)C' C, C' C, C' C'C'C' C)C' C' 0
C' C' C' C' C' C) C'C,C'C'C,C'C, C' C) C' C' C' C, C) C) C' C' C, C' C) C'C,C'C'C'C'C'C,
C, C' 0 C' C' C' C'C'C)C'C,C'C' C' C, C' C' C) C' C) C) C' C' C' C' C' C'C'C'C'C'C'C'c,
C, C' C) C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' ? C' C'C'C'C'C'C)C' C' C) C' C' C) C' C'C'C'C'C'C'C'C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                 c_I)    C
                                                                                                                                                                                                         I-
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -<
(.4 04 (.4 (.4 F-,)            F.,)
   F.) — C' '-0 C, NJ 0- C_Il .4). (.4 F.) —
C' C' C' C' C' C' C)C'C'C'C)C'C) C'
C.-.)                                           -0 C, NJ 0-       ————C'C)
                                       F,) F-,) F-,) I--.) F-.) F,) F-.)
                                             C, C) C, C' C, C' C) (.4
                                                                              F-.)    C' C'C'C)C)C' C' C)
                                                                      F-,) — C' -C C, NJ 0. C_'l .4). ,ã F,) — C'
                                                                  C' C' C, C' C' C' C'C'C, C'C,C'C' C,
                                                                                                          C_fl   -
(-4 (.4 - - - - .0- 4). -0- -.0- .0- .0- .0- .0- .4).   .0- -0- .0- .0- .0- 0- 0- .0- .0- .0- .0- .0- .0-                                                        .0- .0- .0- .        .0- .0-

FJ .4 F.) 0.- C'
                                                        .0- 4). - C_fl C_Il
                                             F.,) F,) F.) 04 (.1 (.4 (.4 .0-
                         NJ — .0- 'J C' (.4 0- -0 — - 0— C, C'          F.) .0- 0-
                                                                                       0. 0.. l— 0•- 0-.
                                                                                       C' F-..) (..4 C.') 0—
                                                                                                                       _                                         0-- 0.- -'4 NJ NJ NJ
                                                                                                                                                                         —0 — 1.) (.4 C_Il
'.4 C_fl C' (.4 . F) -0 (.1 0- C, C, NJ .0- — 0- C, 0.4 C_fl NJ NJ '.4 0. C_fl p.j C' 0- F-.) NJ                                                                 F'.) NJ — - NJ C'
                 (.4 (.4                            (.4 0-IC,)      0.104                             (.4 0.1                                                    (.404 04 (.1 C..) C'
                                   NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ '4 0- 0- 0'- 0-'                                                                                               0-0-0-0-0.
C_fl 04 F-.) — C' co '--.4 0- C_'l - 04 F..) F.) — C) -0 -.0 C, '-4 "-4 0- Cfl C_Ti - .0- (.1 (.4 F-..)
F-..) C, C_fl F-,) C' C, NJ NJ Ni '-.1 C, -.0 — (.4 C_fl '--4 C' 04 NJ C'

C)C'C'C,C'C,             C'C'CC'C, C'
                                                                                C, F.) NJ — 0- — 0—     -
                                                                                             C, C'?? C' C'C'C'C)C)C'C'
                                                                                                                                                                 F-,)
                                                                                                                                                                 F-,) '4 (.4
                                                                                                                                                                                   C'
                                                                                                                                                                          — C' C' C'
                                                                                                                                                                               .0- C'
                                                                                                                                                                 C' C C' C) C) C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                 rn


L'I C_fl C_TI C_fl - . -
            C_fl CM C_fl CM C_fl (11 C_fl
                                             .-
C'C'-0-0C,C,0:i -C, NJ- NJ- NJ-.'—4 0-0-0-0-0-0-0-
C_ri CM                    c_ri (fl _r C_fl  CM C_Il C_fl C_fl C_Il
                                                      C_Ti
                                            .0- .0- 0- .0- .0-                -
                                                                        Cfl CM C_fl CM C_Il C_fl CM
                                                                                      C_fl              .'l Jl Jl CM C_TI
                                                                                                    .0- .0- .0- .0- .0- .0-
                                                                    0- 0- 0.- 0- 0- C_Il (_TI CM UI CM C)) CM C_fl C_Il
..                - C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_Il C_Il C_fl C_fl C_fl (.11 C_fl C_fl C_TI C_fl C_TI CM C_fl C_Il CM C.rl C_li CM CM CM CM CM C_I) CM C_fl 0-
'-4 co
04 — '-4
'.0     C) .J —
                  .
                  .o      , C' —
                       C' 0- —
                       F--.)
                                      — F,) F-.) (.404 (-4 - .0-. CM CM C_fl 0- 0—
                                      0-. — 0.- — C_fl -c 0-) NJ — .0- C, —
                               C) Ci1 NJ NJ C_'l   C_TI NI C, 0.- .4). -0 - '4 -o
                                                                                                                 -            NJ NJ '-.4 NJ C, C, C,                     -.0-0
                                                                                                                                                                 '-0 — (.4 ri
                                                                                                                                                                                      -c C'
                                                                                                                                                                 F..) C_fl '—4 -0 C' C'
                                                                                                                                                                                         C'                      lI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 •—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I—

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           —3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                •ce-F.     CD
C' C) C)                                                     C'C'C)C'C)C'C'                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rP —
(.1 (.4 (.4 04 04 (.4 04 (.4 (.4 (.4 (.40-4 (.40-1 (.4 C,)                                                                                                                                                     (TI
(.4 - CM C_fl 0.- 0- 0--. 0.- NJ NJ NJ NJ NJ C, C, C, C,C,C,-0-C-0-0,o 04      .0- .0- .4). .0-
                                                                            -o C) C) C' C' C) C' CC'—
C' C' C) C, C' (.4 CM C, C, F..) — _-._J -.0 — F.,) —                       C, C' — F.) - C_fl 0— NJ C, C'                                                                                                           II—
C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C) C' C' C' ? C' C' C' C)C'C) C' C' ? C' C' C'?C'C)??? C'C'C)                                                                                                            -I              C)
C'     C' C'- C,— C'  C' C) C' C' C' C' C' C,                               — — — F.) F-..) F-.) F-..) I,) F-.)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 z
                   — F-.) (.4 - . C'
C) C)
C' C' C) P.. C'
C'
                                     C_Il 0-. NJ NJ C, -c C' —
                               NJ C_TI
        C' C' C, C C, C' C' C' C)
                                             F..) C' C,                —-CC,0-
                                                             C' C' C' C, C' C)
                                                                               -                   F-,)
                                                                                                            F.) 0.1 .0- C_fl 0-
                                                                                                          — '-.0 -.J 0- - (.4 NJ    C,      'C C' — F-,) (.,4 .0- C_fl
                                                                                                                                F..) C) '.0 C, 0-. (1) .0- (.4 F..) C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                 C,)
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -3     C,
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -3
                                                                                                                                           C'   ? C' C' C) C'?                                   -3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
(.4 (. c_TI o-. NJ  C, .0 C' — PS,)
                                    - .0- -.0- .0- .0- .0-
        C' C' C) C' C, C' C' C) C, (.4  .0- C_fl 0- '-—4 C,
                                    C' C' C' C' C, C'
                                                                                              .0- C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl CM J1 C_I) C_fl 0-S.
                                                                                              '0 C' — F.) (.4 - C_fl 0- NJ C,
                                                                                              C'C'C'C'C'C'C,C' C,
                                                                                                                                                          )... 0- 0- 0-0.0-.
                                                                                                                                                   —.0 C) — F.) C.,)   C_fl (fl.
                                                                                                                                                C) C, C' C) C' C' C'C'C'
                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                     C'?C'C'C'?                                                                 C' C) C' C' C,?
- '0. £. 04 (.4 04 040404040404 04040404040404 04040404040404 040404040404
F'.) — C' 'C -0 C, C, C, 0) NJ NJ NJ NJ 0'. 0. 0- 0'- 0-- 0-- C..fl C_fl C_TI C_fl C_fl C_fl CM .0- .0- .0- .0- .0- .4).
C' C' C) F,) C) '-.4 C_fl F.) C' C, (F-. C...) — '0 C, 0- .0- F-.) —
C' C- C, C' C' C'
P.) F-,) F-.) F-,) I-.) F.)
                                      C'C'C'??C)
                                      F-.)   F-.) F-..) F-,) — —
                                                                     '.4 C.— .4). (.4 F.) C' -0 C, 0- C.fl - (.4


C_fl C_fl C_fl - .0- (.4 F-.) — — C' '-0 C, NJ NJ 0- C_fl .0- (.4 F-..) F-.) — C, -0 C, '-.4 NJ
                                                                                                                 ?C'?C'C'C'?       C)?????
                                                                                                                 — — — C) C' C) C) C'C'C'C)C'C)C,C'
                                                                                                                                                           — C) C'
                                                                                                                                                                                                 iz
                                                                                                                                                                                                 ci)
                                                                                                                                                                                                        orn=
C) C) C' C, C' (.4                                                      —
                                      C_fl C, C' F-,) 0-. NJ'0 — F..) .0- 0-- C,                          —0           04 - 0- NJ C, C, 0- CM - (.4
                                                                                                                                        — i.,) 0- C_Il F.)
                                                                                                                                                       0-. NJ C, C'                              -3     —
                                                                                                                                                                                                        -3
                                      C' C' C'? C'? C'C'C'C'C'C'C'
C) C, C' C' C' C'
0- 0-0- 0- 0- 0-                      0— 0- C_fl C_TI C_fl C_fl
                                                                   ?C'?C'?C'? C)C'C'C' C'?
                                             C_fl CM C_fl _fl C_fl .0-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                 C
NJ 0-. C_lI .0- 04 F-,) — C' -0 C, NJ 0.-
C) C) C' C, C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C_fl  C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C,        NJ 0— C_fl - (.4 F.) — C' -0 co —.J 0— C_fl .0-
                                              .4). 0..l l-.) — C' '0                                                                                                                             -3
                                                                       C'C)C'C'C'C'C'         C'C'C'C'C'C'C)C'
(-40.4 (.404 (.4 (-4 040404040404 040404040404040404                                                                              040404040404040404 .4 (.40-1
— F..) F.) (.4 C..) (.4
- — F..) -(. 0—                       (.404 - - 0- -
                        NJ '.0 C' F-.) - C_fl .0- .0- C_fl CM C_fl CM C_fl C_TI 0-
                                              NJ '-.0 — F-,) .0- 0- C, -o —
                                                                                                                              0— 0— 0-. 0- —.4 NJ NJ NJ NJ                  C, C,      C,
                                                                                                                              C.4 C_fl NJ —o — (.4 CM NJ -0                 — (.4 C_fl NI
—0 'O 0 -o C_fl — NJ (.4 -0 C_fl F-,) -.0 0-- (.4 C' '-.4 C_fl F..) C'         NJ
                        4040404 0404040404                                                                                                       4.40.4 0.1             (.1 (.4 (-4
               4044404 .0- .0- .0- .0- .0- -0 — F-.) .0- 0-. C, -0 — 0- 0' 0- F- '-4 NJ NJ
                                                                '                                                                                                           C, C, C, C,
                                                                              4). C_TI C_fl C_Fl C_fl C_fl C_Fl 0'-
F.)     jj P.) Ps.) . O "-4 -c  C' I-.) .0- C_TI '._.I                                                         '-.4
                                                                                                                                                                            —                    rn
0.4 0-4 C..) '-.0 C_TI — NJ 0-1 -o C_fl F-.) —0 0- (.4 C' —.4 C_fl F'..) C' C, '—.4 0.4 C_TI NJ -0 — C..l C_fl —.4
                                                                                    C_fl . 0-1 F-.) — C) C' C'                                                          C)C'——NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                 (.1 C_Il 0'-
C)C'C)c.C'C)C'? C' C' ?                                                C'     C' C) C) C' C' C) C'C' C, C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C' C) C' C' C,
C_ri C_fl C_fl UI CM CM C_fl C_fl TI M C_Il C_fl C_fl C_fl C_TI C_Ti C_TI C_fl C_fl (-.TI C_fl                                r1 CM CM C_fl CM CM
c_fl C_fl C_fl c_ri C_ri C_ri C_Il C_TI C_fl C_fl .4).. .0- .0-                                                                                                 C_fl    C..fl CM C_fl C_fl CM
NJ NJ NJ NJ C_fl - (.4 —                        C'C'-0C,-,j                                                                   .0- 0- .0- 0- .0- .0-             .0- .0- CM C_fl (ri C.fl
                                                                              NJ 0-- 0— 0- C_fl C_fl C_fl C_fl                CM 0- 0-. 0- '—4 '-J C, C,                    C' C, — I'.)
                                                040404040404                                                                                                            .0- .0- .0- .0- .0-
—      .0- C_fl C_fl 0— 3— 0--                  NJ NJ—C, ) co
cc--   F-,) — C_TI C) ..0- —0                   (.4 Nj                  '--.4 C' .0- C, F-.) C_fl
                                                                                                      F-.) 04 (.4 (-4 .0- .0- .0- _rl C_TI C_fl 0— 0-
                                                                                                  (.4 0-      (.4 NJ C' .0- C, — (r. C,
                                                F.) .0- .0- .0- 04 F-,) — -o 0- (.4 C. NJ (.4 C) C.- C
                                                             C_fl
'OF-,) -.00.3 '.0 . C, C'                                                                                 F-.) NJ (.4-0 .4). C' 0-. — .4 F.) .4).
                                                                                                                                                  0--
                                                                               Table    2
                                                                          Simulation #2
                                                                (t       =   .549, te       =    .25)
                                                                     p
        DEBT                    EQUITY                                                                  DEBT                    EQUITY
 HH     INST    TOTAL    HH     INST    TOTAL     RB     RE          U        R                 HU   INST      TOTAL    HH      INST    TOTAL    RB      RE       U        R
                1.000   0.000   0.000   0.000   4.750   0.000   0.260 6.000                 0.410 0.250 0.660          0.340    0.000 0.340     3.873 3.872      0.266   4.659
0.750   0.250
        0.250   0.990   0.010   0.000   0.010   4.73?   3.612   0.260 5.980                 0.409 0.241 0.650          0.341    0.009 0.350     3.851 3.851      0.265   4.622
0.740
0.730   0.250   0.980   0.020   0.000   0.020   4.724   3.616   0.260 5.958                 0.408 0.232 0.640          0.:342   0.018   0.360   3.831 3.831      0.264   4.58?
0.720   0.250   0.970   0.030   0.000   0.030   4.710   3.620   0.260 5.93?                 0.407 0.223 0.630          0.343    0.027   0.370   3.810 3.810      0.263   4.551
0.710   0.250   0.960   0.040   0.000   0.040   4.696   3.625   0.260 5.914                 0.406 0.214 0.620          0.344    0.036   0.380   3.790 3.790      0.262   4.516
                0.950   0.050   0.000   0.050   4.682   3.629   0.260 5.891                 0.405 0.205 0.610          0.345    0.045   0.390   3.770 3.770      0.262   4.480
0.700   0.250
        0.250   0.940   0.060   0.000   0.060   4.667   3.634   0.260 5.868                 0.403 0.197 0.600          0.347    0.053   0.400   3.750 3.750      0.261   4.444
0.690
0.680   0.250   0.930   0.070   0.000   0.070   4.651   3.638   0.260 5.843                 0.402 0.188 0.590          0.348    0.062   0.410   3.730 3.730      0.261   4.409
0.670   0.250   0.920   0.080   0.000   0.080   4.635   3.643   0.260 5.818                 0.401 0.179 0.580          0.349    0.071   0.420   3.711   3.711    0.260   4.373
0.660   0.250   0.910   0.090   0.000   0.090   4.618   3.648   0.260 5.792                 0.399 0.171 0.570          0.351    0.079   0.430   3.692   3.692    0.260   4.33?
0.650   0.250   0.900   0.100   0.000   0.100   4.601   3.654   0.260 5.765                 0.398 0.162 0.560          0.352    0.088   0.440   3.673   3.673    0.2S9   4.302
0.640   0.250   0.890   0.110   0.000   0.110   4.583   3.659   0.260 5.73?                 0.397 0.153 0.550          0.353    0.097   0.450   3.654   3.654    0.259   4.266
0.630   0.250   0.880   0.120   0.000   0.120   4.565   3.665   0.260 5.708                 0.395 0.145 0.540          0.355    0.105   0.460   3.635   3.635    0.259   4.230
0.620   0.250   0.870   0.130   0.000   0.130   4.546   3.671   0.260 5.678                 0.394 0.136 0.530          0.356    0.114   0.470   3.617   3.61?    0.259   4.193
0.610   0.250   0.860   0.140   0.000   0.140   4.526   3.677   0.260 5.647                 0.392 0.128 0.520          0.358    0.122   0.480   3.598   3.598    0.259   4.15?
                0.850   0.150   0.000   0.150   4.505   3.683   0.260 5.614                 0.390 0.120 0.510          0.360    0.130   0.490   3.580   3.580    0.259   4.120
0.600   0.250
        0.250   0.840   0.160   0.000   0.160   4.483   3.690   0.260 5.581                 0.389 0.111 0.500          0.361    0.139   0.500   3.562   3.562    0.259   4.083
0.590
0.580   0.250   0.830   0.170   0.000   0.170   4.461   3.696   0.260 5.546                 0.387 0.103 0.490          0.363    0.147   0.510   3.545   3.545    0.259   4.046
0.570   0.250   0.820   0.180   0.000   0.180   4.4383.703      0.260 5.510                 0.385 0.095 0.480          0.385    0.1S5   0.520   3.527   3.527    0.2S9   4.009
0.560   0.250   0.810   0.190   0.000   0.190   4.413 3.711     0.261 5.473                 0.383 0.087 0.470          0.367    0.163   0.530   3.510   3.510    0.260   3.971
                                0.000   0.200   4.388 3.718     0.261 5.434                 0.381 0.079 0.460          0.369    0.171   0.540   3.493   3.493    0.260   3.932
0.550   0.250   0.800   0.200
                        0.210   0.000   0.210   4.362 3.726     0.261 5.394                 0.379 0.071 0.450          0.371    0.179   0.550   3.476   3.476    0.261   3.893
0.540   0.250   0.790
        0.250   0.780   0.220   0.000   0.220   4.334 3.735     0.261        5.351          0.377 0.063 0.440          0.373    0.187   0.560   3.459   3.459    0.261   3.854
0.530
0.520   0.250   0.770   0.230   0.000   0.230   4.305 3.743     0.261        5.307          0.375 0.055 0.430          0.375    0.195   0.570   3.442   3.442    0.282   3.814
                                                4.275 3.752     0.261        5.261          0.373 0.04? 0.420          0.377    0.203   0.580   3.425   3.425    0.263   3.774
0.510   0.250   0.760   0.240   0.000   0.240
                                0.000   0.250   4.243 3.762     0.262        5.213          0.371 0.039 0.410          0.379    0.211   0.590   3.409   3.409    0.264   3.732
0.500   0.250   0.750   0.250
0.490   0.250   0.740   0.260   0.000   0.260   4.210 3.772     0.262        5.16:3         0.369 0.031 0.400          0.381    0.219   0.600   3.393   :3.393   0.265   3,690
                0.730   0.270   0.000   0.270   4.175 :3.782    0.262        5.110          0.366 0.024 0.390          0.384    0.226   0.610   3.37?   3.377    0.266   3.648
0.480   0.250
                0.720   0.280   0.000   0.280   4.139 3.793     0.263        5.O5           0.364 0.016 0.380          0.386    0.234   0.620   3.361   3.361    0.26?   3.604
0.470   0.250
0.460   0.250   0.710   0.290   0.000   0.290   4.100 3.805     0.263        4.997          0.361 0.009 0.370          0.389    0.241   0.630   3.345   3.345    0.269   3.559
0.450   0.250   0.700   0.300   0.000   0.300   4.060 3.817     0.263        4.93?          0.358 0.002 0.360          0.392    0.248   0.640   3.329   3.329    0.270   3.513
0.440   0.250   0.690   0.310   0.000   0.310   4.017 3.829     0.264        4.873          0.350 0.000 0.350          0.400    0.250   0.650   3.281   3.325    0.270   3.422
0.430   0.250   0.680   0.320   0.000   0,320   3.971 3.843     0.264        4.805          0.340 0.000 0.340          0.410    0.250   0.660   3.215   3.324    0.270   3.30
0.420   0.250   0.670   0.330   0.000   0.330   3.924 3.85?     0.265        4.734          0.330 0.000 0.330          0.420    0.250   0.670   3.145   3.324    0.270   3.183
