                 NBER WORNG PAPER SERIES




            A CAPITAL MARKE'1' IN AN EQUILIBRIUM
                   BUSINESS CYCLE MODEL


                      Robert J. Barro


                   Working Paper No. 326




            NATIONkL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138
                         March 19T9




This research is being supported by the National Science
Foundation. I have benefited fror coerits by Moses
Abraovitz, Bob Hall, Zvi Hercovitz, Robert King, and Leo
Leiderman. The research reported here is part of the
NBERtS research program in economic fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of onomic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper 326
                                                                   March 1979



                                 Summary


         A CAPITAL MARKET IN AN EQUILIBRIUM BUSINESS CYCLE MODEL

                              Robert J. Barro




     Previous equilibrium "business cycle" models are extended by the

incorporation of an economy-wide capital market. One aspect of this ex-

tension is that the relative price that appears in commodity supply and

demand functions becomes an anticipated real rate of return on earning

assets, rather than a ratio of actual to expected prices. From the stand-

point of expectation formation, the key aspect of the extended model is that

observation of the economy-wide nominal interest rate conveys current global

information to individuals.

    With respect to the effect of money supply shocks on output, the model

yields results that are similar to those generated in simpler models. A

new result concerns the behavior of the anticipated real rate of return on

earning assets. Because this variable is the pertinent relative price for

commodity supply and demand decisions, it turns out to be unambiguous that

positive money surprises raise the anticipated real rate of return. In fact,

this response provides the essential channel in this equilibrium model by

which a money shock can raise the supply of commodities and thereby increase

output. However, it is possible through a sort of "liquidity" effect that

positive money surprises can depress the economy-wide nominal interest rate.

     Economics Department, University of Rochester
     Rochester, New York 14627   716-275-2669.
                                                                           March 1978
                                                                Revised February 1979



       This paper extends previous equilibrium "business cycle" models of

Lucas (1973, 1975) and myself (1976) by incorporating an economy-wide capital

market. One aspect of this extension is that the relative price that appears

in the supply and demand functions in local commodity markets becomes an

anticipated real rate of return on earning assets, rather than a ratio of

actual to expected prices. The analysis brings in as a central feature a

portfolio balance schedule in the form of an aggregate money demand function.

The   distinction between the nominal and   real rates of return is an important

element in the model.

       Front the standpoint of expectation formation, the key aspect of the

extended model is that observation of the economy-wide nominal rate of return

conveys current global information to individuals. In this respect the present

analysis is distinguished from Lucas's (1975) model, which considered only local

(internal) finance. However, my analysis does not deal with the dynamics of

capital accumulation,      as considered by Lucas, and   does not   incorporate any
other   elements, such    as inventory holdings, multi-period lags in the acquisition

of    information, or the adjustment costs for changing employment that were treated
by Sargent (1977), that could produce persisting effects of monetary and         other

disturbances.
        In   order to retain the real effects of monetary surprises in the model, it

is necessary that the observation of the current nominal rate of return, together

with an observation of a current local commodity price, not convey full informa-

tion about contemporaneous disturbances. Limitation of current information is

achieved in the present framwork by introducing a contemporaneously unobserved

disturbance to the aggregate money demand function, along with an aggregate

money supply shock and an array of disturbances to local excess commodity

demands. Aggregate shocks to the commodity market (to the extent that they

were not directly and immediately observable) could serve a similar purpose.
                                         —2—


     With respect to the effect of money supply shocks on output, the model

yields results that are similar to those generated in earlier models. Notably,

incomplete current information about the nature of underlying economic disturbances

can produce a positive relation between money shocks and the level of output.

Further, the coefficient that connects money disturbances to output responses

tends to be inversely related to the variance of the money shocks.

     A new result concerns the behavior of the anticipated real rate of return

on earning assets. Because this variable is the pertinent relative price for

commodity supply and demand decisions, it turns out to be unambiguous that

positive money surprises raise the anticipated real rate of return. In fact,

this response provides the essential channel in this equilibrium model by

which a money shock can raise the supply of commodities and thereby increase

output. However, it is possible through a sort of t'liquidity" effect that

positive money surprises can depress the economy-wide nominal interest rate.

Given the increase in the real interest rate, this liquidity effect must

involve a decrease in the anticipated rate of inflation. The downward movement

of the nominal interest rate is less likely to obtain if money shocks exhibit

positive serial correlation because the perceived part of money movements would

then have a direct positive impact on anticipated inflation.

     Since the relative price variable in the commodity supply and demand

functions is a real rate of return on earning assets, rather than a ratio of

actual to expected prices, there is a less clear connection than in previous

models between money shocks and the current price level. Although the typical

pattern would still be a positive, but less than one-to-one, short-run response

of prices to money shocks, it   is   now possible that the required positive move-

ment of the anticipated real rate of return would reflect art increase in the

nominal interest rate rather than (or as a partial substitute for) a rise in
                                             —3—



the   ratio of current to expected future prices. Abstracting from effects of

serial correlation in the money supply process, the model suggests that a

strong positive response of the current price level to money shocks would

be associated with a strong negative response of the nominal interest rate

and vice versa.

        The first section sets up the model and presents the basic equilibrium

conditions. The analysis proceeds, as in my (1976) paper, by postulating

"plausible" forms for the supply and demand functions, rather than by presenting

and solving an explicit underlying maximization problem. There is, however,

an extended discussion of the specification of the relative price and wealth

variables in the commodity supply and demand functions. The second section

solves the model under conditions of full current information. Although these

results involve an independence of the "real" variables from monetary disturbances

(including the shock to the aggregate money demand function), they provide a

useful frame of reference for the subsequent analysis. The third section

solves the model under a specification of incomplete current information,

where individuals are limited in their current knowledge of the economy to

observations of the economy-wide nominal interest rate and a single local

commodity price. A central aspect of the solution involves inferences from

the observed current nominal interest rate and local price level to the expected

value    of the contemporaneously-unobserved money shock. The final part of this
section provides some interpretations of the principal analytical results.

I. Setup of the       Model

        In   the current period each individual transacts in two markets: a local
commodity market indexed by z, and      an   economy-wide capital or loanable-funds
market       that deals in homogeneous, riskless, one-period loans. The number of
                                           -4-.




commodity markets and the number of individuals are assumed constant, so that

separate notation is not used below to distinguish aggregate from per capita

quantities. The logarithm of the current price on the local commodity market

is designated by P(z) and the nominal, one-period rate of return on the capital

market is denoted by Rt. Aside from holding capital market claims, individuals

can hold fiat money, which is a liability of the 'government." Changes in the

aggregate quantity of money occur through positive or negative transfers from

the government to individuals. The size of the transfer varies randomly across

individuals and is independent of an individual's own holdings of cash. The

analysis does not deal with any deadweight losses associated with governmental

transfer/tax programs. The logarithm of the aggregate nominal quantity of

money, denoted by M, is determined from



     (1)    Mt        Mt_i +   p+


where p    is   the constant long-run growth rate of money and m indicates the

extent to which the current money growth rate departs from p.          I   assume that

   is generated in accordance with the first-order stochastic process,



                  =            +
     (2)
                      pin1

where p -O,. p < 1, and             the current innovation to money growth, is

normally, independently distributed with zero mean and variance a. In parts

of the subsequent analysis the values of Mt and            are currently unobservable,

but the lagged values, Mt_i and ni1,        are   assumed throughout to be contained

in current individual information sets.
                                              —5—


        Each individual's portfolio allocation problem can        be   viewed as involving

a tradeoff between the rate-of-return differential for holding capital market

claims     rather than money, R, and    the   marginal transactions benefits from
holding cash) Overall portfolio balance entails equality between the total
amount of     cash outstanding and   the   aggregate demand for money, which I assume
can   be   described in the semi-log form,


        (3)


where the constant, which would include the fixed number of individuals, has

been normalized to zero. In equation (3) Mt is again in logarithmic terms,

Pt is the (unweighted) average across markets of the local (log of) commodity

prices, y > 0 measures the interest rate sensitivity of real money demand,

is the (unweighted) average      across markets     of the local (log of) commodity

outputs, and       >   0 is the elasticity of "per capita" real balances demanded

with respect to "per capita output." The shock to aggregate money demand,              '
is   assumed to be independently, normally distributed with zero mean and

variance .        The realized value of        is currently unobservable in some of

the subsequent analysis.

       The postulated commodity supply and demand functions for market z involve

the specification of a relative price term and a wealth variable.



Speficiation of the Relative Price Variable

       The relative price term compares current sale (purchase) opportunities

in market z with those anticipated for next period in a randomly-selected

market. For example, a sale this period is evaluated at the (log of) current

price   P(z) plus the nominal rate of return from        date   t to t+l, Rt, to obtain

a comparison with the expected (log of) price next period, EP+i. (The
                                         -6-
                                                       is conditioned on information
subscript   z indicates that the expectation of

available currently in market z.) The relative price term is then

r(z) P(z)_EP+1+R__that is, the anticipated one-period real rate of
return from the perspective of market z.       it is this expression that would be

considered in contemplating a shift of labor services, commodity purchases, etc.

from date t to date t+l, assuming that any funds (plus or minus) held over time

earn nominal interest at rate R. By comparison, the earlier analysis in

Lucas (1973) and Barro (1976) amounts to treating         =   0, which is appropriate
in a model where the only store of value is money that bears a zero nominal rate

of return. The logarithm of local commodity supply, y(z), is assumed to be

positively related to r(z), while the log of local demand, y(z), is negatively

related. The impact on demand amounts to the usual positive substitution effect

on saving of the anticipated real rate of return. The nature of the income

effect associated with a change in r(z) is discussed in the sectionbelow that

deals with the specification of a wealth variable.

     In   the present model it   turns out that expected future values of r are

constant--essentially,   departures of r(z) from the    unormalv real rate of return

represent   a temporary situation that cannot be predicted to arise in one
direction   or the other for future periods. Therefore, it is only the current
value of the perceived real rate of return that will appear in the        commodity

demand and supply   functions.
     The present treatment of the anticipated real rate of return,

considers only the supply and demand effects associated with the conditional

 first moment of         Generally, higher moments of the conditional distribution

 of the future price level would also be relevant. For example, suppose that

 the pertinent relative price variable for determining commodity demand and
             A
 supply were E[k(z)e kt+l )], where a caret denotes the level of a
 variable rather than its logarithm, and z' specifies the randomly-selected
                                           -7—



market visited next period. Assuming +1(z') to be log-normally distributed,
the log of this expected relative price variable is given by2



                     -        +
                                  12
        P(z) +


where          is the average across the markets of P+1(z') and a2 is the conditional

variance of P+i(z'). This expression differs from the r(z) variable specified

above by the inclusion of the variance term, a2. As long as a2 is constant,

the use of this expression rather than rt(z) would modify the subsequent analysis

only by adding effects of once-and-for-all shifts in a2 on the mean (natural)

values of output and the real rate of return. It would also be necessary to

relate a2 to the underlying parameters of the model, including the variances of

the exogenous disturbance terms. Additional variance effects on the supply and

demand functions would, of course, arise in a serious analysis of individual

choice under uncertainty.



Specification of the Money/Wealth Variable

        Since the model does not encompass changes in physical or human capital,

the specified wealth variable considers only movements in the money stock.3

The net money/wealth variable that is pertinent to commodity demand and supply

involves four elements: current money stocks, expected future monetary transfers

from the      government, current money demand, and   expected future money demand.

          (z) denote the quantity of nominal money held at the start of the
        Let

period (before any market trading occurs, but after the transfers from the
government) by the aggregate of individuals located currently in market z.
Individuals     anticipate for future periods an infusion of cash that will accrue

as transfer payments from the government. The size of the transfer varies

randomly      across individuals--in particular, the amount   is   independent of
                                                   -8—


individual money holdings or of current or future market location. The expected

individual nominal transfer for period ti is therefore equal, aside from a

constant of proportionality, to the expected change in total money outstanding

for the period, E(A+1 -                         where    i ?.. 1.

    Denote the sequence of anticipated future one-period nominal interest rates

                            I treat these future yields as though they were known with
as Rtl, R+2
certainty, although this assumption is not crucial for the results obtained

below.4 The discount factor applicable to date t+i is then given by



                              1
     vi =
            (l+R)(lI.Rt+1). ..(l+Rt+i)

The nominal present value of current money holdings plus expected future transfers

is equal to



              +                   -
                  1=1


where constants of proportionality have been omitted.

     Commodity demand and             supply   will be influenced by this wealth variable

net of the expected portion of wealth "expended" on current and                    future   demands

for cash. If the nominal demand for money in period t÷i by individuals who

are located at date t in market z is                        (z),, then the nominal interest earnings
                                                        1

in period t+i+l for these individuals are reduced by R+M÷(z) relative to

a situation where zero cash is held. The expected nominal present value of

these interest payments foregone is given by

       Ad
     RM(z)
     (l+R)
                  +     v.
                      i=l
                               R .EM .(z).
                            i+l t+i z t+i
                                                    -9-


Therefore, the net monetary wealth variable for current participants of

market z can be written as



            +                                  -   R(:)      -




Using the condition, v = C1+Rt+)v±+i, the second term can be modified to
yield the equivalent net wealth expression,

                                                                     Ad
                                                                 RM(z)                d
            -                      +                         -            -
                (l+Rt)Ezt

   Suppose now that individuals are identical in the sense that their expected

nominal demands for cash in period t+i, EM.(z), where i > 1, is equal, aside

from a constant of proportionality, to the expected total nominal demand for

the period, E          ..   The two summations terms above can then be written as
                 zt+i.


         v.  R .E
          i+l t+i. z     t+i
                                   dt+i
    =1


which equals zero since individuals appropriately anticipate portfolio balance
to obtain in every (future) period. The simplified net wealth expression can

then be written in two equivalent forms:



   (4)
                               -
                                       (l+R)       Z)_Ezt1
                                                             =                +
                                                                                  (l+R)tt'
                                                                 +
                                                                     (l+Rt)1t_(fl.•
   The first form of the net wealth expression in equation (4) indicates that

a net monetary wealth effect arises in market z only when the money held in

this market at the start of the period, (z), or the local demand for money,
                                      -10-


      differs from the perceived value of the aggregate money stock,

Equal movements in (z), Mt(z) and     Et     yield no net effect because the

interest foregone associated with current and expected future money demand

exactly offsets the present value of current cash plus expected future

transfers. For a given value of          the net wealth position is raised by

an increase in t(z)   and lowered   by an increase in M(z) (because of the

interest foregone, RtMt(z), on this period's relatively high cash holdings).

     The second form of the net wealth expression in equation (4) is convenient

because it separates out the last two terms, which add to zero in summations

across the markets. The middle term depends on 1(z) -          which expresses

the relative cash position of participants of market z at the start     of   the

period.5 Since this term adds to zero in summations across the markets, it

may represent a shift to relative commodity demand and supply, but it would

not (in a linear model) represent an aggregate shift. Since relative commodity

demand and supply disturbances to market z are included separately below, it

is satisfactory to omit further consideration of this term in the construction

of the money/wealth variable.

     The last part of the net wealth expression in equation (4) depends on

      -
          l(z).6   Since t(z) represents cash held at the start of the period

by participants of market z, portfolio balance does not require this term to

equal zero. That is, market z could turn out to be a net importer or exporter

of cash during period t. However, overall portfolio balance for the current

period does require this term to add to zero (in equilibrium) in summations

across the markets. As in the case above, this term can be viewed as a

component of the relative commodity demand and supply terms that are introduced

separately. Therefore, this term may also be neglected in the construction of

the money/wealth variable.
                                             —11—


        The key element in the money/wealth variable is the first term on the

right side of equation (4), which involves the expression,            -           Note

that, since                in   each market or on average over z, this term can

represent an aggregate net wealth effect that does not vanish in summations

across the markets.

        Commodity   demand and supply will depend on the "real value" of the term,
    -
         Et)/(l+R).       If the real value were defined as the ratio of this nominal

magnitude to the current local price level (z), then a change in rt(z) would--

with this "real wealth" concept held fixed--involve an important income effect.

Since the real rate of return expected at date t for date t+l onwards turns out

to be constant in the present model, the natural definition of real wealth is

in terms of date t+l commodity values. With this wealth concept held fixed,

a change in r(z) has an income effect that involves only the one-period

opportunity for a high (or low) anticipated real rate of return. Since this

income effect can reasonably be neglected in a context where decisions are based

on "permanent income" over a long horizon, it is then satisfactory to assume

that the substitution effects of r(z), as discussed above, are, in fact, the

dominant responses     to a change in the current anticipated real rate of return.
The expected real value for date t+l of the money/wealth variable, abstracting

from the two terms on the right side of equation (4) that cancel in summations

across the markets, is




        (5) (l+)tzt t z't+l =                       tztzt÷l
        In order to remain within the setting of a linear model, it is necessary

to make some approximations to the form of the money/wealth variable. Basically,
                                          —12—


these approximations amount to neglecting some effects of higher moments of

the distribution of money growth--that is, errors that are of the same order of

magnitude as those committed above when the future price variance was neglected

as a component of rt(z). From equation (1), assuming            << 1, it is assumed
that




              :



where mt is the non-systematic part of the money growth rate. With

observable at date t, EA is similarly approximated by j(l+1.x)(l+Emt),

which neglects an effect of a term that depends on the conditional variance of

m. The money/wealth variable can        then   be approximated by



        (6)




       The principal implication of this analysis is that the net money/wealth

variable in expression (6) depends on discrepancies between actual and currently

perceived money growth, ni -             The net money/wealth variable equals zero

when rn =            independently of the anticipated rate of growth of money or

prices. It should be noted from the forms of expressions (4)        and (5) that   this

general       type of result does not hinge on the approximations made above. Further,
this conclusion does not depend on the form of the money demand function--which
did    not enter the analysis--or on the specification of individual information

sets, other than their inclusion of the last period's money stock.

       Two aspects of the derivation of the net money/wealth variable in the

form of equation (6) should be stressed. First, the analysis involves the

capitalization of transfers and interest-foregone over an infinite horizon.7
                                           -13-
In this context    it   is not surprising that an increase in current real balances
that is    accompanied by an equal, permanent increase in the demand   for real
balances   would not generate a net wealth effect that would influence commodity

demand and supply. On the other hand, in a finite horizon setting the

liquidation value of terminal real balances would produce a positive net

wealth effect when actual and desired real cash rose by the same amounts. This

point is analogous to the issue of whether interest-bearing government bonds

constitute net wealth. The finiteness of life can generate a net wealth effect

for shifts between public debt and taxes because the tax liabilities on future

generations are not fully counted. Similarly, a net wealth effect front the

level of real money balances would result if the interest-foregone associated

with the demand for money (net of government transfers) by future generations

were not considered. As in the interest-bearing public debt case discussed in

Barro (1974), the presence of operative intergenerational transfers can make

finite-lived individuals act as though they were infinitely-lived with respect

to calculations of effective wealth. With a tie to subsequent generations and

the knowledge that descendants will also have a demand for money (as well as a

claim to future government transfers), an increase in actual and permanently

desired real cash balances would not exert a direct wealth effect on commodity

demand and supply. In this sense the derivation of the net money/wealth term

in the form of equation (6) can apply even when the finiteness of life is

brought into the model.

     Finally, the major limitation of the present analysis is its failure to

incorporate the real role of money as an economizer of transaction costs, etc.--

that is, to bring in the real factors that underlie the demand for money.

Although these considerations would not seem to invalidate the specification

of the net wealth term in expression (6), some other effects might be missed.
                                                        -14-


For example, an increase in the average inflation rate that reduces the average

holdings of real cash and correspondingly raises average transaction costs

incurred could also influence the work-leisure decision, the demands for

productive factors, etc. These effects would depend on cross-substitutions

between the demand and supply of commodities and the demand for money.

Sidrauski's (1967) deterministic model, in which real balances provide

utility, where labor supply is exogenous, and where utility is additive over

time with a constant utility rate of discount, is an example of a setting where

these effectsdo not arise in the steady state.



Specification of Commodity Supply and Demand Functions

     Formally, the local commodity supply and demand functions are written

as the semi-log expressions,



          $              S                                          S
     (7) y4(z)      =   k    (z) +   c5 r.(z)
                                         L
                                                — 3 (m4.—E in) +
                                                    5  i.
                                                                    c (z),



      (8)   y(z) = kd(z)        -
                                     dr(z)      +
                                                    3d(m_EZm)
                                                                +



where y denotes the log of the quantity of commodities (and services), the

k-terms--assumed to be invariant over time--represent any systematic supply

and demand forces that are not captured by the other terms, r(z)

is the relative price term discussed above, s"d >0 are relative price

elasticites,                  >0 are wealth elasticities, and the t(z)'s represent

local shocks to commodity supply and demand. The realized values of these

shocks are not currently observable in some of the subsequent analysis.

Aggregate real shocks could be added to equations (7)                   and   (8), as in Barro

 (1976, pp. 4,5),       without      altering the nature of the main analysis. The
                                            -15—


present model does not deal with capital accumulation, inventory changes,

population growth, technological change, etc., which could be described by

exogenous or endogenous movements over time in the k-terms of equations (7)

and (8). Note that the ad_term in equation (8) corresponds to the usual

inverse effect on commodity demand (investment and/or consumption) of the

anticipated real rate of return. The a5-term in equation (8) corresponds to

the type of relative price effect on supply (of labor services, etc.) that

was stressed in Lucas and Rapping (1969). As seems appropriate, this relative

price is measured by an anticipated real rate of return--that is, in a manner

that   is symmetric to the specification of commodity demand.8
       In order to preserve the linearity of the model (so as to be able to
calculate expectations), I have entered the money/wealth variable from       expression

(6) as a linear term in (m_Em). Essentially, the dependence of the
B-coefficients attached to this variable in equations (7) and (8) on the level
of   normal real balances has been lost in this restricted specification. The

Bd_term in equation (8) expresses the usual positive wealth effect on demand.

The B -term in equation (7) can be viewed as a negative wealth effect on the
       5

supply of services--that is, a positive wealth effect on leisure. The general

analysis would not be altered- -although some ambiguities would be resolved--if

the wealth effect on the supply side were omitted.

       It is convenient to use the definitions,

       a      +
                  ad,
       S      +

       k = k(z)       ki(z)_k5(z),9
                  d      —   s




where c(z) is assumed to be normally, independently distributed with zero mean

and variance c.         The values of the ct(z)'s are assumed to net to zero in

summations   across the markets)0
                                         -16-


Market-Clearing Conditions

     The local commodity price, (z)__or, equivalently, the anticipated real

rate of return from the perspective of market z, r(z)__must be such as to

satisfy the local market-clearing condition, y(z) =     y(z).   This equilibrium

condition follows from the constraint that commodities not travel from one

local market to another during the current period. However, the existence of

a global capital market means that a particular market z can assume a net

export (import) position in cash that corresponds to the opposite net position

in interest-bearing assets. If relative shocks to money supply and demand in

market z are neglected (or viewed as part of the E(z) terms, as in the present

analysis), the net cash and interest-bearing asset positions of market z will

depend, from equation (3), on the relative values of local commodity price and

output, which will turn out to depend on the realized values of the local
                         d           s
commodity market shocks, c(z) and

     Using equations (7) and (8), the local commodity market-clearing condition

requires



     (9) r(z) =   (l/ct)[k   +
                                 (m_Em)   +
                                              Et(Zfl,

which implies the expression for local (log of) output,



     (10) y(z) = (ri5/    [kd(+(z)]
                   +
                         d'd
                                   (m_Em).

It follows that economy-wide average values, for which the (z) terms vanish,

are given by
                                                -17-


      (11) r =   (1/)[k   +
                                  8(mt_Exn)],


and



                        d                s +     s8dd8s)
      (12) y = (5/cz)k      .4.

                                                           (m_Em),

where Em is the economy-wide average value of                   It is convenient to

define



                   +



which is the level of       that corresponds to        =
                                                           Em    in equation (12).

      It is useful to note that equations (9) - (12) have been derived without

regard to the form of the demand function for money, the form of the process

for m1, or any specification of current information sets other than their

inclusion of Mt1. Equations (9) - (12) are not final solutions for anticipated

real rates of return and outputs because they contain the endogenous expectation,

Em. However, several results are already apparent:

      1) r(z) and y(z) will depend only on "real" factors--that is, the k-

and £-terms in the present setup- -unless money growth          differs   from its perceived

                       Of course, this property depends on the form of the net
value, Tat   EzmtU
money/wealth term, as given in expression (6).

      2) The anticipated real rate of return is positively related to unperceived

money shocks. Typical Keynesian analysis under fixed wages and/or prices argues

that (unperceived?) monetary expansion has a depressing, "liquidity" effect on

the (nominal and real) rate of return,12 which leads to an expansion of aggregate

demand. Since this scenario leaves unexplained the motivation for increased
                                        -18-


supply, it is necessary to view output determination in this context as involving

an initial excess supply/quantity rationing situation in which production and

sales and/or employment are willingly raised without additional price incentives

in response to increases in aggregate demand. In the present equilibrium context

the initial monetary expansion produces an excess demand for commodities that

must be closed by an increase in the anticipated real rate of return.

     3) Output can be positively related to unperceived monetary      expansion.
Demand is directly stimulated (in accordance with the coefficient         by the

monetary movement, and supply is raised (in accordance with the coefficient

    by the increase in the anticipated real rate of return. However, because

of the offsetting wealth and relative price effects, as represented by the

coefficients B3 and d' the sign of the output response is generally ambiguous.

The net effect depends on the same combination of elasticities, sBddBs that

appeared in my earlier model that omitted a capital market (1976, p. 11). If

the dominant influences are the wealth effect on demand (Bd) and the relative

price effect on supply (c15)--in   particular,   if the wealth effect on supply B5

is minor--then unperceived monetary expansion will have a positive output

effect.

     The full solution of the model involves also the determination of R and

P(z). Defining the combination of supply and demand parameters,



     H sBd -


the nominal rate of return can be written from equation (3), with         substituted

from equation (12) and Mt from equation (1), as



     (13) Rt =   (1/y){Mti++mt_Pt_t_[y*+(H/cL)(mt_Ezmt)]},
                                                          -19-


where y is defined below equation (12). The solution for P(z) can be written

by using the condition P(z)               rt(z). +                   - R,   where rt(z) is determined

from equation (9) and Rt from equation (13), as



                               +                 +               +
        (14) P()                   (m_Em)            J_ct(z)

                             + iMt   l+.j+mt_pt_c,t_5[y*4.!(rnt_Emt)] •




Note that EP+1 and Em are expectational variables contained on the right

side of equation (14).

       The solution of the model hinges on the structure of current local information.

I assume       throughout that information on               all lagged variables, including Mtl and

          is available during period t.               I    work out first the case of full current
information--which           includes direct observations or sufficient indirect informa-

tion   to infer the values of the three current shocks, m,                                  (z) --and second
the    case where current information is limited to that contained in the observation
of the economy-wide nominal interest rate Rt and a single local commodity price
          13                                        .
Pt (z).
                The background of the full current information case is useful in
discerning the monetary effects on output, the anticipated real rate of return,
etc., that emerge under conditions of incomplete current information.


II.    Solution     of   the   Model Under Full Current Information
     Since Em = m obtains under complete current information, the solutions
for r(z) and yt(z) follow immediately from equations (9) and (10). Using

asterisks to denote the full current information case, the results are


        (15) r(z) = (l/cL)[k +

                 y(z)    =
                             (ct5/c&)kd(z)
                                             +
                                                 c(zfl + (d1)[k5(z)             +
                                                                                    (zfl.
                                            -20-


Therefore, in terms of economy-wide average values, the results are



       (16) r = k/ct,
                =
                    (ct5/cL)kCI
                                  +
                                      d     y*



       Given the availability of full current information, the average across

markets   of the anticipated real rate of return corresponds to its ??naturalI
value, k/ct, and    is   independent of the quantity of money, Mt, the current money
shock, ni (or ne), the aggregate money demand shock,or the long-run money
growth rate, i. The absence of anticipated inflation-type effects on real rates
of   return and output    depends on the form of the net money/wealth term in
expression   (6). The average anticipated real rate of return would be affected

positively by any aggregate real disturbances that affected excess commodity

demand. The local anticipated real rate of return, r(z). is positively related

to the local excess commodity demand shock, (z).

       As with the anticipated real rate of return, the level of output under

conditions of full current information is independent of M, m,           or l4
The (geometric) average of outputs across the markets is fixed at its Pnatural?v

value, y*     (ct/ct)kd +
                              (ctd/ct)k5.
       As a prelude to the incomplete current information case, it is useful to

apply a solution procedure for P(z) and Rt under- full current information that

is more formal than would be necessary for this case alone. The method is the

one of undetermined coefficients that has been applied before in models that

omitted a global capital market in Lucas (1973, 1975) and Barro (1976).

Specifically, given the form of the price solution in equation (l4)--which

involves the expectations, EP+1 and Em__and given that m is generated

from the first-order process that is shown in equation (2), it is apparent
                                            -21—


for the full current information case that the present "state of the economyt'

for a local commodity market would be fully described by a specification of

values for the variables,                                 I limit attention in the present

analysis to solutions that are determined as a stationary function of this

state vector--that is, non-stationary price solutions are not considered.

     In the present linear model, the local price solution will end up as a

linear function of the state variables--that is,



        (17) P(z) = it0 +           + 1t2m + 3t       +




where   the it's are a set of yet-to-be-determined coefficients. The (geometric)

average price across the markets is determined by averaging the c(z)'s to zero

in equation (17) to be



        (18) Pt = 11o +          + 2m   +



The expected price for next period in a randomly-selected market is given by

taking expectations of an updated form of equation (18) to be



        (19) EPi =    ito   + iij(Mi+i.z+Emt)   +
                                                    Pt2EIflt,


where equations (1) and (2) and the conditions, Ect+i Ec+i(z) = 0, have

been used. Under full current information, E m = m can be substituted in
                                           zt     t
equation (19).

     The forms for P(z), Pt and EP+1 (and the condition Em = 1n) can be

substituted into the price level relation that is shown in equation (14). The

five 71-coefficients are then determined by requiring this price condition to
                                                        -22-


hold identically in [Ml,m,4,c(z)1. The solution from this straightforward

exercise turns out to be



             =   yk/cL -        +

             = 1,
      'TTt

             =   1+

      ir     =   -l/(l+y),
                 1/cL.
      7T



      The implied price level solutions are then


                                                                                                        c (z)
        (20) P*(Z) = yk/cL           -       +   .iy + (Mi+U+m)         +
                                                                            m(1+)           -
                                                                                                r-. +

and


        (21) (EPt1)* = yk/cL             - LSy*   + 111 + (Mi+i+mt)             +       +



where    _mt) = Mt from equation (1) could be substituted in the above
expressions. Note that, via inverse effects on money demand, there is a

negative effect on the price level of normal output y and a positive effect

of the long-run money growth rate .                      As would be expected, the level of the

nominal money stock has a one-to-one, positive price level effect.

        The anticipated rate of inflation from the perspective of market z is

given by



        (22)        (E p      )* -   p*(z)   =    +
                                                        pm
                                                          t       +
                                                                       t    -   t (z)
                      z t+1           t               (l÷y—'rp)       l+y
                                              -23-


The average across markets of the expected rate of inflation is influenced

positively by the long-run money growth rate p,         by   the short-run part of

anticipated money growth as represented here by PIn, and by the (temporary)

aggregate money demand shift,

      Finally, the nominal rate of return, which corresponds to the sum of the

average anticipated real rate r from equation (16) and the average across

markets of the anticipated inflation rates shown in equation (22), is equal to



                                  Qmt
              t
        (23) R*=k/ci+ 1.1+
                                 (1+y-yp)    1+1



The nominal interest rate is independent of the level of the money stock, but

varies one-to-one with the long-run money growth rate                The excess of current

                                  has a temporary positive effect on anticipated
money expansion over i,      m,
inflation if p >    0, which implies a positive effect of            on R. The effect

of monetary disturbances on the nomonal rate of return becomes substantially

more complicated and interesting under conditions of incomplete current informa-

tion, as discussed in the next section.



III. Solution of the Model Under Incomplete Current Information

      The full current information setup is now replaced by a specification in

which current information for a participant of market z is limited to that
contained in the observations of the local commodity price, P(z), and the
global nominal interest rate, Rt. Because this analysis becomes algebraically
very complicated, I have     simplified the model by eliminating serial correlation

in   the money growth process--that is, by assuming p =         0   in equation (2). In


zero mean and     variance   .
this restricted specification ni        is   independently, normally distributed with
                                   This simplification of the model is probably not
                                          -24-


serious because the main effect of allowing p : 0     seems to be the corresponding

influence of the perceived part of        on the anticipated inflation rate and          the
nominal rate of return,   as   shown in equations (22) and   (23).     These effects of

serial correlation in money growth did not have any     impact on the anticipated
real   rates of return or levels of output, as given in equation (15), because

these variables depend, as shown in equations (9) and        (10),    only on the unperceived

part of money growth,   n1_Em.
       The basic equilibrium conditions that are expressed in terms of

y(z), R, and     P(z)   in equations (9), (10), (13) and     (14)    continue to apply.

The forms of the solutions for P(z), Pt and EP4.i that are shown in equations

(17) -   (19) also remain valid)5 The key difference in the incomplete information
setup is that the Em terms that appear in equations (14) and (19) cannot

simply be replaced by m.

       In the present context Em is conditioned on the observations of P(z)

and Rt (and Mi). It is apparent from equation (17) that the current informa-

tion contained in the observation of P(z) amounts to knowledge of a certain

linear combination of the three current                                        Equation

(13), which reflects averaging-out of market-specific effects, indicates that

the observation of Rt conveys information about a particular linear combination

of the two aggregate disturbances, which can be denoted as c2m+c3 where the

c's are yet-to-be-determined coefficients. If the model had contained only a

single aggregate shock (or no market-specific shock)--for example, if                   = 0

had been assumed16--then the observations of Pt(z) and              would   amount   to full
current   information. In other words, the setup with one type of relative

disturbance and two types of aggregate disturbances is the simplest             stochastic
structure within the present general framework that would reveal the consequences
of   incomplete current information. It would, of course, be possible to introduce
                                                       -25-


additional shocks--for example, aggregate real disturbances to the commodity

market can readily be incorporated.

     Under the assumption of normally distributed shocks, the conditional

expectation of    will turn out, as discussed in the appendix, to be a linear

combination of the two pieces of current information--that is,



     (24) Em = bi[ir2m        +
                                  3't      +
                                                 TI4C(z)] + b2(c2m
                                                                        +



The formulae for the b1 and b2 coefficients are derived in the appendix.

     The average value            which appears in equations (13) and (14), can be

calculated by subtracting bilT4ct(z) from the Em expression that is shown in

equation (24). Note that it is now not possible to determine the anticipated

real rate of return and the level of output before obtaining the solutions for

Pt(z) and Rt. Because r(z) and y(z) depend on                            which depends in turn on

the realized values of P(z)       and              it is now necessary to start with the full

solution of the model.

     The two c-coefficients, which express the dependence of Rt on                      and

can be readily related to the it-coefficients by using the expression for Rt that

is given in equation (13). Substituting on the right side for P from equation

(18) and for Em from the use of equation (24), and writing Rt =                     ... + c2m   +

(where the dots denote dependence on Mt_i and a constant, which are not of interest

here) leads to the conditions,



                        =   —(l/y)[1       -               -
     c2(i +   b25H/y)                                             b1SH/ct)],

     c3(1 + b2cSH/ya) =     (l/y)[1    +
                                               rr3(1
                                                       -
                                                           b15H/)],

where it may be recalled that H s3dds
                                                 -26-


     The solution for the rr-coefficients now involves the use of the price level

condition from equation (14). The procedure is first to substitute for P(z)

from equation (17), Em from equation (24), EPt+i from equation (19), and Pt

from equation (18), using the above two conditions to substitute out for the c2

and C3   coefficients       in the expression for                 The five it-coefficients are then

determined, as in the full current information case, by requiring the resulting

equation to hold identically in                                           Not surprisingly, the

constant, its,     and the Mtl coefficient, if1, correspond to the full current

information values. However, the other three coefficients generally differ

from those associated with full current information. After a large amount of

algebra, the solution for these coefficients turns out to be


                              (1—b2) (——SH) +      (l+y)
             112                 (c——dH) + [CL(l—b1)+b18) (l+y)
                       (b1—b2)


                   -— -           (l-b2)c + b28
     (_5)
                          (b1-b2 (--H) + [(l-b1)+b1] (l+'y)
             113




                   =                 +
             114       l/{ct(1b1)        b1].

     Defining the denominator of the 112 and                     expressions    as
                                                            i1




             A         (b1—b2) (ct—8—dH) +   [c(1—b1)
                                                        +
                                                            b18] (].+y)


and neglecting the constant and M1 parts of the answer (which correspond to

those from the full current information case), the price level solutions are

given from equations (17) and (19) by
                                                         -27-


        (26) P(z)             +
                                       (l/A)[(l—b2)(a--—6H)
                                                                       +
                                                                               8(l+Y)]1n
                               —
                                       (1/A) [(l—b2)c +      b28J          +                        +
and
                                                                                c(z)/[ct(1_b1)          b18J

        (27)   EPt1 =              + (l/A)[(b1-b2)(c&-8-tSH) + biB(l+yflmt
                                   -       (a/A)             +                              +
                                                   (b1-b2)       bit(z)/[cL(l_b1)

These   results   imply the anticipated inflation rate from the perspective of

market    z,


        (28) EPt+i_Pt(z) =                     — (l/A)(l_b1)(cz+$*y._SH)in +               (l/A)[cL(l_b1)+b28]
                                               —




The solution for the nominal rate of return, which is found                                  by   means of the

above conditions for the c-coefficients, is



        (29)      =         - (1/A)(l_bi)(cz_8_dH)mt               +
                                                                       (l/A)[c1(l_bi)+biB].

      The locally-anticipated real rate of return is determined from the use of

equations (9) and (24) to be



                                       #                                   +
        (30) r(z) =     r(z)                Cl/A)(1_bi)B(l+)m                   (i/A)(bi_b2)$
                        —


where r(z) is the full current information solution (which includes a dependence

on (z)) that is shown in equation (15). Finally, the result for local output is

                                       +
        (31) y(z) =     y(z)                (aSd_adS){(l/A) (1—b1) C1)mt + (1/A)(bi-b2)
                                       -
                                            iIa)ct(z)/[]bi) +
                                                 -28—


where y(z) is the full current information solution (which includes a
               d        s
dependence on (z) and £t(z)). as shown in equation (15).

     The above solutions involve the b1 and b2 coefficients. The analysis in

the appendix relates these coefficients to the underlying parameters of the
                                             2   2         2
model, including the variances,                      and            The appendix calculations

do raise the possibility of multiple solutions for b1 and b2, although a unique

solution is guaranteed for a plausible range of parameter values. Since I do

not presently understand the economics of the multiple solution case, I have

limited attention in the text to situations where (b1, b2) are uniquely

determined. For present purposes, the most important properites of the

solutions for b1 and b2-.-in the case of a unique solution--are, assuming

that ,     o and         are all non-zero,



            o < b1 < 1

            -    < b2    < 1   if (c—8—5H) >     0,

            b1 > b2 if and only if (c-6-6H) >                  0.


The analysis implies also that the A-parameter, as defined above equation (26),

is unambiguously positive.

     I focus the analysis on the case where H sd'd8s > 0 and

                                  >   0.     If the income elasticity of money demand, S,

were equal to unity and if                 and   were negligible, this last condition would,

assuming     <   1,   require c'. >   /(l-).         Larger values of ds imply a less stringent

condition--for example, o. >               would be required when ds                    In general the

assumed inequality requires a high relative price elasticity of excess commodity

demand, ct, in comparison to the wealth elasticity, .
                                              -29-

Effects of Money Shocks

        Consider now the effects of a money shock,             The central conclusion,

which was suggested much earlier from the form of equation (9), is that the

anticipated real rate of return, r(z), rises with m. as shown in equation

(30).     (Note that 1-b1 > 0 and A > 0 apply.) Unanticipated monetary expansion

causes excess commodity demand, which requires an increase in the anticipated

real rate of return in order to restore market clearing. These movements imply

a positive response of output to           (assuming that a$Bd_dS >     0),   as shown in

equation (31). However, as             ,   the   results from the appendix imply that

b1 - 1 (all price movements are viewed in this situation as reflecting monetary

stimuli on a one-to-one basis), while A remains finite, so that the coefficients

on m in the rt(z) and y(z) expressions approach zero)7 When monetary

disturbances become the primary source of price fluctuations, the confusion

between monetary and other disturbances vanishes, which implies a disappearance

of the "real" effects of m (on r(z) and y(z)). This phenomenon is an example

of Lucas's (1973) effect of monetary variance on the slope of the "Phillips

curve."

        A basic implication of the model is that the responses of
                                                                        P(z), EP+i
and       to m must be consistent with the positive response of r(z) PCz) -

          + Rt.    However, the response of   the    three individual components of   the
anticipated       real rate of return turns out to be sensitive to changes in the
specification      of the model. In   the present setup, assuming      > 8+dH,   it   follows

from    equation (26) (using the definition of A and the condition b2 < 1) that

P(z) responds positively and less than one-to-one with tnt.           It also follows

from equation (27) (recalling that b1 > b2) that EP+i responds positively

and less than one-to-one with m. Further, the response of EPt÷i is smaller

than that of          so that the anticipated inflation rate, as shown in equation (28),
                                        -30—


declines with m. Finally, equation (29) indicates a negative response of

the nominal interest rate to m1. This behavior corresponds to the usual

"liquidity" effect of monetary expansion--with the quantity of money rising

more than prices in the "short run," as implied by equation (26), aggregate

portfolio balance requires a decline in Rt (assuming, as guaranteed by the

condition a >   +SH, that the rise in      does not, by itself, raise money demand

sufficiently to balance the increase in supply). Note that the dowTlward

response of Rt to      is consistent with the upward movement of r(z). The

intervening variable between the nominal and anticipated real interest rates,

which is the expected rate of inflation, moves downward sufficiently--that is,

P(z) rises sufficiently relative to E1Pt+i__to allow           and r(z) to respond

in opposite directions to monetary disturbances. The "short-run flexibility"

of the anticipated infaltion rate is obviously a crucial element in this

analysis. If inflationary expectations responded only sluggishly to current

disturbances, it would not be possible for the nominal interest rate to move

substantially in the short run in a direction opposite to that of the anticipated

real rate of return.

     The pattern of response to monetary shocks may be altered if the relative

price sensitivity of excess demand, a, is sufficiently weak that a < +cSH

applies. Equation (29) indicates that           would now be positively related to

me__because the response of money demand from the output channel is stronger

than before. The response of P(z) to m becomes of ambiguous sign and would

be negative if a--SH were negative and of sufficient magnitude. However, the

response of EP+i to        that is shown   in   equation (27) is still positive (as

can be seen by substituting for b1-b, from the formula given in the appendix),

so that the anticipated inflation rate now rises with nit. A conclusion here

is that a weak contemporaneous response of prices to money shocks is possible
                                                       —31-

if it is accompanied by a positive relation between money shocks and the

nominal rate of return. The positive response of the anticipated real rate

of   return now involves an increase in the nominal                 interest rate that exceeds

the      rise    in the anticipated inflation rate. In the previous (perhaps more

likely)         case,   the   rise in r(z) involved a decline in the anticipated inflation
rate that dominated over a decline in the nominal rate of return.
          Another consideration that would affect the relation of money shocks to
prices and         the      nominal interest rate involves serial correlation in the money
growth      process. This possibility was considered in the initial analysis in

the form,               =
                            '_1 + n,    but was dropped subsequently on computational

grounds. This extension would not seem substantially to alter the determination

of r(z) and y(z), which depend from equations (9) and (10) only on the un-

perceived parts of monetary expansion. However, anticipated future growth rates

of money would imvolve the term,                        =
                                                            P(pm1
                                                                    +
                                                                        En).   For the case where

     >   0, the current monetary innovation n would raise En and thereby raise the
short-term anticipated money growth rate. This expectation would produce an

increase in the short-term anticipated inflation rate and "thereby" raise the

nominal interest rate. (A positive effect on price levels would also arise

here because of the inverse dependence of money demand on Re.) The negative

"liquidity" effect of monetary expansion on                     that is shown in equation (29)

 (when c > 8+dH applies) would therefore be offset by this direct money growth

anticipation effect.

          Because of the various possibilities for the effects of monetary surprises

on price levels and the nominal interest rate, it seems that the most interesting

conclusion from the present analysis is that the average anticipated real rate

                                            +
of return, rt                Pt -   EPt+i       Rt, would rise with rn. This result is of special
 interest because it distinguishes qualitatively an implication of the "equilibrium
                                                  -32-

business      cycle" approach from the hypothesis of an inverse effect of              on

that would arise under usual Keynesian analysis.

       It is worth emphasizing that the model's results discussed above apply

to the anticipated real rate of return--which is the variable that affects

commodity supply and demand--and not directly to the realized value of this

return. In fact, under the present partial information setup that involves

the setting of an economy-wide nominal interest rate, it turns out that the

anticipated and realized real rates of return respond in opposite directions

to money shocks. Aside from           effects   that involve the dependence of

realized values of date t+l disturbances, the economy-wide average anticipated

real rate of return differs from the average realized return because of a

difference between the economy-wide average value of EP+i and the value of

this expectation that would have been formed under full date t information. The

latter expectation, labeled EPt+l, follows immediately from updated forms of

equations (26) and (20) as EP+i =             ... + mt__that    is, under full current

information, the effect on t+l of                  is one-to-one (assuming p   = 0)   and the

effect of            is nil. The economy-wide average realized real rate of return

depends on the realized values of date t+l disturbances and on the expression,

   -             -         The last term is determined, using the above expression for
       (EPt+i
       and the formulae for P(z) and                from equations (26) and (29),     as


       (32)     Rt -              =   ... - (l/A)(l_bi)(c_8)(l+y)m
                                      -   (1/A) (1,1-b2) (cL_)4t.


In contrast     with the anticipated real rates of return, as shown in equation (30),
the average      realized rate moves inversely to m.
                                          -33-


     It seems clear that this result could not obtain if the capital market

specified a real interest rate rather than a nominal rate. In the context of

an economy-wide real interest rate, the movements in anticipated and realized

real rates of return would be coincident and would involve a positive response

to money shocks. The "indexation" of nominal returns on financial assets to

the average realized value of inflation would therefore alter the model's

conclusions concerning the behavior of realized real rates of return)8



Effects of Money Demand Shocks

     Consider now the impact of an aggregate money demand shock, . The model

yields the surprising conclusion that this disturbance has a positive effect on

output. However, it should be stressed that the present analysis does not admit

the possibility of negative correlation between the money demand shock and a

disturbance to aggregate excess commodity demand (which was not included in the

model). The existence of this sort of correlation would likely reverse the

association between money demand shocks and output movements.

     It is clear from equations (9) and (10) that the effect of
                                                                          rt(z)
and yt(z) would operate in the present framework solely through an effect on

Enit. An increase in       implies, as would be expected, a decrease in P(Z)

from equation (26) (assuming a. >    +dH so that b2 < 1) and an increase in Rt
from equation (29). The former effect leads, in accordance with the coefficient

b1, to a decrease in Eni. The latter effect involves, through the coefficient

b2, an ambiguous effect on Em. However, if the latter effect is positive,

it must, assuming ci >   +5H,   be of smaller magnitude than the former effect.

Therefore, Em declines with          which implies--for a given value of mr__that

r(z) and y(z) would increase. Although a money demand shock is contractionary

in the sense of reducing price levels, it is expansionary in terms of leading,
                                       -34-


via an increase in (m_Em) and a corresponding increase in anticipated real

rates of return, to an increase in outputs. It is worth noting that the

present example is one in which an output expansion is accompanied by a

decline in current prices relative to expected future prices. The result

in equation (32) indicates that the effect on realized real rates of return

is again opposite to that on anticipated returns.



Effects of Relative Shocks

       Finally, a relative excess demand shock £t(z) raises P(z) (and does not

affect Rt) and thereby implies an increase in         Consequently, r(z) and

        are determined below their full current information values, as shown

in equations (30) and (31). The output solution in equation (31) implies

that, in comparison with the full current information case (and assuming

c' >   ÷5H and s8ddS> 0), the incomplete current information solution
involves "excessive" response to the global disturbances, ni and      and

"insufficient" response to the local disturbances, (z). Similar behavior

emerged in the model without a global capital market that was constructed in

my earlier paper (1976, p. 17), although the aggregate money demand/portfolio

shock, , did not enter into that analysis.


IV. Concluding Remarks

       This theoretical study has focused on the anticipated real rate of return

on earning assets as the relative price variable that links monetary shocks

to output responses. A monetary disturbance that creates excess demand for

commodities raises this anticipated return and thereby eliminates the excess

demand. If this relative price variable does have a key role in

the transmission of monetary effects, it is likely that the same variable
                                         -35-



would be important for analyzing the output effects of other variables,

such as government purchases of goods and services.    (See Hall, 1978 and

Evans, 1978, in this context.) For example, the rate of return mechanism

might explain the tendency of total output to rise strongly during wartime.

A possible analysis would involve the following elements. 1) Aggregate

demand rises initially because the government spending is, first, not a close

substitute for private consumption or investment, and second, is not perceived

as permanent. These two considerations imply a small initial offsetting

decrease in private commodity demand. 2) The consequent increase in the

anticipated   real rate of return would reduce private demand and also stimulate
an increase in the overall supply of goods and services. A strong response
on the supply side might account   for the observed responsiveness of total

output to wartime spending.

     There are numerous related issues that could be pursued theoretically--

notably, a mechanism for explaining the persisting output effects of monetary

and other   disturbances could be added to the model. However, I suspect that
empirical research would   potentially            the most fruitful complement

to the present theoretical analysis. Key empirical questions are whether

monetary disturbances exert the hypothesized positive contemporaneous effect

on the anticipated real rate of return and whether the response of this

relative price variable can be documented as a central channel for the

transmission of real effects of monetary disturbances. The treatment of

expectations will be a crucial part of this empirical analysis.
                                  REFERENCES


Aitchison, J. and J. A. C. Brown, The Lognormal Distribution, Cambridge
     University Press, Cambridge, 1969.

Archibald, G. C. and R. G. Lipsey, "Monetary and Value Theory: A Critique
     of Lange and Patinkin," Review of Economic Studies, 26, Oct. 1958, 1-22.

Barro, R. J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political Economy,
     82, Nov./Dec. 1974, 1095-1117.

___________  "Rational Expectations and the Role    of Monetary Policy," Journal
     of   Monetary Economics, 2, Jan. 1976, 1-32.
_________ and S. Fischer, "Recent Developments in Monetary Theory," Journal
     of Monetary Economics, 2, April 1976, 133-67.

Evans, P., "The Timing and Duration of Fiscal Policy in a Neoclassical Model,"
     unpublished, 1978.

Graybill, F. A., An Introduction to Linear Statistical Models, vol. 1,
     McGraw-Hill, New York, 1961.

Hall, R. E., "Intertemporal Substitution and Aggregate Fluctuations," unpublished,
     1978.

King. R., "Asset Markets and the Neutrality of Money," unpublished, 1978.

Lucas, R. E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic
     Theory, 4, April 1972, 103-24

__________ "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
     American Economic Review, 63, June 1973, 326-34.

__________ "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal of Political
     Economy, 83, Dec. 1975, 1113-44,

_________ and L. Rapping, "Real Wages, Employment and Inflation," Journal
     of Political Economy, 77, Sept./Oct. 1969, 721-54.

Mishan, E. J., "A Fallacy in the Interpretation of the Cash Balance Effect,"
     Economica, 25, May 1958, 106-18.

Sargent, T. J., "Rational Expectations, the Real Rate of Interest, and the
     Natural Rate of Unemployment,' Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     1973, No. 2, 429—72.

_________ "The Persistence of Aggregate Employment and the Neutrality of
     Money," unpublished, 1977.

__________ and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
     Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political
     Economy, 83, April 1975, 241-54.

Sidrauski, M., "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,"
     American Economic Review, proceedings, 57, May 1967, 534-44.
                                      FOOTNOTES



     11f    these net benefits are always positive then portfolio balance would

require Rt to be positive. The form of the money demand function, equation

(3) below, does not exhibit this property-, although a modification along

these lines would not seem to have important implications for the main

analysis.

     2See Aitchison and Brown (1969, p. 8).

     3A change in r(z) would generally have an income effect. •See the

discussion below.


     4The important condition is         =                  where   is the discount
                                              (l+Rt+±)+i,
factor for date t+i, as defined below.


     5This term corresponds to Lucas's (1972) mechanism for generating relative

disturbances across markets.


     6This term is analogous to Mishan's (1958, p. 107) "cash balance effect

[that] comes into operation when the cash available to the community for

transactions purposes .     .   . diverges   from the amount of cash that the community

desires to hold for this purpose." This concept appears also in Archibald

and Lipsey (1958).

     71n this respect the analysis parallels the infinite horizon, optimizing

model of Sidrauski (1967). The superneutrality of money in his model--that

is, the independence of the steady-state real interest rate and capital-labor

ratio from the growth rate of money--depends on this infinite horizon setup.

For additional discussion see Barro and Fischer (1976, section 3).


     8Sargent (1973, p. 434) and Sargent and Wallace (1975, pp. 242-43)

specify a model in which commodity demand depends on the anticipated real

rate of return, but where commodity supply depends on the ratio of the

current   price   to the price that was anticipated for today as of last period.
                                        —2—


    9The equality k =   k(z)   for all z follows from an arbitrage condition

(in the absence of mobility costs over one period of time) that requires all

markets to look equally desirable, ex ante, from the standpoint of suppliers

and demanders.

    10This netting to zero is essentially a matter of defining a relative

disturbance to local commodity markets. Aggregate real commodity shocks could

be considered separately in equations (7) and (8). Serial independence of

the c(z)'s can be viewed as a consequence of the arbitrage condition described

in n. 9 above.

         interaction between monetary "neutrality" results for output and

interest rates has been stressed by Sargent (1973, pp. 442-44).

    12The downward effect of money on the rate of return in this type of

model follows unambiguously only if a direct wealth effect of money on consumer

demand is omitted.

    131t is assumed throughout that the observation of one's own transfer

from the government conveys negligible additional information over the

observations of Rt and P(z). Similarly, the analysis neglects the information

provided by observations of one's own money demand shift.

    14The locally anticipated real rate of return and level of output also
                                                                  d
respond in the same manner to permanent demand or supply forces, k (z) and

k5(z)., as to temporary stimuli, 4(z) and (z). The distinction between

permanent and temporary shock effects that arose in my earlier model (1976,

appendix 1) does not appear here because of the adjustment of the nominal

interest rate (to the value of k in equation (23) below). The permanent!

temporary distinction would reemerge if the commodity excess demand response

to (perceived) "permanent" movements in r(z) were differentiated from the
                                               -3-

response     to (perceived) "temporary"      changes. It   would be anticipated that

excess commodity demand would be substantially more responsive--because of

the larger set of intertemporal substitution possibilities--to movements in

r(z) that were viewed as transitory opportunities for above or below normal

real rates of return.


                       1r5m1 would have to be added to equations (17) and (18) if
         15The term

p        0 were permitted. The term P7TSEZm would then appear in equation (19).

         16However, the equilibrium solution can     break   down in the present model

when         =   0.   The problem is that the observed nominal interest rate cannot

impart information about the underlying money shock when the interest rate

is invariant with money--as one would expect when               =   0.   The introduction

of a non-zero value for p would eliminate this problem. A more general

discussion of this type of equilibrium problem is contained in King (1978).

         17i have as yet been unable to ascertain whether the relation between

a2 and
    in
            these     coefficients is monotonic.


         18The   simultaneous   presence of economy-wide nominal and      real   interest

rates      would imply a qualitative shift in the information structure of the
model. The two pieces of current global information implied by this setup
would seem to constitute          full current information in the present model that

includes         only two types of aggregate shocks. A satisfactory analysis of this
model would seem          to require the introduction of additional disturbance terms.
                                       Appendix

            Derivation of the Conditional Expectation of Money Growth



      The conditional expectation,                 is expressed in equation (24) in

terms of the two pieces of current information and the two coefficients, b1

and         The b1-coefficient multiplies the current information implicit in
      b2.
the observation of Pt(z), 1r2m+1T34+7r4c(z), while the b2-coefficient

applies to the current information contained in the observation of

c1m+c34). The three n-coefficients are shown in equation (25-)             while the

two c-coefficients are those attached to,m and                in the formula for Rt

in equation (29).

       Since the three current disturbances, m,              and t(z), are indepen-

dently, normally distributed with zero mean and known variances, the deter-

mination of the b1 and b2 coefficients emerges from a straightforward, but

tedious, calculation of a conditional expectation. A formula for the pre-

sent multivariate normal case appears in Graybill (1961, p. 63). An intui-

tive feel for tiis formula can be obtained by viewing b1 and b2 as least-

squares estimates--using the known population variances and covariances--

that would emerge from a regression of m on the two variables,

1r2m+1T3+T4C(z) and c2m+c3$t. The results can be written from the usual

least-squares regression formulae as

                            b1 =   - (c3/)(cf3-c3Tr2)aY
                  b2
                       =    (l/) [ir3(c27r3 - c32)aa +            2 2
                                                          (ir4) C2cY],
where   the determinant t      is given by

                    =
                           (cjir3-c3rr2)2oci
                                               +
                                                   (c24)2 +  (c37r4)2G.
After substitution for the r- and         c-coefficients and a substantial amount

of manipulation, the two b-coefficients can be expressed as
                                              -A2-




            (Al)            b =
                                          +                                +
                                  a8aa        L a(l-bl)+b18

                       2 2   (lb1)(a..8-.SH) r                                               ' 2 2
                           -
                      m                                                                        m C
                               (a(l-b1)+b
                                     .L   1 8}
   (A2) b2=                                                         2
                            ci8aa -                                     a22   +
                                                               81

Unfortunately,      the solutions for         and b2 cannot be written as closed-form

express ions.

      The solution in equation (Al) can be expressed as a cubic in the coef-

ficient b1. It is possible to obtain necessary and sufficient conditions

in terms of the parameters, (at,
                                         o o, ,      a, 8,   dH),       for the existence of a

single real root. The general conditions are very complicated, but a suffi-

cient condition for one real root turns out to be


            (A3)
                             (82a)/a    > (8/27) [(cL-B-c5H)/cL]2

Therefore, if         is   not too small relative to cr       and/or       if          is small,
                                                                                  Ia-8-6H1

a single real root is guaranteed. However, there seems                     to be a range of
parameter   values that yield three real roots for b1.

      The solution in equation (A2) relates b2 one-to-one to the value of

b1. Therefore, a unique solution for b1 implies a unique solution for b2

and   vice versa.
      There seems to be a range of parameter values that yield three sepa-
rate real solutions for (b1, b2). I do not presently see the economic
meaning of these multiple equilibria. For some discussion of this type of
problem, see King (1978). For present purposes I carry Out the rest of the

analysis under the assumption that the parameter values are such as to iriply

a single real solution for (b1, b2).
                                           -AS-




     It is convenient to have an expression for the difference between b1

and b2, which can be written as


                                           (1-b 1)   (1+y)        m C
    (A4)   (b1 -b 2) =

                         (ct(1_b1)+b1]{a8cia -       bl(1_bl) [ct(1     bBI]%aC ÷
     The subsequent discussion assumes that the parameters, (,                  a, ct, ),
                                                                          cr,
are all positive. The condition 0<b1<I. then follows from inspection of

equation (Al).

     The condition b2 <     1.   if a—B-SH> 0 is implied by equation (A2). The

result follows if the denominator on the right side of the equation can be

shown to be positive because the second term of the numerator (which is nega-

tive if cx-8-6H>0) can, since O<b1<l, be readily shown to be of larger

magnitude than the middle term of the denominator. The denominator is posi-

tive for some values of (a, a, a)--for example, as a-0 and b10, the

denominator would become positive since ao 0. Further, the denominator

cannot pass through zero because this expression equalling zero can be shown

to be inconsistent with the expression for b1 that is given in equation (Al).

With b2 a continuous function of the a2's (in the case of unique solutions

for b1 and b2), it follows that the denominator must be positive throughout.

     The condition b1 >           if and only if a-B-5H >0 follows from equation (A4),
                            b2
because 0 <        < 1 and the expression in large brackets in the denominator of
              b1
the right.side of the equation is positive from the argument in the above paragraph.

It also follows from the form of the expression for (b1-b2) in equation (A4)

that the A parameters as defined above equation (26) in the text, is unam-

biguously positive.

     The following limiting conditions for the b-coefficients are implied by

equations (Al) and (A2):
                           -A4-



     =>
in        (b1, b2) -O,

     =>
in        (b1, b2)+1,

     => b1-O,     b2+-o.sign(cL-Ø-SH),

     =>
          (b1, b2) a8a/(a8o+a) [0,1],

     =>
C         (b1, b2)1,
                         (ct-8-SH) (1+y)a2
                                         In
     =>                                       =   (+).sign(a__dH):
          b1÷   0, b2-
