NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNIONIZATION AND PRODUCTIVITY:
MICRO-ECONOMEPRIC EVIDENCE

Kim B. Clark

Working Paper No. 330

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge

MA 02138

March 1919

partially supported by
grants from the Department of Labor, the National Science
Foundation and the Wertheim Fund of Harvard University.
Helpful comments were received from John T. Dunlop,

The research reported here was

Richard Freeman, James Medoff and members of the Labor
Workshop at the University of Chicago Business School and
the Labor Seminar at Harvard University. Laura Nelson
ably assisted with the computations. The research
reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Fconomic
Research.

NBER Working Paper 330
March 1979

Unionization and Productivity: Micro—Econometric Evidence

ABSTRACT

It is widely agreed that unionization affects the rules and procedures

governing the employment relation in organized establishments. The effect of
these changes on establishment productivity, however, is unclear. Existing
evidence is based on a comparison of union/non—union differences in value added
per hour worked. Although positive union effects have been estimated, possible
differences in prices and technology in the union and non—union sectors render

the results inconclusive. The effect of unions on productivity is examined
in the present paper using establishment level data from the U.S. cement in-

dustry. The cement industry provides a useful empirical framework. Output
is easily measured in physical terms, and data on both union and non—union
establishments permit estimation of the union effect controlling for differ-

ences in technology. The results suggest that unionized establishments are
6—8 percent more productive than their non—union counterparts. This conclusion is supported in time series data, where a comparison of productivity

before and after unionization reveals a positive union effect of similar mag-

nitude. Since the statistical analysis controls for capital—labor substitution, scale effects and technological change, the evidence suggests that
unionization leads to productive changes in the operation of the enterprise.

The results are relatively robust. Specification changes and adjustments for
omitted variables leave the basic findings intact.

Kim B. Clark
Harvard Business School
Morgan 5
Soldiers Field Road
02163
Boston, MA
(617) 495—6561

Trade unions have a perceptible influence on the production process

in organized establishments.' Even a cursory glance through a modern
labor agreement reveals the depth of union involvement in the operation
of the enterprise. Contract provisions extend beyond flatters of compensation and promotion to include the introduction of new technology,
the assignment of workers to specific tasks, the size of crews, and the

amount of work to be performed. Perhaps more important than specific
rules, the typical labor agreement establishes a formal system for
setting rules and resolving disputes.
With the extent of union interest and involvement in the production
process it seems natural to question the impact of the union on enter-

prise performance, and in particular on productivity. Yet the question
has received little analysis. In the late 1890's and early 1900's
Marshall and Moore examined the union productivity effect theoretically,
but the ideas they advanced were not followed up with empirical analysis.2
Without evidence, discussions in the literature rarely rose beyond an

inconclusive exchange of opinions.3 However, in the recent papers by
Brown and Medoff, and by Frantz attempts have been made to provide

econometric analysis of the union impact.4 Using value added per
manhour to measure productivity, bothstudies find positive union effects.
While the evidence is suggestive, the findings rest on untested assumptions

about technology and pricing behavior. Since value added has been used
to measure output in these studies, what appears to be an output effect
may well be a difference in prices. Moreover, possible differences in
technology between union and non—union establishments are not controlled

for in the analysis. Brown and Medoff find the empirical results to be
very sensitive to assumptions about differences in the parameters of the
production process.5

—2—
This paper extends previous work by relaxing the technology and value

added assumptions. The analysis focuses on the effect of unionization on
productivity using establishment level data from the U.S. cement industry.
The output of a cement plant is measured in physical terms, and data on

both union and non—union establishments permJt estimation of the union

effect controlling for differences in technology. Furthermore, the availability
of time series data on productivity before and after unionization makes
possible estimation of the union impact while controlling for firm specific
effects, as well as changes in labor quality.

The paper is divided into

five sections. After laying out the analytical framework in section I, the
empirical model and the data are briefly described in the second section.
Section III presents the basic empirical results, while section IV contains

an analysis of firm specific effects and quality adjustments. Conclusions
are found in section V.

Section I: An Analytical Framework
The theoretical description of the production process used in this

paper is quite simple. Output is treated as a function of capital and labor
input, where capital is presumably adjusted for the effects of depreciation,

and labor is measured to reflect variations in quality. Given the level of
inputs, output may also depend on organizational and institutional factors —

i.e.

methods of organization, effectiveness of management, and the motivation

of workers. Within this simple framework, labor productivity, defined as the
ratio of output to labor input, depends on the capital—labor ratio, the scale
of operations and the various organizational factors.6

Unionization may affect each of these determinants. The traditional
channel of influence links the union wage effect to capital—labor substitution.7 In response to a rise in the relative wage, the firm seeks to raise

the marginal product of labor by raising the capital—labor ratio. The net
effect, however, is an increase in unit costs and a misallocation of re—
sources.

A second channel of influence_recognizes that the rules

governing

-

—3—
the employment relation under trade unions are likely to affect methods of
organization and other aspects of the internal operation of the firm.
While the traditional union effect is inefficient, the direction of
the organization effect is unclear. If unionization puts pressure on management

to improve operations the production process may yield a larger volume
of output for any combination of capital and labor.8 The opposite conclusion
holds if unionization reduces motivation or otherwise impedes the effective

operation of the enterprise. Thus, both the sign and magnitude of the organization effect are open to empirical question and analysis. The organization
effects must be combined with the traditional substitution effects to assess
the overall union impact on efficiency.
The link between unionization and the organizational determinants of
productivity depends on changes in the labor contract under unions and on

adjustments made by workers and management to new provisions. The distinction between changes in the rules of the employment relation, and the
resulting changes in behavior which link the contract to productivity has

often been overlooked in discussions of this issue. The existence of a
rule, on its face inimical to productivity, has been treated as prima facie
evidence of a negative organization effect.9 Yet few contract provisions

directly affect the determinants of productivity. Most operate indirectly
through changes in incentives whicI affect the decisions of workers and
managers.
Rules, both formal and informal, are conunon to all work situations.1°

In a non—union setting management generally determines the formal rules

governing the terms and conditions of employment. Under trade—unions, the
introduction of a mechanism for collective voice affects both the substantive rules governing the employment relation and the procedures for rule
making and dispute settlement. Union influence extends beyond mere codif i—

cation of existing rules. While workers may

affect

rules in a non—union

—4—
setting through individual mobility, this channel is indirect and depends on
management's ability and willingness to make complex inferences relating contract provisions to turnover.11 Collective bargaining establishes a more power-

ful, direct means of influence, and may provide a more effective channel of
information about worker preferences and potential trade—of fs implicit in
alternative contract provisions.

By introducing new procedures and new channels of information, and by
altering the substantive rules of the workplace, unionization is likely to

lead to changes in the behavior of workers and managers. For workers, perhaps the most significant change is a shift in relative power and increased

control over conditions of work. Freeman has argued that the existence of
collective voice under unions creates an alternative to "exit" behavior
(quitting, absenteeism) and, ceteris paribus, can be expected to, reduce

turnover, with clear consequences for productivity2 Firms with lower rates
of turnover are likely to have a higher level of investment in firm specific

training, and may have more effective work groups. A similar effect may
follow

from the use of seniority rules, which tend to be more prevalent in

union contracts. In those production processes where skills obtained on the
job areimportant, seniority rules may reduce rivalry among workers and increase incentives for assistance and cooperation3 In addition, the arbitrariness inherent in rankings based on management's assessment of ability
(or other subjective criteria) may adversely affect workers' perception of

their jobs. introduction of seniority criteria may thus have positive
effects on motivation and morale.14
For managers, the introduction of a trade union affects the viability

of previous methods and procedures. In the face of a rise in the price of

—5-labor, and union

interest in the
production process,

centive to increase
and to address

the effort obtained

from a given

management has an inlevel of labor

aspects of the

input,

production process which may have
ed5 The upshot is that
been neglect—
collective
bargaining may
encourage management to
take steps to
improve productivity. Yet collective
voice contains
tial for
the potenreducing productivity.
The power inherent in the potential
for
collective action
may be used to
protect malfeasance
and codify reduced work
effort?6
Management's ability to fire undesirable
workers may be reduced and
the union
contract may advance rules which
require that work be done more
than once, or that restrict
managements' ability to adjust to
changing conditions. Thus,
seniority rules
may hinder the effective
matching of workers
and jobs, and rules limiting
displacement of workers
may impede the introduction of new

technology. The

grievance procedure may be abused with
numerclogging the channels.
Instead of
providing useful information the
day—to—day administration of the contract
may result in a
of the
disruption
production process.
ous petty issues

It seems clear

that the ultimate

effect of unionization

plex

depends on comunion—worker—management interaction, at the

shop floor. The

direction and

magnitude of

bargaining table and on the

productivity changes will depend
adjustments. These
considerations underscore the
importance of empirical
analysis in resolving the
Section II:
unionism—productivity issue.
Empirical Analysis of the Cement
Industry
The basic
problem facing
any empirical analysis of the Union
impact on
organizational aspects of the firm is
to control for
other differences
on specific

policies and

—6—
Among the many potential
in union and non—union establishments.

differences identified
singled out as

in the literature,

deserving of particular

is the technology
Brown and Medoff

of production;

have shown that

two have been

attention.

The first

of output.
the second is the measurement

few conclusions can

be drawn when union

if those differestablishments use different technologies,
and non—union
unless output is inca—
reflected in the analysis. Moreover,
ences are not
effect of unionization on prices
terms, the potential
sured in physical
the em—
considerations justify

comparison. These

clouds the productivity

Cement is one of the few industries

adopted in this paper.
pirical focus
in which union

and non—union

produce a relatively

establishments with

homogeneous product

the same basic technology

easily measured

individual cement plants

In physical units.

it is possible to

con-

inWith data on production in
productivity without
differences and to compare
trol for technological
behavior.
about pricing
voking assumptions
intensive
in a highly capital
Cement is a fine grey powder produced
consists of three
of production in a cement plant
process.17 The basic flow
and iron
rich in calcium, silicon, aluminum,
stages. In the first, stone
is then fed into a
The raw material
crushed and ground.
is extracted,
into small
partly fused
about
27OOF
and
kiln, fired to
large rotating
is ground and mixed
final
stage
clinker
"clinkertt. In the
pebbles called
with various strength
to form cements
other chemical agents
I—
with gypsum and
recognized specif
to
generally
Cement is produced
and drying properties.
Materials The
Society for Testing
bythe American
cations established
of established product
and the existence
of the product
homogeneous nature
establishof the output of different
facilitates comparison
specifications
ments.

—7—

The physical characteristics of the product have iraportant implications for

the structure of the industry and consequently for the analysis of productivity.

Finished cement has a low value—to—weight ratio and shipping costs are a
high proportion of the delivered price. The consequence of high shipping costs
is a regional market structure. In 1972, fewer than five percent of industry
shipments exceeded 300 miles, while close to 60 percent were less than 100 miles.19
While the regional nature of the industry creates conditions of apparent oligopoly,
historically the homogeneous nature of the product and the capital intensity

of production have led to intense price competition° Overt attempts to limit
competition through a basing point pricing system were declared illegal in
1947, and there is substantial evidence of moderately competitive pricing behavior in the 1960's and early 1970's.21
The regional character of the cement product markets is reflected in the structure
of collective bargaining where single employer agreements with substantial

local negotiations are the rule. The dominant union in the industry is the
United Cement, Lime and Gypsum Workers International Union which represents

about 75 percent of all cement plants2 The UCLGWIU is relatively decentralized, and local and regional officers play a significant role in shaping the

substance of negotiations. Slightly less than 9 percent of the plants in the
industry are non—union, with the remainder divided among the Steelworkers,

joint councils and independent unions. Taken together the regional nature of
markets and the decentralized character of the union suggest that the impact

of the union may vary by region. The empirical analysis allows for regional
union effects, with primary focus on the South and Southwest where most competition between union and non—union plants takes place.

—8—
The Data
Since 1919 the Portland Cement Association has conducted an annual survey
of association members requesting information on the production of clinker,
finished cement, cement shipments, and manhours for each of the respondent firm's

establishments. This survey constitutes the basic source of data used in the
empirical analysis.23

The survey provides annual data on tons of finished cement produced, which

is the output measure used here. The data on manhours is broken down by department, permitting the construction of variables measuring production and super-

visory or non—production labor input. The supervisory category includes plant
management, supervisors, clerical staff and laboratory personnel.
The production category includes workers in the quarry, the raw grinding and
finishing departments, and the general labor group.

Beginning in 1973 information is available on location, plant capacity,
fuel usage, and the installation date and "practical" capacity of individual

kilns. The location data permits construction of five regional categories —

"4

Northeast, North Central, South, Southwest and West Total capacity of the
plant determines grouping into size categories, which provide an alternative

to total manhours as a measure of scale effects. Data on kiln age and capacity have been used to construct a measure of the capital stock in the ith
plant in year t given by

Kjt=XtJCjjt

O<A< 1

(1)

where C. is the capacity of kilns of the jth vintage?5 The adjustment parameter
reflects the effects of depreciation, obsolescence and vintage, and is deter—
mined empirically by searching for the value which minimizes the error sum of
squares in the regression equation.

—9—
The data set is completed with information on union status. We initially
obtained a record of plants operating under a collective bargaining agreement

from the Cement Employers Association. Separate verification of union status
was obtained from the staff of the United Cement, Lime and Gypsum Workers Inter-

national Union. In one situation, the question of union status was answered
through direct contact with the plant in question.
Table 1 presents a summary of the sources and definitions of the variables
used in the analysis, and compares the cement industry data set with a hypothet-

ical ideal. The ideal analysis would place establishments in the two sectors on
a comparable basis by controlling for differences in the amount and quality of
labor and capital, the parameters of the production function and returns to scale.

In general, the cement data set measures up quite well to this standard. The
existence of well known ASTM standards enables us to compare the output of dif-

ferent establishments in physical terms. Productivity and unionization can be
examined at the establishment level with controls for possible union/non—union

differences in technology. Reasonably good measures of the vintage of the plant
and the operating kilns are available, and we have two measures of establishment
size which should provide a reasonably good fix on returns to scale.
The principle weakness in the data Is the absence of good measures of labor

quality. The regional controls capture structural differences in labor quality,
but fail to control for any substitution of higher for lower quality labor in-

duced by the union wage effect. However, the likely effect of quality adjustments
on productivity can be estimated from time series data on plants which change

union status. In a time series context, the labor quality effect not only
depends on technology and changes in compensation, but on the extent of

turnover as well. Together with an estimate of the union wage effect, information
on turnover can be used to determine the extent of bias induced by the omission
of quality measures.26

manhours available in un—
weighted form; no information on personal characteristics of workers; regional differences captured by dummy;
check an bias through time
series data
capital measured by rated
capacity adjusted for maintenance; data available on
vintage of capacity; no
independent measure of utilization
size measured by total manhours per establishment and
plant capacity

data available on characteristics of union and non—union
plants; number of non—union
plants is small

hours per worker adjusted
for differences in innate
ability

capital stock adjusted for
depreciation, obsolescence,
and vintage effects; utilization of stock

measure of size reflecting
proportionate change in all
inputs

observations on union and
non—union establishments

labor input
adjusted for
quality

capital input
adjusted for
quality

returns to scale

union/non—union
differences in
technology

2.

3.

4.

5.

Cement Data Set

production measured in tons;
types of cement defined by
official standards

Characteristics
output measured in physical
units; corrected for quality
differences

Ideal Characteristics

measuring output

Measurement Issues

1

The Cement Industry Data Set and the Ideal

TABLE

kiln

capacity)

indexes

plant:

vintage

i'

vintage:

t—age of plant

C..(t-j)

Age of plant:

size measures: (1) unadjusted
capacity (size categories)
(2) total production manhours
per establishment (L)

(C =

ijt; j

ZAt_C

capital stock in the

production workers: total
manhours by production
department (L); supervisory:
total manhours of plant
management, foreman, clerical
and laboratory staff (S)

output: tons of finished
cement (Q)

Definitions (and symbols)

— 11 —

The Empirical Model

The cement data set provides measures of output (Q) and three inputs:
capital (K), production worker hours CL) and the hours of supervisory personnel

(S). These data may be summarized, and the effect of unionization measured

using standard production function analysis. Output is assumed to depend on
the three inputs, and organization factors. Apart from organization effects,
labor productivity depends on the capital—labor ratio, the ratio of 8upervisory

to production worker hours, and the scale of operations. Productivity also may
differ between union and non—union establishments because of differences in the

parameters of the production function. To control for these possibilities, and
thus to identify union/non—union differences which stem from organization
factors we specify a Cobb—Douglas production function for each sector.27
In intensive form, the two production processes may be written as:

u"k

ln(Q/L)k =

ln(A)

+

ln(Q/L). =

ln(A)

+c ln(K/L) +Yln(S/L) + (O—l)lnL

+Yuln(S/L)k +

(Ou_l)Lk

(2)

and
(3)

where u and n indicate union and non-union respectively, k and j index establishments

in the two sectors and returns to scale is given bye = c. +

iB

+

y,where is

labor's

share. The parameter A captures the organizational determinants of productivity,
and is assumed to be invariant across establishments within the sector.
Equations (2) and (3) control for union/non—union differences in the production parameters, but within the tio sectors, technology and productivity may

vary because of vintage and region effects. While the basic production process
in cement is much the same today as it was in 1920, changes in technology have
increased the extent of mechanization

and automation, increased the size and

speed of machinery, and significantly altered plant layout and design. Since

— 12 —

the vintage of the plant clearly affects the level of productivity, the appropriate union/non—union comparison is between plants of the same vintage.

Two

approaches to this problem are examined below. We first confine estimation of
(2) and (3) to plants with roughly the same vintage. This procedure not only
establishes the appropriate union/non—union comparison, but also allows the

entire production function to change with the vintage of the plant. A second
approach is to specify a common production function, but to allow the union
effect to differ by vintage through union—vintage interaction terms.
Interaction terms may also be used to introduce regional union effects.

As we noted earlier, ceinnt is priced and sold in regional markets and the
pattern of collective bargaining has a distinctly regional character in which
local and regional union officers play key roles in determining the nature

of labor—management relations. For these reasons we introduce region dummies
and allow different union effects in different regions.
If region effects were absent and the union and non—union sectors were tech—
nologically identical except for differences in organizational factors, the union
impact could be estimated using a simple dummy variable.

The organizational differ-

(1 + b), and the coefficient on the union
ences could be written as A
= Afl
U

dummy would provide an estimate of b, the productivity differential. In
equations (2) and (3), however, the input ratios have different effects on
productivity in the two sectors, so that the estimated union effect not only
may vary by region and vintage, but also may depend on parameter dilierences and
the level of the input ratios at which the union/non—union comparison takes

place. To see the implications of differences in technology, we make
use of covariance analysis in which all parameters are allowed to vary between the

sectors. Ignoring problems of heteroscedasticity, the union and non—union parameters

— 13 —

may be estimated jointly using interaction terms between the basic
independent

variables and the union dummy.28 If we confine the analysis to plants of the

same vintage, the most general form of the model is given by:
ln(Q/L)i =

lnA + bU + u -

+ 0u +

0n

-

an)/iu

—

Y)ln(S/L)iU

)1nL1U +a ln(K/L)i +ylfl(S/L)i

l)lnL +

(4)

- n)kREGkU

+En REG
k nk k
where U takes a value of 1 if the plant is unionized and zero otherwise, and

REG indicates the region dummies. By specifying the model at this level of
generality we can assess the implications of constraining the region and production parameters to be identical.

The coefficients on the interaction terms provide estimates of the difference between union and non—union parameters, while the non—union parameters are

given by the coefficients on the regular independent variables. In this formulation the union impact depends on region, the extent of differences in technology and the particular value of the independent variables chosen for com-

parison. The union productivity effect in the kth region is given by:

[lfl(Q/L) b + u )ln(K/L). +

u 'mn)1i
-

(5)

+(Ou —O)lnL.+(ii
n
i
u —TI)
nk
Equation (5) makes clear that if production parameter differences are large,
and we ignore them in estimating

a substantial bias may be introduced.

In addition, the choice of comparison values of the input ratios may be of some

consequence. In the work which follows mean values will be used in calculations
of the productivity effect.

- 14

-

Section III: The Empirical Results
This section summarizes the cement industry data and presents estimates of

several variants of the basic model developed in Section 11. The means and
standard deviations of the variables used in the empirical analysis are pre-

sented in Table 2. The data cover the period 1973 — 76 and include 29 nonunion observations (9 plants) and 436 observations (119 plants) in the union sector
Each plant—year has been treated as a separate observation.29
Turning first to data from the complete sample (columns 2 and 3),
evidence on average productivity (line 1) in Table 2 reveals that nonunion establishments are 18 percent more productive than establishments

which are unionized. Part of the reason for the difference is evident in
the higher non—union capital—labor ratio (22 percent) in line 2, and the

higher rate of capacity utilization in line 3. The non—union sector also
has a higher supervisor ratio, but the difference is quite small. Similarly
small differences in size are found in line 5, with plants n the union
sector about two percent larger.

The importance of controlling for vintage in comparing union and nonunion establishments is evident in line 6, which contains data on average

kiln age. Unionized establishments are significantly older than the plants
in the non—union sector. The difference primarily reflects the almost complete organization of the industry by 1950, and the entry of new plants in

the 1960's which have remained non—union. The average kiln age actually
understates differences in the vintage of the capital stock. It is common
practice in the industry to install new kilns in old plants. Thus two plants
of the same kiln age may have very different grinding and crushing equipment,

very different plant designs and manning requirements. The problem is
especially acute in the case of union/non—union comparisons, since most non-

union plants have been constructed since the late 1950's. To more fully

— 15 —

Table

2

Means and Standard Deviations of
Productivity and Determinants
New Vintage Sample
(constructed since 1957)

Complete Sample
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Total

Union

Non-Union

Union

(T=465)

(T=436)

(T=29)

Basic Variables

Mean
(std.dev

1. Average Productivity
of productionworkers

2.16
(.82)

Mean
(std.dev.)

Mean
(std.dev.)

(5)

Non-Union

(T88)

(T=19)

Mean

lean

(std.dev.)

(std.dev.)

2.13

2.55

3.07

2.G

(.81)

(.80)

(.86)

(.73)

(tons per manhour)

2. Capital—labor ratioa
(adjusted tons of

1.91

1.88

2.34

2.88

.31

(1.84)

(1.88)

(1.20)

(1.19)

(1.15)

.86
(.19)

.85
(.19)

.94
(.22)

.31
(.13)

.31
(.13)

.36
(.14)

.41

.40

(.18)

(.15)

566.9
(330.8)

567.8
(333.6)

555.0

594.2

(296.9)

(308.9)

21.09

21.69

13.21

12.16

(13.01)

(13.13)

(8.08)

(3.32)

capacity per manhour)

3. Average Utiiizationb
rate

4. Supervisor_LaborC
ratio

5. Average Cement
Capacity
(thousands of tons)

6. Average kiln aged

.88

.92
(.27)

(.17)

(341.4)

3.23
(3.36)

—

Notes:

a)

the capital measure is calculated according to equation (1) with
A =

.985

b) utilization is output divided by cement capacity
c) measured as ratio of non—production manhours to production manhours
(t—j), where C is cement capacity,
ijt
i indexes plants, t is time, and j indexes

d) kilnage is defined as (—---)Zc.

Cj j

vintage

— 16 —

correct

for differences in the vintage of the plant, we have calculated means

and standard deviations for plants built since 1957. The results are presented
in columns 4 and 5.

The contrast between union/non—union comparisons based on the total sample

and those based on the new plants is instructive. Among new plants, unionized
establishments are more productive by 3.6 percent. As in the previous comparison, however, non—union establishments have a higher capital—labor ratio,

and operate at higher rates of utilization. The data for newly constructed
plants are thus not inconsistent with the existence of a positive union pro-

ductivity effect. Union establishments are more productive in spite of operating at lower rates of utilization, and with a lower capital—labor ratio. In
addition line 6 reveals that even among plants built since 1958, non—union

establishments are significantly newer. Taken together these patterns suggest
the plausibility of a positive union effect.

Estimates of the Basic Model
The basic model to be estimated has been laid out in equation (4 ).

Sev-

eral variants of the model are examined in this section, beginning in Table 3
with a version in which all parameters except the intercept are constrained to

be identical in the union and non—union sectors. The estimated union effects
are average effects across regions under the assumption of a common technology.
The equality constraints on the region effects and on the parameters of the

production process will be examined subsequently. The analysis in Table 3 does allow for vintage effects, first by estimating the model
for the plants built since 1957, and second by using the complete sample and
distinguishing between old and new union and non—union establishments. Finer
vintage distinctions are not possible given the number of non—union observa—

non—constant
returns —
size dummies

non—constant
returns —
total manhours

constant
returns

non—constant
returns — total
uanhour s

non—constant
returns — size
dummies

b)

c)

non—constant
returns — size

b)

4)

3)

2)

1)

.810
.933

(.070)

(.063)

.175

.213

(.029)

.356

(.028)

• 237

(.027)

.178

.160
(.030)

(.077)

(.022)

(.019)

.384

(.073)

.276

(.141)

1.035
(.074)

.328

(.021)

1.001

.327
(.021)

.353

.090
(.042)

.442
(.068)

.103
(.044)

.447

(.043)

.110

ln(S/L)

(.053)

(.069)

(.133)

.802

(.271)

.883

.445
(.057)

.725
(.114)

ln(K/L)

.033

;

(.027)

— .032

(.050)

—

ln(L)

X

X

x

size
dummies

X

X

K

x

x

x

x

(.044)

—.027

(.045)

—.027

union
(total)

Plant Vintage

region
dummies

or

.068

(.055)

.091

(.056)

.070

.071

(.056)

(.04 7)

.100

(.046)

—.111

(.084)
(.053)

(.087)
—.140

(.055)

—.079

(.087)

—.117

—.084
(.055)

—

—

—

(old)

non—union

—.123

—

—

(old)

(new)

.070
(.046)

union

union

.630

.617

.673

.650

.649

.702

.651

.650

R2

total

non—union

358

10

107

19

465

29

the capital measure is calculated
according to equation (1 ), with .985
regions are defined in footnote 24
size categories are based on total cement
capacity and breakdown as follows (in 1,000 tons): 0—250, 250—500,
500—750, 750—1000, IOOIHold and new are defined as before and after
1957, respectively the number of observations in each
union—vintage cell are as follows:
old
new
total
union
348
88
436

dummies

constant
returns

a)

complete sample
with nounionvintage effects

constant
returns

a)

complete sample
with union effects
by vintage

Note:

3.

2.

c)

b)

a)

Specification
new plant sample

1.

Cons

Estimates of the Thion Effear 'ithAitrnative
ControLs-

3

17 —

Table

—

.24

.227

.211

.217

.218

.160

.170

.170

SEE

— 18 —

tions.

Furthermore, since most plants in the industry were unionized by 1950,

the data set contains little information about the union differential among
older plants.

The results with the new plant sample in line 1 appear to provide a
reasonable description of the cement production process among newer plants.3°
The size of the coefficient on the capital—labor ratio is consistent with
the capital intensive nature of cement production, and with evidence from
the Census of Manufacturers?1 Other production function parameters are

similarly consistent. We find that a 10 percent increase in the supervisor—
worker ratio will increase productivity by 1 percent. In addition there is
no evidence of a clear relationship between productivity and the scale of

operations. The coefficient on total production manhours per establishment
in line lb is quite small, with a large standard error, suggesting that the
sum of the output elasticities is not significantly different from one.
Moreover, the size dummies referred to in line lc show no consistent pattern.
That does not imply, however, that productivity does not differ signifi-

cantly between establishments of different size. Empirically, the size
dummies provide a significant increase in explanatory power, even though
the relationship between size and productivity is not monotonic.
The evidence on the union effect in line 1 supports the view that union-

ization in the newer plants increases productivity. A positive union effect
is found in all specifications. In line la, which assumes constant returns,

we estimate that unionization raises productivity by 7 percent. The addition
of total production manhours in lb has little effect on the estimated union

effect. However, the union impact is significantly larger when size dummies
are used to capture scale effects. With size dummies present, we estimate a
union effect of 10 percent.32

— 19 —

In

lines 2a — 2c the model is estimatedwith union effects by
vintage using

the complete sample. The results indicate that the older union and non—union
plants are both less productive than the newer plants, and not significantly dif-

ferent from one another. The difference between the coefficients in line 2a,
for example, is —

.038(.070).

The size of the coefficient and its standard error

is not surprising given the small number of non—union observations.

The addition

of information from the complete sample does not affect the positive union effect

among the newer plants. Under each specification, the estimated coefficient for
new union plants is virtually identical to the estimates in line 1.

!Iowever,

when the new and old plants are forced to have the same union coefficient in
lines 3a — 3b, the averaging process yields an insignificant negative coeffi-

cient and obscures the vintage effects.
Union Effects by Region and Differences in Technology
The estimates of the basic model in table 3 assume no regional differences in the union effect and identical

production parameters in the

union and non—union sectors. These assumptions are examined in table 4
by introducing region interaction terms (line 1) and by estimating the

full

unconstrained model with separate coefficients for the union and non—union

establishments (line 2). The estimates of the union effect by region in
line 1 are based on the new plant sample and cover the South and Southwest
since these are the only regions in which new union and non—union

plants co—exist.33 The evidence clearly suggests a substantial difference
between the two regions, with the effect in the Southwest much larger.
The union effect in the South is negative in two of the specifications,
although the coefficient is small, and about one—fifth the size of

its standard error. The imprecision in the estimates reflects the few
number of flOfl—uflio

available

observations

(4) in the South. More information is

in the Southwest, which contain many of the non—union I [rms in

the industry. The regional pattern evident in table 4

is conststcni with

one interpretation of the relative prevalence of non—union firms in the

c)

h)

a)

2.

b)

c)

.429

(3)

(2)

.510
(.209)

.662
(.117)

.055
(.111)

(.080)

(.043)

.135

.121
(.043)

(.043)

.496

.437
(.052)

-

(.050)

—.336

in L

—

17

53

lo

23

—

14

—

107

88
14
23

38

13

the union effect in 2a is an average over a?l resicno;c:Cc
(see equatio (4)).

total

non—union

union

total
b.C.
b.C.

southwst

south

line 1

X

input—union
interaction size
dummies
terms

are as follows:
observations by union—region cell

built before 1957

the nurber of

plants

region effect;
separate union/
non-union technoiogieS conotant
returns

region effects; no
union/non-union
differences in
technology; constant
returns

no region or technologY
.474
constraints; constant
.681
returns
(.095) (.049)

union effect with and
without region and
technology differences

.427
.938
(.184) (.070)

non—constant
returns — size
dummies
.098

(.045)

(.306) (.060)

(.044)

.119

.113

1.021

(.169) (.060)

.840

_____________________

1nSiL)

.431

-

region

-

nRjL,

of Technology

non—constant
returns — total
manhours

returns

constant

a)

Specifications
-1. union effect by

-—

ons

The Effect

2

27

23

b.C.

14

—

.111

-

.165
(.106)

(.098)

.171

—

-

—

R

.695

.692

.681

.705

.655

.653

nv—uniOn sector

117

29

(.052)

—.043
(.102)

(.093)

.081
(.040)

.110
(.049)

-.078

(.104)

.125
(.053)

(.104)

001

.091
(.052)

14

.092
(.052)

—.023

(.103)

—.016

Union Effect by Region
North
South
W!Southwest
Central

to zbe
luput coefficientS in 2c pertain

32

38
13

line
southwest

X

X

X

X

terms

region—
union
interaction

south

X

X

X

X

X

region
dummies

Table 4
and Region on the Productivity Effect

.171

170

.172

.160

.170

.170

SEE

—21—
Southwest. Given a union wage effect, and the regional nature of markets,
union firms in the Southwest may face greater competitive pressure and
a more Immediate incentive to improve operations and reduce costs.
The effect of relaxing the technology constraint is examined in line 2
where estimates of the union effect from the full unconstrained model are

presented (see equation (5)). The estimates are based on the new plant
sample with the addition of older non—union plants. The use of all available
non—union plants is designed to improve the precision of estimates in the

non—union sector. While the use of older non—union plants may bias the
union effect, our primary interest is not in specific estimates, but in
the change in the union effect when the technology constraint is

relaxed. Thus, the estimates in line 2 are to be viewed as no more than
illustrative of the impact of specification changes.
In order to provide a basis of comparison, line 2a contains estimates

of the model without region or technology effects. The assumption of
constant returns has been imposed and is maintained when the region and
technology constraints are relaxed. It is clear from comparison with the
results in line la of table 3 that the use of older non—union plants has only

minor effects. The production function parameters are very similar, and
the union effect of 8 percent is only marginally higher. It appears that
the larger sample conveys much of the same information as obtained when

the older non—union plants are excluded. A greater measure of divergence
Ia evident in line 2b where estimates are presented with the regional

constraints relaxed. The production parameters are similar to those
found in line 1, but the union effect shows greater variation across

regions. The most striking change is found in the South, where the union
effect is much more negative. The effect In the Southwest is quite close
to the sample average, while the North Central estimate Is large and

positive. As with the earlier results, the union effect in the South
is based on relatively few observations and there appears to be a good
deal of divergence in productivIty among the non—union plants within that

— 22 —

region.

The result is a large standard error on the Southern effect, so

that when the three regions are averaged, the effects in the North Central
and Southwest dominate.

In line 2c we present estimates of the model without constraining

the productionparameters in the union and non—union sectors to be identical.
The results provide evidence of no significant differences in technology

between the two sectors. Although the union sector emerges with a lower
capital coefficient, and a higher coefficient on the supervisor—worker
ratio the interaction terms have large standard errors?4 The union
effect by region has been calculated using equation (5) and mean values

of (K/L) and (S/L) in each region. The results suggest that
technology differences explain little of the union/non—union

productivity differential. The estimated union effects in line 2c are
very close to the effects estimated with the technology constraint imposed.
The evidence thus suggests that constraining the production functions to be
identical in the union and non—union sectors does not obscure important
technological distinctions, and does not affect inferences about the union effect.
Section IV: Firm Effects and Quality Adjustments
The empirical analysis in section III found unionized establishments

to be more productive than their non—union counterparts. The evidence suggests
that unionization leads to productive changes in the operation of the enterprise.

This conclusion, however, rests on two assumptions. First, the union coefficient
only can be identified as a measure of the productivity effect of unionization
if we assume the absence of individual firm effects, or that any effects specific
to the enterprise are independent of union status and other determinants.
Second, it is necessary to assume that quality adjustments are non—existent or

small. The statistical design in section III failed to control for union
induced changes in worker quality. The union coefficient, therefore, may
capture more than organization effects.

— 23

—

These issues have been examined at lehgth in Clark (1979)
and will be addressed only briefly here. To estimate the impact of
the union holding constant firm specific effects, we make use of
data on productivity in six establishments before and after unionization.
Information on turnover in each establishment sheds light on the extent of
quality differences after the union is introduced, and permits a rough
calculation of the bias caused by omission of quality measures.

Productivity Before and After Unionization
Empirical analysis of productivity using time series data on a given
establishment requires modifications to the basic model developed in section III.
Since the focus is on a change in union status in a specific establishment,

controls for region and vintage may be omitted. However, changes in methods
of organization and management which improve productivity are likely to occur

over time and should be controlled for in estimating the union effect.35

Assuming that disembodied technological change in the ith firm is of the
sample exponential form, the basic model may be rewritten as:
ln(Q/L) =

in A0 + 5t

+ (S
where 5

it +

+ bU.

cx

it

in(K/L). + y ln(S/L).

— 1)
inL. +

it (6)

is the rate of technological change, v is the error term and all other

variables are defined as before.

As specified in (6), the parameters of the production process are assumed to
be identical in each firm, but productivity may vary across establishments

because of differences in organizational factors. It is common in production
function analysis, for example, to attribute part of any unexplained variation

in output to firm specific differences in managerial ability.36 If specific
differences in organizational factors exist, ignoring them may lead to biased
estimates of production parameters, including the union productivity effect.
Firm specific effects may be held constant by assuming that the error term has
the following "fixed effects" structure:

— 24 —

V.it =P.1 +E it
(7)

Evi
2

a

.
v when i = j anu

it

COV(V. ,ViS) = EC1tE15

t —

=
0

otherwiSe

Under this specification, consistent estimates can be obtained by introducinc
individual establishment intercepts.

Time series data from the PCA survey has been developed for six cement

plants which were unionized in the 1953—1976 period. Since several of the
establishments were constructed after 1953, we do not have data on each plant

in each year of the period. There is an average of 17 years of data per
establishment.36 Table 5 presents a summary of the estimated union coefficient
under alternative specifications. The sign of the union effect is invariably
positive, while the exact order of magnitude and precision of the estimate

depends on model specification. The evidence supports the conclusion, however,
that unionization leads to gains in productivity within an establishment, with
the size of the effect ranging from 8—10 percent.

These results are not

sensitive to adjustments in the model to allow for variation in capacity
utilization or other omitted variables.37
Quality Adjustments
Both the cross section and the before/after analyses suggest that

unionization leads to productive changes in the operation of the enterprise.

Yet neither control for possible changes in labor quality. If unionization
induces firms to acquire workers of higher quality, the estimated

effect

may reflect quality differences as well as changes in organization. While
sufficient data is not available to address tile extent of union/non—union

differences in quality, it is possible to place an upperbound on the potential
bias due to omission of quality measures in the before/after analysis.

/

corrected for
auto correlation

2

.084

(.070)

.103

(.063)
.147

.181

.147

—

.83

(.091)

.590

.576
(.091)

—

P

The results corrected for auto correlation were estimated with input parameters
set at cross section values.

/

constant returns to
scale

(.070)

.104

.89

D.W.

Note:

1

corrected for
auto correlation

.179

.107
(.064)

SEE

Union

Adapted from Clark (1979), table

/

non—constant returns
to scale

Firm Intercepts

Firm Specific Effects

Source:

2.

5

—

Estimates of the Union Differential Controlling for

Specification
1.

25

Table

—

— 26 —

The change in productivity which follows from union induced changes

in labor quality depends on technology and the union wage effect. If unionization raises the wage, the firm will attempt to reduce costs by substituting

higher for lower qualilworkers. But a distinction must be made between
changing the quality of the workforce and changing workforce productivity.
While it is clear that productivity and quality are related positively,
the magnitude of productivity change resulting from a change in quality

depends on the technology of production. Without precise specification of
the way in which workers of different quality interact with each other and

with other factors of production few conclusions can be drawn about the extent
to which the firm can recover the incremental cost of an exogenous wage

increase by hiring workers of higher quality. It is possible, however, to
place an upper bound on the change in productivity. In order for the firm to
achieve a stable equilibrium, a given change in quality must lead to a more

rapid increase in the wage than in productivity.38 This condition is intuitively
reasonable, since if it were not true, the firm could lower unit costs by

raising the wage. The implication is that the effect of quality adjustments
on productivity is bounded by the union wage effect.
The stability condition can be used to gauge the effect of omitting

quality adjustments in the before/after analysis. Assume that unionization
raises the wage by c percent. Because of contract rules and associated legal
problems the firm is not likely to adopt the optimal overall level of worker

quality immediately. Until the workforce has turned over completely, the
firm will have old and new workers and the new workers will be of higher
quality. The stability conditLon implies that the efficiency advantage of
new workers will be less than

percent. If we assume that unionization does

not change the basic technology of production, the effect of unionization on
productivity can be written as: b + hD3, where b is the organization effect as

— 27 —

before,

h is the efficiency advantage of new workers, D is the proportion of new

workers in the workforce and 3 is the elasticity of output with respect to

changes in production labor input.39 The empirical analysis summarized in
table 5 implicitly assumed hDI3=0 so that the union coefficient could be

identified as the organization effect. A more realistic upper bound on the
quality effect can be estimated from available information on labor's share,
the union wage effect, and turnover in the six plants.
Based on the estimation results in table 3, a likely value for 13 is

0.45. Evidence in Clark (1978) suggests that the union wage effect lies in
the range from 12—18 percent. This, estimate is based on data on the entry wage,

with adjustments for fringe benefits, and changes in job classifications. Since
the efficiency advantage of new workers is less than the wage effect, we shall

use values of 11 and 16 percent for h in the calculations which follow. As
part of a general case study of the effects of unionization in the six
before/after plants, information has been obtained on the percentage of the 1976

workforce who were employed at the time the plant was organized (see Clark
(1979) for details of the case studies). The average value of D in 1976 was

0.34, with estimates ranging from .05 to .65. This overstates the proportion
of new workers relevant for present purposes, since D should be measured by

an average value over the sample period. If the rate of growth of D was
constant throughout the union era, then the estimated value at the midpoint

of the period would be appropriate. Both midpoint and endpoint values will
be used in calculations below.
Table 6 summarizes the assumed values of (3, h and D arid presents

alternative calculations of the effect of quality on productivity. These
calculations support the conclusion that changes in quality are likely to have

had a small effect on productivity. Under the most generous assumptions,
quality improvements raise productivity by a litt over two percent. Under

— 28 —

Table

6

Calculations of Upper Bounds on the Effect of
Quality Adjustments on Producticity
Estimates of the Quality Effect
(1)

(2)

Turnover Assumption

Upper Bound
Estimates of
Union Wage
Effect

(1) endpoint value

(

D = .34

=

h =

Lower Bound
Estimate of
Union Wage
Effect

.16)

(c =

.12;

q = .024

q =

.017

.012

q =

.008

(2) mid point value

D = .17

Note: q =

hD;

q =

=

.45; h =

.9;

4

= union

wage effect

h =

.11)

— 29 —

more realistic assumptions about turnover, the effect is close to
one percent.
Given that these calculations provide upper bounds, the evidence suggests
that omission of quality measures introduces at most a small bias into
estimates of the union effect in the before/after analysis.

Correcting for

changes in quality leaves the basic findings intact.

Section V: Conclusion
The empirical evidence suggests that unionization increases the

productivity of otherwise comparable establishments. This finding emerges
in both cross section and time series data and is relatively robust with

respect to model specification. Controls for capital—labor substitution,
economies of scale, individual firm effects, technology differences and changes
in labor quality have been introduced with only moderate effects on the

magnitude of the union differential. Since the traditional channels of union
influence have been held constant, we interpret the finding as a measure of
the effect of unionization which works through changes in the internal operation
of the firm.

The finding of a positive union effect in a particular situation does

not warrant the conclusion that unionization

raisesproductivity everywhere,

lways. Indeed, evidence from the coal industry suggests that the
deterioration of industrial relations in that industry in the l970's
led to a significant decline in productivity in unionized establishments.40
It is evident that the union effect in

a particular setting will vary with

the character of industrial relations. As
the effect of unionization on

Marshall argued long ago,

productivity depends on union policy as well

as management adjustment. Research reported here and elsewhere has uncovered
positive union effects, but remains incomplete. The task ahead is to
identify the actual channels of union influence and
procedures which yield gains in productivity.

those practices and

— 30 —

FOOTNOTES

1. The basic reference is Slichter, Healy and Livernash (1960).
2. See Marshall (1899), PP. 381—382, 387; and Moore (1961), PP. 187—189.

3. Bok and Dunlop (1970), pp. 260—261 provide a brief summary of this
literature.
4. See Brown and Medoff (1978), and Frantz (1976).

5. The same is true of the value added assumption. Indeed, Brown
and Medoff show that if unions have a wage effect and relative
cost differences are fully reflected in prices, the estimated union
coefficient identifies only a price effect. See Brown and Medoff (1978).
6. The analysis would be unchanged If framed in terms of total factQr
productivity. The only difference lies in the treatment of factor
shares. See Griliches and Jorgensen (1965).
7. The traditional channel is discussed in Johnson and Miezskowski
(1970), and the paper by Lewis in Bradley (1959).
8. This effect assumes the existence of unexploited opportunities to
increase profits and is therefore closely related to Lelb9nstein's
X—efficiency; see Leibenstein (l96 for an extended analysis.
9. The most prominent example of featherbedding rules are found in the
construction and transportation sectors.
10. For a classic statement of these ideas, see Simon (1953).

11. See Freeman (1976) for a discussion of these Issues.

12. See Freeman (1978).
13. The effectof seniority on training is discussed in Williamson,

Wacht a1arris

(1975).

14. Research in organizational behavior suggests that there is no
necessary link between morale and productivity. The link between
motivation and productivity Is quite strong, however, and is affected
by workers' perceptions. See Lawler (1973).
15. The neglect of some aspects of the production process is consistent wIth
behavior characterized by bounded rationality and satisf icing, rather
than full optimization. For an analytical treatment of several
satisficing models, see Radner (1975).

— 31 —

16.

These issues are dealt with in great depth in Slichter, et.al (1960).

17. For information on the cement industry see Loescher (1959),
Lesley (1924), Hadley (1945) and Hilts (1938). An informative
booklet on the industry is published by the Portland Cement
Association entitled The Cement Industry: An Economic Report (1974).
18. See Loescher (1959), pp. 135—136.
19. U.S. Department of Commerce, Construction Review (June, 1976).
20. Loescher (1959) presents an analysis of pricing practices in the
industry.

21. See Clark (1978), pp. 45—48. Beginning in 1960, the industry
experienced several years of excess capacity. In the face of
increasing supply, the real price of cement fell 25 percent
from 1960 to 1970.
22. See Heneghan (1957) for a discussion of the history of the union.
23. The survey covers about 80 percent of the establishments in the
industry. While the composition of the sample varies slightly from
year to year, there appears to be no systematic variation in participation by region, union status, size or productivity.

24. The regions were defined as fo]lows: North East — Maine, New Hampshire,
Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New York, Delaware,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, West Virginia; North Central —
Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin,
Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota, North Dakota; South —
Florida, Georgia, Alabama, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virginia,
Kentucky, Tennessee, Mississippi; Southwest — Louisiana, Arkansas,
Texas, Oklahoma; West — New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Idaho, Colorado,
Nevada, Montana, Washington, Oregon, California.
25. It is important to note that the assumption that all capital is
proportional to kiln capacity could result in a biased estimate
of the union effect. If, for example, unionization raises the
wage—rental ratio, firms will have incentive to substitute capital
for labor. In the case where some part of the capital stock is not
proportional to kiln capacity, our measure of the capital—labor
ratio will understate the true ratio in union establishments, and
so lead to an upward bias in the union coefficient. It is our
view that this bias is quite small. Given the nature of the
production process, the fraction of the capital stock not proportional
to the size of the kiln is likely to be relatively small. If, for
example, we set this fraction as high as 0.20, and assume a union
wage effect of 15 percent, then with an elasticity of substitution
equal to one, and a capital share of 0.4, the bias amounts to a little
over one percentage point.

- ,32

26.

-

Brown and Hedoff found that measured labor quality explained very little of
the variation in productivity in aggregate, data. In research iii
progress Chamberlain has used the Brown—Medoff data to estimate the union
productivity effect with a model in which both observed and unobserved
components of labor quality were introduced. He found that accounting
forunobserved quality differences had little impact!on the union
productivity effect.

27. The Cobb—Douglas form is restrictive, but useful for its simplicity.
Other functional forms leave basic conclusions unchanged. Using a
CES specification, for example, we obtain a union effect of .093 (.050)
in the Southwest region, and an effect of .015 (.100) in the
South. These results should be compared with those in line 1 of
table 4.

28. The formulation in (4) assumes that the standard deviations of the
error terms in the union and non—union equations are identical.
Re—running the equations separately results in standard errors of
estimate not significantly different from one another, and consequently little change in the standard errors. of the coefficients.
29. The treatment of each plant year as a separate observation ignores
the time series —cross section nature of the data. The most serious
problem with the procedure is the failure to take into account
firm specific effects which may lead to understatement of the standard
errors a well as bias in the union effect. Because union
status changes In only one establishment in the 1973—76 period
it is not possible to identify both the effect of unionization
and individual firm effects. We have assumed that the average
firm effect in the union and non—union sector is identical, so that
firm effects net Out in any union/non—union comparison. We have
examined the impact of entering a time trend in the analysis, and
allowing for a time—varying Intercept through year dummies. Neither
of these adjustments affects the results. With year dummies, for
example, the average union effect is .068 (.043) compared to .064 (.045)
with a trend term, and .070 (.046) in the results'reported
in table 3.
30. Since gross output has been used to calculate productivity in table 3,
the results rest on an assumed; proportionality between materials
(including energy) and gross output. The assumption is likely to
be reasonably accurate for raw material, but there Is evidence
that the ratio of energy to output has changed quite substantially
over the last 10 years. Even if energy use and unionization are
uncorrelated, omission of energy may bias the results. As long as
energy (or more accurately the ratio of energy to other inputs)
is correlated with included variables which are in turn correlated
with unionization, the union coefficient will be biased. The sign
and extent of the bias will depend crucially on the relationship
between the union dummy and the capital—labor ratio.

— 33 —

For example, a regression of :ln (K/L) on U using the new plant
sample and other control variables from line la, yields a
coefficient of —.067 (.080). Assuming that the relationship
between energy and capital is positive, as seems likely, the result
implies that the omission of energy actually Induces a dowTiward bias
in the union effect. In any case, given the magnitude of the
coefficient, the extent of the bias is likely to he quite small.
Similar conclusions apply to the question of bias induced by
measurement error in the capital stock.

31. Calculation of the ratio of the wage bill
a value of 0.30, which implies a capital
(value added—wage bill) contains elements
to capital, this calculation considerably
share.

to value added yields
share of 0.7. Since
which are not payments
overstates capital's

32. The magnitude of the union impact in table 3 is roughly comparable
to the estimated change in unit costs arising from the union wage
effect. Using data on the entry wage in union and non—union
establishments, Clark (1978) finds that rates in unionized
establishments are about 12—18 percent higher than in comparable
non—union establishments. This translates into an effect on cement
costs of about 5—8 percent. With a productivity effect of 7 percent
the evidence suggests that unionization has no effect on unit costs.
33. To preserve degrees of freedom, the West and Southwest have been
grouped together in table 3 and table 4. In separate runs, these
regions had almost identical coefficients; combining the two regions
has no effect on the results.
34. The coefficients on the ineraction terms are: —.098 (.108) on the
capital—labor ratio, and .055 (.111) on the supervisor—worker ratio.
35. In principle, variation in the utilization of the capital stock should
also be included. In practice, controlling for utilization rates has
only moderate effects on the estimated union coefficient. For example,
under constant returns to scale, introduction of the utilization rate
yields a union coefficient of 0.l00(.040); when corrected for atuo
correlation, the result is .064(.040).
36. There is an average of 8.7 years of data following unionization.
37. It might be argued that abrupt changes in the firm's environment, which raise
productivity, may be correlated with unionization. Using data
on plants which do not change union status Clark (1979) finds that
omitted variable bias of this sort is not important. Controlling for
variation in productivity in other plants, the union effect is .092(.046)
under non—constant returns, and .069(.043) under constant returns.

— 34 —

38.

This result holds in a model in which quality augments the efficiency
of labor and in which the wage is an increasing function of quality.
See Clark (1979).

39. After unionization the production process is Q AK1(L + (l4h)
where o and n indicate old and new respectively. We not that
A = A (i+b), L = L + L and D =(L/L). Pooling union and
non uion observatigns w have in (Q/L) = in A0 + [b + hE3]U + (i-) in (K/L),
where U is the union dummy.
40. These results are based on work in progress by Margaret Connerton,
Richard Freeman and James Medoff.

— 35 —
REFERENC C S

1.

Brown, Charles and James L. Hedoff, "Trade Unions in the Production
Process" Journal of_Political Econorn1, (June, 1978).

2. Bok, Derek and John T. Dunlop, Labor and the American coflimunitL
(N.Y., 1970).
3. Bradley, Philip ad. The Public Stake in tin ion Power (Charlottesville, 1959).

4. Clark, Kim B., "Unions and Productivity in the Cement Industry,"
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1978.
5.

______________
Unionization," processed, 1979.

, "Productivity

Before and After

6. Council on Wage and Price Stability, Prices and Cpç4ty Exl!psion in
the Cement Induatry, (1977).

7. Federal Trade Commission, EconomicReflprtoinMe1ere.ndvenjrl

Inttion in CemenS (1966).
B. Frantz, John, "The impact of Trade Unions on Productivity in the Wood
Household Furniture Industry," processod (June, 1976).
9. Freeman, Richard B., "Individual Mobility and Collective Voice In the
Labor Market," American Economic Review, (May 1976).
10.

________--__________ ,, "The Exit—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market:
Unionism, Job Tenure, Quits and Separations," NBER Working Papor No. 242.

11. Griliches, 1. and Vidar Ringatad, Returns to Scale and the Form of the
Production Function (Amsterdam, 1974).
12. Hadley, Earl J., The Magic Powder, (New York, 1945).
13. Heneghan, John N., "A History of the United Cement, Lime and Gypsum Workers
International Union," processed, (1952).
14. Hilts, H.E., The Manufacturing, Volume, and Costs of the Portland Cement
Industry iQj7United States, (Washington, D.C., 1938).
15. Johnson, Harry and Peter Hiezkowski, "The Effects of Unionization on the
Distribution of Income: A General Equilibrium Approach," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, November, 1970.
16. Jorgensen, Dale and Griliches, Z., "The Explanation of Productivity
Change," Review of Economic Studies, (1965).
17. Lawler, E.E., Motivari:: [Li Work OrAunizadons, (Monterey, 1973).

18. Leibenstieo, Harvey, "Ailocative Efficiency vs. 'X—Efflciency'"
American Economic Revicw, 'soc, 1966.

19.

Tesley, Robert W.,
United

States,

Hiatodof the Portland Cement Jndusiry in the

(Chicago, 1924).

20. Loescher, Samuel M., Imperfect Collusion In
(Cambridge, 1959).
21. Marshall, Alfred, Elements of Economics,
22. Moore, H.L. , Laws

fWaes,

the

vol.

Cement Industry,

1 (London, 1899, 3rd edition).

(N.Y. 1911).

23. Portland Cement Association, "The Cement industry: An Economic Report," 1974.

24. Radner, Roy, "A Behavioral Model of Cost Reduction," Bell Journal of
Economics, (Spring, 1975)
25.

26.

Simon, Henry, "A Formal Theory of Employment," Econometrica,

Slichter,

Man;gorent,

Stigier, (;ii)re.l.,''A Hieurv '1
Economic

rt I. i verin;isli , liii Impact of
(Washington, D.C., 1960)

Sumner, James Ilealy, and Rote

Q!!UQc.t4y_,l9JZ34n tng on

27.

(1951).

Rev low, (Decc'mbc' r ,

28. U.S.- Departaent ol

1

Is' I I vend 'n ii'' Syol i'm:,,'' Ans'r ''dud

949)

Commerce, Construction Review, (June 1976).

29. Williamson, Dliver, Jeffrey Harris and Michael Wachter, "Understanding
the Employment Relation: The Analysis of Idiosyncratic Exchange,"
Bell Journal of Ecomics, (Spring 1975).

