               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         VEHICLE CURRENCIES AND THE STRUCTURE
               OF INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE



                      Paul Krugman



                  Working Paper No. 333




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                        April 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and, not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 333
                                                               April 1979




                                 SUMMARY


     Vehicle Currencies and the Structure of International Exchange


     This paper is concerned with the reasons why some currencies, such as

the pound sterling and the U.S. dollar, have come to serve as "vehicles" for

exchanges of other currencies. It develops a three—country model of payments

equilibrium with transaction costs, and shows how one currency can emerge as

an international medium of exchange. Transaction costs are then made

endogenous, and it is shown how the underlying structure of payments limits,

without necessarily completely determining, the choice and role of a vehicle

currency. Finally, a dynamic model is developed, and the way in which one

currency can displace another as the international medium of exchange is

explored.




                                                   Paul Krugman
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Yale University
                                                   28 Hillhouse Avenue
                                                   New Haven, CT 06520
                                                   (203) 436—3246
                                                              Revised March 1979




Introduction

     Most work in international monetary theory assumes a world in which there

are only two countries and two currencies. While this is a useful simplifica-

tion for many purposes, it does make it impossible to consider two interesting

aspects of the international monetary system. One aspect is what we might call

the structure of payments. In a world of more than two countries, each country

will run balance of payments surpluses with some countries, deficits with others,

even when its overall payments are in equilibrium. This multilateral struc-

ture of payments will often be of considerable economic interest. The other

neglected aspect of the international system is what we might call the

ture of exchange. People who want to exchange one currency for another will

not necessarily make the exchange directly. They may make the exchange by way

of some third currency, which becomes a "vehicle" for the transaction. His-

torically, certain currencies —   the pound sterling before 1914, the U.S. dol-

lar in recent years — have come to be widely used as vehicle currencies. To

put it another way, these currencies have served as international media of

exchange. The purpose of this paper is to examine why some currencies take

on this special role.

     There is an obvious parallel between the role of a vehicle currency in

international exchange and the role of money in domestic exchange. In each

case people choose to engage in indirect rather than direct exchange. When

we ask why currencies are not exchanged directly; why one currency pre-

dominates in indirect exchange; and what determines which currency takes on

that o1e, we are raising issues very similar to those we raise when we ask

why households engage in monetary exchange instead of barter; why some one

commodity tends to emerge as a medium of exchange; and why certain commodities

(gold, silver, furs, cigarettes) are more suited for this role than others.
                                                                                   2




By bringing up familiar issues in a different context, the study of inter-

national exchange can cast a new light on old insights. For example, I will

show that there must be indirect exchange if countries' payments are not bi-

laterally balanced. This, if one thinks about it, is just the counterpart in

international exchange of Jevons' lack of "double coincidence of wants."

Other parallels will appear in the course of the pp•i

     It is obvious that the international structure of exchange must depend

crucially on transaction costs. Since it is notoriously difficult to integrate

such costs into economic models, one might expect that any analysis of the

structure of exchange will have to b extremely complex. This need not be the

case, however, if one is willing to look at illuminating special cases instead

of trying for a general model. In this paper I will try to set out as simple

a model as possible of the structure of exchange. At each point assumptions

will be chosen to make the next step in the analysis as easy as possible. This

process of buying clarity at the expense of realism means that this paper must

be regarded as a preliminary study. Nonetheless, the results seem intuitively

plausible, and look as though they ought to generalize.

     The basic model of this paper is one in which there are three countries,

the minimum necessary for indirect exchange. Section I analyzes the model for

the case in which there are no transaction costs. In this case the structure

of payments can be determined, but the structure of exchange is indeterminate.

Transaction costs are introduced in Section II, and it is shown how the struc-

ture of these costs determines the structure of exchange. Section III then

allows transaction costs to depend in turn on the structure of exchange. This

section shows how, under plausible assumptions about the nature of this depen-

dence, the underlying structured payments limits the choice of vehicle currency.
                                                                                 3




 Finally, Section IV develops a dynamic model of the development of the exchange

 structure.

 I. The Hodel Without Transaction Costs

      Consider a world consting of three countries: A, B, and C. Each coun-

 try has its own currency, the Alpha in A, the Beta in B, and the Gamma in C.

 There are three exchange markets on which Alphas and Betas, Betas and Gammas,

 and Gammas and Aiphas can be exchanged. We will call these the ciB, By, ind yct

markets respectively. For the purposes of this section we will assume that ex-

 changing currencies is costless.

      Let us define E8 as the price of Aiphas in terms of Betas, EFY as the

price of Betas in terms of Gammas, and so on. Then because transactions are

 costless, arbitrage will ensure that the costs of acquiring a currency directly

 are the same as the costs of acquiring it indirectly, via the third currency.

This condition can be written as

     EciBEBy E
             ycx
                 =1                                                 (1)


     These exchange rates will be determined by the supply and demand for cur-

rencies. I will assume that the relevant variables are flow demands and sup-

plies. This goes against much recent literature on exchange rates, which views

exchange rates as determined by the requirements of stock equilibrium. The

only justification for the treatment here is simplicity. Asset market equilibrium

in the presence of transaction costs is very difficult to model, while if we

are willing to adopt a flow model the analysis is quite easy. The analysis here

should therefore be regarded as preliminary, with the integration of this

theory with the "asset" view of exchange rates a piece of pending business.

    The demand for and supply of currencies, then, will be assumed to arise
                                                                                      4



from the desire of residents of the three countries to make payments to other

countries. Residents of A wanting to make payments to B, for example, will

have to acquire Betas. The currency markets will clear if the demand for each

currency by foreign residents equals the supply from domestic residents want-

ing to make payments in foreign currency. Let us define                as the desired

payment by residents of A to B, measured in Betas, similarly BC is the desired

payment by residents of B to C, and so on.           In each case we viii assume that

'desired payments depend both on the exchange rates and on a vector Z of other

varaibles, which will be taken as exogenous. We can write the conditions of

equilibrium in the currency markets as



                E; Z) ÷     P(E, E;            Z)                                   (2)




       Ear   p(E         Ea; Z) +         .
                                              PAC(Ea
                                                        Ea; Z) for Aiphas;


                                                                                    (3)
                          + PCB(EcxBp E; Z)
       p(E, Eya; A)
                                                                 for   Betas; and
       E13. PBA(E, Eya; Z) + E81. PHC(Ea8 E1; Z)
                                                                                    (4)
                           + PBC(E, E; Z)
       PAC(EP Ea; z)
                                                                  for Gammas. In each case
       E. PcA(E, Eya;
                            Z) ÷
                                    EYB
                                          •
                                              PcB(Ea, E; Z)
  we have written a condition of aggregate balance of payments equilibrium. Be-
                                                    countries are in balance of payments
  cause of budget constraints, if any two
                                                                        there is
  equilibrium, the third must also be in balance. Notice, however, that

                                    be in bilateral balance. If, for example,
  no reason why countries must
                                                            with A, we can still
  P
    AC
       > E  P ,
          yctCA
                 i.e., C runs a balance of payment surplus

   have an equilibrium if A runs an offsetting surplus, and C an offsetting

   deficit, with B.
                               5




E




                   B




    a                      Y




                       N

                           a




        Figure 1
                                       6




    T      A               R




        T— I
                    R- I



           —i
C


    - -----     S
                               >
                                   B




         ure 2
                                               7




                    N
         /
/   /
/
             sI
                        Figure 3




                   a



             S -4-T —   I              R+S-I



    -r



                            Figure 4
                                                                           8




    Figure 1 illustrates the determination of the system of exchange rates
                                                     substitutes. The horizontal
under the assumption that the currencies are gross
                                             of Betas, the vertical axis the
axis measures the price of Aiphas in terms

price of Aiphas in terms of Gammas.    The lines ctcz, 88 and yy lines represent

positions of balance of payments equilibrium for A, B, and C respectively.

Wairas' Law assures that they intersect at a single point.

     Now let us consider the structure of payments and the range of possible

structures of exchange. It will be helpful if we choose units so that the

equilibrium exchange rates are all equal to one. We can then express payments

arbitrarily in any of the currencies. Given this normalization, the structure

of payments will look like that illustrated in Figure 2.

                                       of one country to residents of another
In the figure, payments by residents
                                shown as running a surplus of I in its exchange
are indicated by arrows. A is

with B; we can relabel B and C if necessary to make this true. The figure
                                                     equilibrium, B must run a sur-
 then shows that, to maintain balance of payments

 plus of I with C, and C a surplus of I with A. Jhile payments need not be

 bilaterally balanced, then, there is a sort of conservation of imbalancC. Once

 we specify A's surplus with B, we have also determined the imbalances be-

 tween B and C and between C and A. (This is a special feature of three—country

 models).

      Our next task is to consider what structures of exchange are possible

 given this structure of payments. Obviously the structure of exchange is not

 determinate In the absence of transaction costs.   But there are limits on the

                                           it will not be possible to carry out
 range of possibilities. In particular,

 the payments in Figure 2 solely through direct exchange. If everyone tried to

 acquire the desired foreign currency in a single transaction, there would be
                                                                                  9




an excess demand for Alphas on the cxB market, an excess demand for Betas on

the y market, and an excess demand for Gammas on the - market.          So some

indirect exchange must take place because, as already pointed out, countries

will not usually have a "double coincidence of wants.'t

     What kinds of structure of exchange are possible? There are obviously

infinite possibilities —    for   instance, one might exchange Gammas for Aiphas

and back again seventeen times, etc. —     but   once we introduce transaction

costs, there will turn out to be only two types of exchange which can actually

arise. An example of the first type is given in Figure 3, where the two—

headed arrows represent the volume of transactions on the cz, y, and ya

markets. In this example the residents of C make payments of I to B indirectly,

first purchasing Alphas and then exchanging these for Betas. They continue to

purchase S —   I   Betas directly, however. At the same time residents of B and

A engage only in direct exchange. As is apparent from Figures 2 and 3, this

clears all three currency markets, by increasing the supply of Gammas on the

yct market and the supply of Aiphas on the c&$ market. Since this structure

of exchange involves indirect exchange only for the imbalance in payments, let

us call this a case of partial indirect exchange using Alphas as the vehicle

currency, with the understanding that it is the payments imbalance I which is

indirectly exchanged. Clearly, we can have partial indirect exchange with

any one of the three currencies as vehicle.

     Figure 4 gives an example of the other possible kind of exchange structure.

In this case all payments between B and C are made indirectly, through the

medium of Aiphas. The y market disappears, while the ciB and yci markets have

he indicated volume. Since all three countries are in balance of payments

equilibrium, it is obvious that both existing currency markets clear. Let
                                                                             10




us call this a case of total indirect exchange, with Alphas as the vehicle

currency. Again, we can also have total indirect exchange with Betas or

Gammas as the vehicle.

     To summarize: I have defined two kinds of structure of exchange, partial

indirect exchange and total indirect exchange. Each type of structure in-

volves the use of one currency as a "vehicle" for indirect transactions. So

we have to determine which currency is the vehicle and which kind of exchange

structure occurs. To do this we must now introduce transaction costs.
                                                                                                11




II. Transaction Costs and flxchange

     In this section I show how transaction costs can determine the structure

of exchange. This analysis relies on the assumption that transaction costs

are "small," so that we can use a concept of approximate equilibrium which

will be defined in a moment. In essence what this concept allows us to do is

determine the structure of exchange while ignoring any feedback from the

structure of exchange to the structure of payTnents.'

     Let us begin by describing transaction costs. I will assume that in each

of the three markets transactors must pay a brokerage fee proportional to the

size of the transaction. This proportion will be tci ,        t By   ,   and   t      in the

cz, y, andmarkets respectively. It will be assumed (countries will be label-

led such that) t         and t   are both less than t   •   This   will, as we will see,
                              ya
insure that the Alpha is the vehicle currency.

        The way these transaction costs will work is to worsen the effective ex-

change rate one gets. Thus if            is the exchange rate on the ciB market, a

                                                                                Betas per
transactor purchasing Betas will actually get only E8(l —                tB)
Alpha; a transactor purchasing Aiphas will get only E(l —                          Aiphas per Beta.
                                                                         taB)
        Because of the transaction costs, the arbit'ige condition (1) will no

longer hold exactly. Instead there will be a deviation from triangular arbit-

rage,

        DE E ByE
             ci8   yci
                         ,Ll
                                                             (5)

        I will call D, which may be either greater or less than one, tha clockwisdom

of exchange rates. The reason for the name is that an increase in the value of

D makes indirect exchange more attractive compared with direct exchange if the

indirect exchange proceeds clockwise in Figures 3 and 4, less attractive if

the indirect exchange proceeds counterclockwise. Consicer, for example, an

exchange of Aiphas for Gammas. In direct exchange, the exchange rate is
                                                                                                                 12



1/E1. In indirect exchange, clockwise via Betas, the rate is EEBy. There

will thus be a bias in favor of Indirect exchange if E E                              >   lIE   ,   that   is,
                                                                               aBy
if E E E          = D >   1.   On the other hand, an exchange of Betas for Gammas
     ciB By yci

takes place at a rate            directly, whil2 the counterclockwise indirect ex-

change takes place at a rate 1/EBEY; thus there is a bias against indirect
                                                                               1.
exchange if          >
                          1/EE         that is, EciBEBIEYa = D >                    Clearly, individuals

deciding between direct and indirect exchange will take into account both

transaction costs and the clockwisdóm of exchange rates.

      Using the concept of clockwisdom we can now proceed to analyze equilibrium.

'Yhat I will derive here is an approximate equilibrium, which will be close to

the actual provided transaction costs are small. The approxiTnateflesS comes

from considering only the effect of transaction costs on the way payments are

made, ignoring the effect of these costs on the payments themselves. Another

way of saying this is to say that transaction costs are taken to affect the

structure of exchange, but that the structure of payments is taken as given.

       Specifically, let us define the equilibrium concept as follows.                               We will

consider an approximate equilibrium to be (I) a set of choices of Indirect vs.

direct exchange which would clear the three currency markets if there were no

 transaction costs, together with (ii) a clockwisdotn D in the exchange rates

which leads people to make those choices.

       Given this concept of equilibrium, we can now state the relationship

 between transaction costs and the structure of exchange. Recall that t and

 t    are both assumed to he less than t                     •   Then we can state that:
                                                        By

       (i) The Alpha will be the vehicle currency

       (ii) If (1 —       t    )(1 —   tIa   )   <1 —   t By     —   i.e.,   if indirect exchanpe is more

 costly than direct —          the equilibrium structure will be one of partial indirect
                                                                                    13




exchange, as defined in Section 1.

     (iii) If (1 —
                     t)(l t) —       >   1 —
                                               t   —   indirect   exchange is less costly

than direct —   the equilibrium structure will be one of total indirct exchange.
     The results (i) —   (iii)   make intuitive sense, since what they amount to

is saying that the system acts in such a way as to minimize total trans-

action costs.

     In demonstrating t1-s   resalts I will m±e    seof th already—mentioned "conserva-

tion of imbalance" in a three—currency model, which Insures that if exchange

is balanced in one currency market it is balanced in all three markets. Thus

we can focus on the 3y market, and look for a value of D which would match the

demand for and supply of Gammas on that market. At the same time, we can make

use of a simple relationship between the structure of exchange and the excess

demand for Gammas in the 3y market. This is that any shift from direct to

indirect exchange in a clockwise direction raises the excess demand for Gammas,

while any shift from direct to indirect exchange in a counter—clockis

direction lowers it. For example, a shift from direct to irid&rect payments

from A to C will add to the demand for Gammas on the 8y market, while sub-

stituting indirect for direct payments from A to B will increase the supply

of Gammas on that market.

     Bearing these points in mind, it is fairly easy to see how we can find

an approximate equilibrium. For each value of D, there will be a desired

pattern of direct and indirect exhange, that Is, a structure of exchange, with

an implied excess demand X, on the y market. As D is Increased, the desired

pattern will shift so as to increase that excess demand. The value of D

which sets XB      0, together with the implied structure of exchange, define

an approximate equilibrium.2' The derivation of the equilibrium 1) is a rather

tedious matter, and carried out in the Appendix; here I sketch out the results.
                                                                                                          14




      Consider first the case where (1 —         t    )(1 —   tya   )   < (1   —   t        ),   that   is,
                                                                                       By
 where indirect exchange is
                               more costly than direct. The excess demand schedule
 for Gammas is illustrated
                               in Figure 5. Flat segments of the schedule are at
 levels of D for which
                       transactors between some pair of currencies are indifferent
 between direct and indirect exchange. As D is increased there is
                                                                   more clock-
 wise and less counter—clockwise indirect
                                                     exchange. As the Appendix shows,
 the y market Is cleared on a "flat" where transactors exchanging Gammas
                                                                         for
 Betas are indifferent between direct
                                            and indirect exchange, while all other
 transactors prefer direct exchange. The
                                                 result, then, must be one of partial
 indirect exchange, as defined in Section I and illustrated in Figure 3. In

 equilibrium, as the figure indicates, the clockwisdom D is
 (1 —
      tB)/(].
              —
                  t8)(l—   t) > 1.  We can thiitk of this as a situation in

which holders of Gammas wishing to acquire Betas are offered a slightly better

exchange rate on indirect transactions, which is just enpwpi to offset the

higher transaction cost.

     If (1 —
                t8)(l —   t)   >   (1 —
                                          t8),   that is, indirect exchange is less
costly than direct, the situation is somewhat different, as shown                           in   Figure 6.
!Iere D is indeterminate within the indicated
                                                       range. The reason for the in-
determinacy becomes clear when we examine the structure of exchange implied

by some D in that range, say D = 1.        For such a clockwisdom, transactors ex-

changing Betas for Gammas and Gammas for Betas will both prefer indirect ex-

change, while all other trnsactors prefer direct
                                                              exchange. The implied struc-
ture must therefore be one of total indirect
                                                       exchange, as illustrated in Figure
4. Since the By market clears with a volume of zero, the exchange rate EB
and hence D are of course Indeterminate.
                                         The structure of exchange is, how-
ever, fully determined.

     In each of these cases the Alpha plays a special role as a vehicle
                                                                                            15




Qrency. It enters into more transactions than A's role in world payments would

by itself justify. The special role of A's currency arises, of course, from

the assumption that transaction costs in the exchange markets differ. We have

labelled the currencies so that t       and   t
                                                  'r
                                                       are   both less than t
                                                                                By
                                                                                     ,   and this


insures the Aiphas will be used as a vehicle.

    But why should transaction costs be different? e would like some theory

to explain this; in particular, we would like to relate the structure of trans—

tlon costs    to the structure of payments in some way, to make sense of the
observed   fact   that vehicle currencies have historically been the currencies of

dominant trading nations. The next section tries to sketch out such a theory.

III. Endogenous Transaction Costs

     In    this section I attempt to provide an explanation of why differences

in transaction costs might arise. The analycis is based on a somewhat ad hoc

but simple and surprisingly powerful assumPtia1: that transaction costs as a

proportion of the transaction are decreasing in the volume of transactions.                         This

turns out to be enough to give us considerable insight bcth into the way the

structure of payments liiits the structure of exchange, and into the exchange

structure's dynamics.

     Since the assumption that transaction costs decrease with the size of the

currency market is crucial to this section, we should consider (without, how-

ever, developing a fully—worked—out model) why this night be so.                 It is fairly

simple to tell stories which would have this result. Suppose, for instance,

that on any given day the supply and demand for a currency from transactors do

not e xactly match at the price set by cixrur tre a. Uat tle tremeet the

difference from their own holdings. Then the average stocks of currency held
                                         16




D




      D    (1 —   1(1 — t )(1   —   t




                                        x
                                         By

Figure 5
                                                                          17




                                      D




D — (1   —   tc&)(1 t )/(1 t By )
                   —       —                   j

                                                                   - t)
                                       '4


                                            D = (1   -
                                                         t)/(1 -




                                               _____                      x
                                                                           3y



                                    Figure 6
                                                                                      18




by traders will reflect, not the overall volume of transactions, but the variab11

of   excess demand. A growth in the volume of transactions would then in-

crease traders' costs less than proportionately if, thanks to the law of large

numbers, their      average stocks did not have to increase in proportion. Similar

hut more elaborate stories could also be told. Alternatively, we might simply

argue that the actual physical resources needed to ru' an exchange, whether

it is a bourse or a computer, may be largely independent of the volume of

transactions. I leave to one side the problem of modelling the industrial

organization of the exchange markets in this case, except to note that it

could hardly be perfectly competitive.

       In any case, let us now consider the implications of letting transaction

costs depend on volume. If we let V , V            ,   V   be the volumes of trans-
                                         aB   By        ia
actions on the three markets, then we have


       t F(V8)                                           (6)


       t F(V)                                            (7)


       t =F(V ya)                                        (8)
where the function F( .   ) is   assumed the same for all markets and we assume

F' <   0.
       If the structure of transaction costs depends in this way on the volume

of transactions, then It depends on the structure of exchange. But the struc-

ture of exchange, as we saw in Section II, is determined by the structure of

transaction costs. What we must look for, then, is an exchange structure which

Is an equilibrium in the sense that the pattern of transaction costs produced

by               choices of direct vs. indirect exchange sustains these choices.

There Is no reason why there must he only one such equilibrium; there may be

as many as six. Exchange might be partially or totally Indirect, and any one
                                                                                19




of   the three currencies might serve as the vehicle.

      The simultaneous choice of type of exchange structure and of vehicle

currency makes for a very complex problem. I will simplify this problem by

concentrating on two more limited choices. First, we will take the type of cx—

change structure as given and consider the choice of vehicle currency.       Then

we will take the vehicle currency as given and consider the choice of exchange

structure. These limited analyses will serve to illustrate the main principles,

while the general case can be analyzed only through numerical examples.

      Let us begin, then, with the case in which we assume that the exchange

structure is one of partial indirect exchange, and we are concerned solely

with which currency is the vehicle. We start with a structure of payments like

that in Figure 2. When a particular currency is chosen as vehicle, we get a

structure of exchange which is an equilibrium if the implied structure of trans-

action costs confirms that currency's vehicle position. From (6) —    (8),
this means that choice of a currency as vehicle must make the volume of the two

markets   in which that currency participates larger than the volume of the third

market.

       The relationship between choice of vehicle and the volume of transactions,

for the structure of payments in Figure 2, is as follows:

           Vehicle           V         V         V
                                           By    ya
          Currency
             a                R            S—I   T

             B                R            S     T-I
             y                   R—I       S         T

Each currency market has a "secure1' volume arising from counterclockwise pay-

ments; the volume is then increased above this level if one of the currencies

traded serves as a vehicle. This suggests two things. First, because choosing
                                                                                      20




a currency as vehicle swells the markets on which it is traded, we have a possibility

of multiple equilibria. Second, because of the "securet1 part of transaction

volume, there are some limits on this; the currency of a country which plays

only a minor role in world payments will not be able to overcome the advantages

of other countries' "secure" volumes.

     These points are illustrated by the examples in Figures 7 and 8. In Figure

7, payments are synnnetrical, and any currency can serve as vehicle. If, for
                                                                = 10,             V =          5;
example, the Beta were to be the vehicle, we would have V = V81

this would make t      and t     less than t        and confirm the Beta as the vehicle.
                  aB        By

On the other hand, in Figure 8, A's dominance in world payments assures that

the Alpha will be the vehicle currency. If one were to try to make the Beta the

vehicle, we would have V          10, V   =    2,   V =    9:   the structure of trans-
                                                      ya
action costs would still lead people to carry out indirect exchange through the

Alpha. Similarly, using the Gamma as vehicle would produce V =               9, V,        2,


V =   10; the Alpha would still be preferred for indirect exchange. So the
unique equilibrium here is a structure of exchange using the Alpha as vehicle,

withV
      aB
           V        l0,VBy =1.
            ya
      In partial indirect exchange, then, only the currencies of countries impor-

tant in world payments can become vehicles; but there may be more than one such

currency. (Notice, by the way, that the relationship between a couny1s role

in payments and the choice of vehicle currency is parallel to the requirement

 that a domestic medium of exchange be a good widely desired). This leaves open

 the question of which currency becomes the vehicle if more than one is capable

of taking on that role. To answer this question we need the dynamic analysis

 of Section IV.

      Before proceeding to this analysis, however, let us consider the other
                                             2].




                            A




                                    .0
                                5




           5
   C
                       10


                   Figure 7




               A




       9               9'

                                    J


c_______                        -        B

                   2

                   Figure 8
                                                                                          22




 special case mentioned of choice of exchange structure: the choice between

 partial and total indirect exchange given the choice of vehicle currency,

 Suppose that we        take   it as known   that   the Alpha will be the vehicle currency,
 and the structure of payments is again that of Figure 2. Then the possible

structures of exchange are (i)Partia]. indirect exchan-,e: V8 =
                                                                                  R, V8    = S —   I,
V =      T;    (ii)Total Indirect exchange: V             = R   ÷ S, V = 0,   V    = S + T.
 ya                                                                  By
We know from Section II that partial indirect exchange can be an equilibrium

if (1 —
              t8)(l —   t)     < (1 —
                                        t8),   or, substituting,


         [1— F(R)J[l — F(T)J < [1— F(S —            I)]             (9)

This can be the case if F does not decrease too rapidly as volume increases.

On the other hand, total indirect exchange requires that (1 —
                                                                              ta8)(l_     t)   >

 (1 —
        t1),    which means that we must have

        [1 — F(R + S)][l — F(S ÷ T)] >          [1 — F(0))          (10)

This is more likely to be the case if F does decrease rapidly with volume.

however, the left—hand side of (10) is larger than that of (9), while the right—

hand side is smaller; therefore (9) and (10) are not mutually exclusive.

        One might expect that total indirect exchange would be more likely if

some one country were very dominant in world payments. This is true in the

limited sense that predominance of one country may make partial indirect ex-

change impossible. In (9), increasing R and T while reducing S —                   I   may reverse
the inequality. Even this is not certain, however. If

        [1 — F(co)J2     1—    F(0), which is fully consistent with F' < 0, the exchange

structure will always be only partially indirect no matter how predominant

one country is.

      To summarize, then, If transaction costs are a decreasing function of

the volume of transactions we can relate the structure of exchange to the
                                                                            23




structure of payments in economically sensible ways. Only the currency of

a country which is important in world payments can serve as an international

medium of exchange; the predominance of one country makes it more likely that

all transactions between the othcrs will take place indirectly.       While the

structure of exchange is thus limited by the structure of payments, however,

there may still be several possible exchange structures. To determine which

structure emerges, we need a dynamic analysis, to which we now turn.

iv.   Dynamics of the Exchange Structure
      Since there may be several possible equilibrium structures of exchange,

we must have some way of determining which structure actually prevails. The

most plausible way of doing this is to specify a process of disequilibrium

adjustment which lets us determine the eventual equilibrium given the initial

conditions. This leaves open the question of where initial conditions come

from; but if we can show how the structure of exchange changes over time this

will usually be enough.

      Let us suppose, then, a dynamic process of the following kind. Decisions

on direct versus indirect exchange will be based, not on actual transaction

costs, but on perceived costs e e e •              These perceived costs will be
                                  aB
adjusted over time in response to the gap between them and the actual trans-

 action costs:

 then               X(tB — t:B)     (11)



                    A(t
                          — t)         (12)

           .

               ru      r 'a
           t =X(t —t e )               (13)

        Since the peeived transactions costs determine the structure of exchange,

 and the structure of exchange in turn determines actual transaction costs, the

 differential equations (11) —    (13) capture   the complete dynamic behavior of

 exchange.
                                                                                 24




       A general analysis of a system of three nonlinear differential
                                                                      equations
 would, of course, be very complex. We can, however, learn something by con-

 sidering special cases in which the problem
                                                collapses to manageable size. What
 I will do in this section is consider two such cases.

      Consider first a situation in which the function F and the structure of

 payments rule out total indirect exchange, and also rule out the Gamma as a

 vehicle currency. (Sufficient conditions for this are

      [1 —   F(°o)]2 < 1 — F(O), and that in Figure 2 we have R —   I   greater than
 S and/or T). Then we need only be concerned with the choice between the

Alpha and the Beta as a vehicle of partial indirect
                                                       exchange. This choice
depends on a comparison of transaction costs in the markets in which both

currencies do not participate, i.e., on t
                                         8y
                                            —   tycz

     Figure 9 shows the dynamic system. On the vertical axis is shown the

perceived difference in transaction costs, on the horizontal the actual dif-

ference. The relationship between perceived and actual costs is shown by

UVWX, which can be explained as follows. If transaction costs are perceived

to be lower in the 8y market than in the ya market, the Beta will be chosen as

the vehicle currency and the actual difference in costs will be —OV. If, on

the other hand, transactions are believed to be cheaper in the ya market, the

Alpha will be chosen as a vehicle and the actual difference in transaction

costs will be OW.

     The dynamics of the system are obvious, and are indicated by arrowheads.

If the perceived difference in transaction costs is less than the actual

(below the 450 line), t —    t will rise; if more, t   —  t  will fall. There
                                                    By    ya
are, as drawn, two stable equilibria, one at a,corresponding to the use of

the Alpha as vehicle currency, the other at b, corresponding to the use of the
                                           25




                  te —
                   By    ycz



                                   x




                                       a
                               /



          V                                ty—t
                                              ya
                                   w




              /
              b
      /

/ /
          U

                  Figure 9
                                       26




          e
              _eya



                                   I
                              7/
                          /

          /
      ________



      b


/ /
                     U,


                     Figure 10
                                                                                  27




Beta. There need not, however, be two equilibria. If V were to shift to

the right of the origin, the equilibrium with the Beta as vehicle currency would

disappear; similarly, a leftward shift of W could eliminate the possible role

of the Alpha. This provides a clue to how the structure of exchange night

evolve over time, to which I will return in a moment.

     First, however, let us consider another special case. Suppose that we can

be certain that the Alpha will be the vehicle currency, so that the only

question is whether indirect exchange will be partial or total.           (A sufficient

condition is R —    I,   T —    I   both greater than S in Figure 2, together with the

assumption that we do not start from a position of total indirect exchange

using the Beta or Gamma). Then we can focus on the difference between trans-

action costs in direct and indirect exchange,

                    —           — (1 —
     (1 —
            t8)(l        tya)          tBy).
     We need not draw the dynamic system in this case, since it will look just

like that in Figure 9 except for a relabelling of the axes. Again there will

be at most two stable equilibria, one corresponding to partial and the other

to total indirect exchange. If country A is sufficiently predominant only

total indirect exchange will be a stable equilibrium; if transaction costs do

not fall enough with volume, only partial indirect exchange will be possible.

     Let us consider, finally, how the structure of exchange might evolve over

time. If the exchange structure is in stable equilibrium, the only things that

can change that are changes in the technology of transactions or, more interesting-

ly, in the structure of payments. .Jro see how changes in the structure of. pay-

ments alter the exchange structure, let us return to the case illustrated in

Figure 9, where the question is whether               or B's currency will be the vehicle.

     In Figure 10 we suppose that the system is initially in equilibrium at. b,

i.e., the Beta is the international medium of exchange. Over time, we suppose,
                                                                                  28




A's role in world payments grows and B's shrinks. The effect is to shift both

V and W right, say to V', W'. At the point at which V passes the origin (which

is when T —   I   in Figure 2 becomes larger than S) the role of the Beta col-

lapses, and the Alpha becomes the vehicle currency. Eventually the system

reaches a new equilibrium at c, with the Alpha serving as the international

medium of exchange. Interestingly, if the structure ofpayments were then to

shift hack to its original position, so that the lines U' V• W'X' shift

back to UV, WX, there would nonetheless have been a permanent change in the

structure of exchange from that implied by b to that Implied by a.

     This sequence of events suggests two important features of the dynamics

of the exchange structure. The first is that the international monetary system

is subject to "tipping"; gradual change in the underlying structure of pay-

ments can, when it reaches a critical point, lead to abrupt changes In the struc-

ture of exchange. The second feature is the way permanent changes can result

from temporary events. If a country temporarily holds a dominant position in

world payments which establishes its currency as an international medium of

exchange, its currency may continue to play that role even after the commer-

cial preeminence of the country has passed.

     In this paper I have attempted to answer in a systematic way the rather

subtle question of why some currencies have functioned as international media

of exchange. The model set forth in this paper is, of course, highly sim-

plified. Nonetheless, it gives results which look as if they have something todo

with the actual   experience   of international monetary history. And the model

shows that it is possible to deal in at least a rudimentary way with the role

of transaction costs in international financial markets.
                                                                               29




Notes

-"Authors who have discussed the role of vehicle currencies, and stressed the

parallel with the use of money in domestic exchange, include Kindleberger

(1976), Swoboda (1968), McKinnon (1969), and Chrystal (1977). DiscussIons

of transaction costs and the structure of exchange in closed economies include

papers by Niehans (1969) and Jones (1976), as well as a distinguished tradition

going back to Jevons (1875) and Menger (1892).

    similar approximation is made by Jones (1976), who assumes in his model of

domestic exchange that costs of trading have no effect on Wairasian market—

clearing prices.

-'Note that we are finding a value of D which would set      X, — 0   if the implied

choices of direct vs. indirect exchange took place without transaction costs.

'To the extent that the costs of transactions arise from the necessity of

holding working balances in currencies, transaction costs will also depend on

the holding costs. I.e., if the Beta is expected to depreciate, this would

raise t    and t   relative to t     •   This   may be important in explaining how
                                Ta
a vehicle currency, once established, can lose its special role, see foot-

note 5, below.

1Strictly speaking, an exchange structure could also be disrupted by changes

in the perceived costs of holding working balances in different currencies, as

already mentioned in footnote 4. Thus one way of intcrpreting Figure 10 is

that a "loss of confidence" In the Beta raises t         relative to t   •   This
                                                    By
could lead to an unraveling of the Beta's role as vehicle. Notice that even

if the loss in confidence is only temporary, it can still have a permanent

effect on the structure of exchange.
                                                                                                                    30




Appendix: Clockwisdom and the Equilibrium Structure of Exchange

       In Section II a concept of approximate equilibrium in the presence of

transaction costs was developed and it was stated that:

(i)       If (1 —
                     tB)(l —       t)
                                   < (1 —
                                          t8),                 the approximate equilibrium will

be one with D        (1 —
                          tB)/(l — t8)(l —            t),          and where the only indirect ex-

change is of Gammas for Betas;

(ii)      If (1 —
                     taB)(l
                              —
                                   t)       (1 —
                                                   tB),    D will be indeterminate in the range

(1 —
       t8)/(l —     ta8)(l
                             —
                                  tya)
                                         to (1 —
                                                   ta8)(l
                                                               —
                                                                   t)/(l               —
                                                                                           t8),     and all Beta—

Gamma exchanges will take place indirectly. The purpose of this appendix is to

demonstrate these propositions.

       In making this demonstration, we can use two helpful aspects of the model

already mentioned in the text. First, because of the budget constraints of

the countries, it is sufficient to consider only one market, e.g. the By

market. Second, the excess demand for Gammas on the By market is non—

decreasing in D, since increases in D can never encourage a shift away from

clockwise or towards counterclockwise indirect exchange. This means that if

for D slightly less than D0 we find                  <    0,   while for D slfghtly more than

we find X8 >    0,   all equilibrium values of D must lie in the range
                                                                                                            D0 to D1.
       Let us begin by analyzing the choice between direct and indirect exchange.

Consider the example of an exchange of Aiphas for Gammas. In direct exchange,

after transaction costs one could get E _l(l —
                                                    yct
                                                                    t   ycx
                                                                              )       Gammas   per Alpha. In
indirect exchange one could get EaBEBY(l —                               —
                                                           tuB)(l                 tBy) Gammas per Alpha. Clear-
ly the breakpoint is E E E
                             a88yya
                                          = D = (1 —      tyct)/(l       —        t     )(l —   t      ).   A similar
                                                                    -                             By
exercise can be carried out for all such exchanges, yielding critical values of

   as shown in Table A—i. For entries below the diagonal in the table the

value is that of the minimum D which will lead to indirect exchange; for entries

above the diagonal it is the maximum.
                       Table A—i:               Critical values of D for indirect exchange



Initial currency\   Final Currency


                                   a                                                                       Y

                                                         (1 —          )(l —                  —                  —
                                                                t              tya   )   (1
     a                                                          j3y—                              t8) (1               t,)
                                                                                                       —
                                                                (1                                (1           tya )

                          (1   —                                                              —                  —
                                                                                         (1
     8                                          —
                                                                                                  t8)(l                tya)
                       (1 —            (1                                                              —
                               tBY)                                                               (1
                                                    t)                                                     t8)
                          (l—t              )                   (l—t       )
                       (l—t )(l—t                    )   (—t )(l—t                   )
                                                                czr3
                                                                                      32




                                                                  the structure of trans-
    Given a value of D, together with information on

action costs, we can determine for each type of exchange whether direct or

indirect exchange is preferred. I will use a "-F" to indicate a preference

for indirect exchange, a ti_n to indicate a preference for direct exchange, and

a "0" to indicate indifference.
                                                                    labelled countries so
     We   can now proceed to cases. Recall that we have
                  both less than t8 .          Also,   the underlying structure of payments
that t6, t

is assumed to be that shown in Figure 2.

Case 1:    (1 —
                  tB)(l — t)< (1 —
                                   tB). In this case it is immediately clear
that D = (1 —             —
                  tB)/(l tB)(i
                               —              t)
                                     corresponds to an equilibrium. Ref er-

ring to Table A—i, we     have       a matrix of preferred exchanges

                                         a         B     y
                           a

                            B


                            1                      0

Thus exchanges of Gammas for Betas may take place either directly or indirectly,

which is consistent with an equilibrium of partial indirect exchange as illus-
                                                                       this, note that for a
 trated in Figure 3. This equilibrium is unique. To see

 slightly higher D the matrix becomes

                                          a        B     y

                                a

                                B



which leads to         = S —    I        (1; whIle for a 9lightly 1o-ier ) we have the ntrix

                                          a        B     y

                                    cx


                                    B
                                                                                          33




  which leads to X = —I           <   0.    The unique equilibrium exchange structure, then,
                      By
  is partial indirect exchange with the Alpha as vehicle.



Case 2:    (1 —   ta3)(l   —  tye )   > (1     t By). In this case, any value of D in the
                                                 —

range from D0 — (1 —       t By )(l   —    t )(l — tye ) to = (1 — t )(l — t )/(l — t )
                                           ctB
                                                                               ye        By
will lead to a matrix of preferred exchanges


                                            a         B



                                                                +
                                      y               +
This   pattern, which means that all payments between B and C take place indirectly,

corresponds to an equilibrium of total indirect exchange, as shown in Figure 4.

This is the unique equilibrium structure although D is indeterminate. If 1) were

slightly above D1, the matrix of preferred exchanges would be

                                            a         B         y
                                      a
                                      B     —


                                                      +

 which would produce an excess demand for Gammas of S —             I on the By market. If
 D were slightly below D0, the matrix would be

                                                a     B         y

                                                                +
                                      y

  which would produce an excess supply of S Gammas on the By market. So the

  equilibrium structure of exchange must be total indirect exchange with the

  Alpha as vehicle.
References

Chrystal, K.A. (1977): "Demand for International Media of Exchange,"
   American Economic Review, 67 (Dec.).

Jevons, S. (1875): Money and the Mechanism of Exchange. London: Appleton.

Jones, R.A. (1976): "The Origin and Development of Media of Exchange,"
   Journal of Political Economy, 84: (August).

Kindleberger, C. (1967): The Politics of International Money and World Language."
   Princeton Essays in International Finance, no. 61

McKinnon, R.I. (1969): "Private and Official International Money: The Case
   for the Dollar," Princeton Essays in International Finance, no. 74.

Menger, K. (1892): "On the Origins of Money," Economic Journal, 2 (June).

Niehans, J. (1969): "Money In a Static Theory of Optimal Payment Arrange-
   ments," Journal of )oney, Credit, and Banking (November).

Swoboda, A. (1968): "The Eurodollar Market: An Interpretation." Princeton
   Essays in International Finance, no. 64.
