      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF SOCIAL SECURITY ON SAVING



           Martin Feldstein




         Working Paper No. 334




   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
            Cambridge, NA 02138

                April 1979
                                                        NBER Working Paper 334
                                                                    April 1979



                                 SUNMARY



                 The Effect of Social Security on Saving

                            Martin Feldstein


    This paper, which was presented as the 1979 Frank Paish Lecture to the

British Association of University Teachers of Economics, provides a non—technical

summary of the recent studies of the effects of social security on private

saving. The first section discusses the theoretical indeterminacy of the effect

of social security while the second part reviews the empirical studies.

     Although the traditional life cycle theory of saving clearly implies that

the anticipation of social security benefits reduces private saving, a richer

theoretical framework suggests several reasons why the saving response cannot

be unambiguously established by theoretical reasoning. These reasons include

the indirect effects of social security on retirement behavior, private pensions,

and gifts and bequests.

     The econometric studies resolve this uncertainty and indicate that social

security appears to reduce private saving substantially. These studies include

(1) aggregate time series evidence on the U.S. saving rates over the past 50

years, (2) microeconomic evidence on the accumulation of wealth by a large

sample of individual households, and (3) internatIonal comparisons of saving

rates in major industrial countries.



                                           National Bureau of Economic Research
                                           1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                           Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                           (617) 868—3905
                  The Effect of Social Security on Saving*
                                                **
                               Martin   Feldstein



     I am pleased and honored to have been asked to deliver the 1979 Frank

Paish Lecture. Professor Paishts studies over many years have

added to our understanding of the economic system in general

and the British economy in particular. The process of saving and capital

formation on which I will speak today was one of the many important subjects

to which Professor Paish contributed.

     The saving rate of an economy is one of the most important parameters

governing its long—run performance. A higher saving    rate means greater

capital intensity, higher productivity and a better standard of living. An

economy that increases its saving rate experiences more rapid technical

progress and a faster rate of growth over many years until a new equilibrium

is established.

      Saving rates differ very substantially among industrial nations.      For

 the 15 year period from 1960 through 1974, gross saving accounted for an

 average of 25 percent of gross domestic product among the 21 0.E.C.D. countries

 for which data are available. But this gross saving rate ranged from a high

 of 37.2 percent in Japan to lows of 18.4 percent and 18.6 percent for the U.K.

 and the U.S. The pattern of high and low saving rate countries has remained


      *
       The Frank Paish Lecture to the Association of University Teachers of
 Economics, 28 March 1979, Exeter, England.
     **
       Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President, National
 Bureau of Economic Research. This paper draws together conclusions of research
 done as part of the NBER's program of research on Social Insurance and its
 special research project on Capital Formation. The views expressed here are
 my own and should not be attributed to any organization.
                                     —2—


quite stable over this period. The correlation between the average saving

rate in a country in the 1960—64 period and the 1965—69 period is 0.97. For

1965—69 and 1970—74, the correlation is 0.93 (Feldstein and Horioka, 1979).

     Why do saving rates differ so much among countries? How do the govern-

ment policies pursued in each country affect that country's saving rate? Asa

profession, we are still disturbingly far from having complete answers to these

very important questions. My remarks today will focus on one aspect of this

subject that, after several years of research, I believe is extremely impor-

tant: the impact of social security on private savings.

     Social security programs have become extremely important in most of the

industrial countries of the world. Social security benefits have come to be

relied upon as the major source of finance of post—retirement consumption in

the United States and In many other countries. The traditional life cycle

theory of saving implies that existing social security programs are likely to

depress substantially the aggregate private rate of saving. Moreover, since

the social security programs are largely unfunded——i.e., they do not accumulate

assets to meet future benefit obligations in the way that a private pension

would——the reduction in the private saving rate translates into a corresponding

reduction in the national saving rate. But as with so many other subjects, a

wider and more general analytic framework reveals a theoretical irideterminary;

we cannot know on the basis of a priori consideration alone whether social

security increases or decreases the private saving rate. I will discuss the

nature of this theoretical indeterminacy in the first part of my lecture.

     There is fortunately a growing body of empirical research on this subject.

While there are of course ambiguities and problems in the interpretation of

these econometric studies, I believe that on balance the evidence strongly

supports the implication of the traditional life cycle saving theory that the
                                    —3—

provision of a large social security pension does substantially reduce real

private saving. The second half of my lecture will provide a review of this

evidence.
                                       —4—

                   Social Security in the Theory of Saving


     The life cycle model is the central idea in the modern theory of saving

because it provides the crucial link between the microeconomics of rational

household behavior and the macroeconomics of the rate of saving. The funda-

mental insight of this theory, that aggregate saving is positivein a growing

economy because the younger workers who save are more numerous and have higher

earnings than the older retirees who dissave, was presented by Sir Roy Harrod

in the second lecture of his famous book, Towards a Dynamic Economics (1948).

Harrod's description of the household's optimizing behavior, which he noted

was an extension of Irving Fisher's (1930) analysis, is remarkably modern and

"neoclassical" for someone who is rightly regarded as one of the great devel-

opers of Keynesian economic theory. It was then Franco Modigliani and his

collaborators (e.g., 1954, 1957, 1963, and 1966) who developed Harrod's insight

and metaphor of "hump saving" into a quantitative theoryand began the process

of empirical verification that has made the life cycle model a central feature

of our economic understanding.



Implications of the Life Cycle Model


     The traditional Harrod—Modigliani life cycle model implies that the intro-

duction of an actuarially fair social security pension program unambiguously

reduces private saving. More specifically, in this life—cycle framework, a

government policy alters the time pattern of consumption only if it changes

the household's lifetime budget constraint. Since an actuarially fair social

security program leaves the budget constraint unchanged, there is also no

change in each year's consumption. The social security tax that is paid in

each year therefore reduces private saving by an equal amount. For an
                                     —5—

actuarially fair social security program, this is equivalent to reducing the

personal wealth accumulated before retirement by the actuarial present value

of futurebenefits (see Feldstein 1974, 1977).

     In the United States, the substantial size of the social security program

implies that the magnitude of this reduction in private saving is potentially

very great. It is useful to review briefly the size of this potential life

cycle effect before going on to discuss the possible offsetting effects

suggested by a more general theoretical framework.

     Consider the question first from the point of view of an average American

worker. A married worker who has had the median level of earnings all his

life now retires with social security benefits for himself and his wife equal

to 65 percent of his peak before—tax earnings. Since these social security

benefits are untaxed, they replace approximately 80 percent of his maximum

after—tax earnings. Moreover, the benefits are now permanently inflation—

indexed so that they maintain their real value regardless of what happens to

the price level. With such a high replacement rate, there is little if any

reason for such a worker to want to save or to have a private pension.

     The replacement rate Is higher for workers with less than the median

earnings and somewhat lower for workers with earnings above the median. Social

security provides a significant replacement rate except for the relatively

small number of employees who earn substantially more than the current maximum

yearly earnings of nearly $23,000. The replacement rate is also lower for

families in which there is a second earner whose contribution to total family

income Is relatively large. It is these groups alone that still have some

incentive for private saving.

     For most American families, social security is the most important form of

household "wealth." More precisely, the actuarial present value of the social
                                      —6--



security benefits to which they will be entitled at age 65 exceeds the value

of all their other assets combined. A recent study at the National Bureau of

Economic Research concluded that the aggregate value of this social security

wealth exceeded $3.5 trillion in 1978.1 To put this $3.5 trillion of social

security pseudo—wealth into perspective, it is useful to note that the most

inclusive traditional measure of the total net worth of the private sector is

less than $6 trillion. If the current social security wealth had been saved

and accumulated as real wealth instead, the stock of real capital would be

more than 50 percent larger than it is today.

     The potential importance of the social security program is also clear if

we look at the volume of social security tax collections. Since social

security taxes are widely regarded as a form of compulsory saving, it is

interesting to compare the annual social security taxes with the annual volume

of private saving. In 1978, social security tax payments by employees and

employers exceeded $100 billion. By comparison, total private saving (inclu-

ding corporate retained earnings and net pension contributions as well as indi-

vidual saving) was also approximately $100 billion. Thus if the social

security tax payments would have been saved Instead, the private saving rate

would have been double its actual level.



Departures from Maximizing Behavior


     These figures leave no doubt about the very large potential impact of

social security on the process of capital accumulation if the traditional life

cycle theory is an appropriate model of individual saving behavior. It has,



     1Martin Feldstein and Anthony Pellechio (1978). The estimate of $3.5
trillion refers to individuals over age 34 only.
                                   —7--


however, been coimnon in many popular discussions of social security policy to

reject this picture of rational life cycle saving and its conclusion that social

seucrity depresses private saving (e.g., Meyers, 1965; Pechman, etal, 1968; and

Schulz, 1974). Individuals are instead viewed as myopic nonplanners who save in

a haphazard way or not at all; it is this failure to provide systematically for

consumption in retirement that is the primary justification for social security.

As a result of such myopia, the introduction of social security or an increase

in its scale would have no offsetting effect on private saving.

     It is also sometimes argued that much of existing wealth does not reflect

life—cycle accumulation but is held in order to make future bequests. According

to one form of this view, individuals receive bequests and then act as stewards

of that wealth until they pass it on to their own heirs; holding and increasing

wealth is a matter of morality and honor, not of utility maximizing economic

behavior. Wealth that is held or accumulated in this way will not be affected

by social security.

     There are undoubtedly some individuals whose saving behavior is largely

haphazard and irrational. There are others who regard the spending of inherited

wealth as morally wrong and who guide their own accumulation by a principle of

stewardship rather than the life—cycle use of funds. I doubt that either form

of behavior is as common as is sometimes claimed. In any case, such behavior

amon part of the population would reduce the effect of social, security on

savings but not eliminate it.

     Some writers have even suggested that the provision of social security may

actually cause some individuals to save more. This argument is based largely

on the survey evidence of Katona (1965) and Cagan (1965) indicating that persons

covered by private pensions did not save less and may have saved more than those

persons not covered by pensions. Cagan explained his surprising
                                     —8—


results in terms of a "recognition effect," i.e., when an individual is forced

to participate in a pension plan, he recognizes for the first time the impor-

tance of saving for his old age. Participation in a pension plan has an educa-

tional effect; more formally, it changes the individual's utility function as he

perceives it ex ante during his working years. Katona added to this a second

explanation: the "goal gradient" hypothesis of psychological aspiration theory

according to which "effort is intensified the closer one is to one's goal"

(Katona, 1965, p.4). In more conventional economic terms, this would imply

that individual preferences are themselves a function of the opportunity set

or of the initial position, a dramatic departure from the usual assumption of

economic analysis.



Extending the Life Cycle Model


     A theoretical analysis that implies that social security may not depress

personal saving need not rest on an assumption of irrational behavior, recog-

nition effects or changing preferences. In an analysis that I called the

"extended life cycle model" (Feldstein, 1974), I showed how individual life

cycle saving could actually be increased by the introduction of social security

or by an increase of social security benefits. The essential feature of that

extended life cycle model is that the pattern of working and retirement is not

fixed but that retirement and saving decisions are made jointly. This has the

important implication that any exogenous variable can influence saving indi-

rectly by altering retirement.

     Social security and private pensions are likely to induce earlier retire—

mentbecause benefits are generally available only to those who are fully or

partially retired. The resulting increase in the expected period of retirement

will, as such, increase total saving during preretirement years. The net
                                    —9—

effect of social security or of a private pension depends on the relative strengths

of the "wealth replacement effect" of the traditional life cycle model and the

"induced retirement effect" suggested by the extended life cycle model. An important

implication of this is the possibility that the effect of social security of a

private pension on saving is not monotonic; at first, the induced retirement

effect might dominate but then, as the probability of retirement reaches a

natural maximum, further increases in retirement benefits depress private

saving.

     A different extension of the life cycle model, the introduction of inter-

generational transfers, has recently been proposed by Robert Barro (1974),

Levis Kochin (1974) and Merton Miller and Charles Upton (1974). The extreme

version of this theory implies that an actuarially fair social security program

will have no effect on private saving. The essence of their argument is that

the introduction of social security (or a change in an existing program) causes

an offsetting change in private intergenerational transfers. To understand

and evaluate this argument, it is useful to distinguish three alternative

cases that might exist before the introduction or change in social security:

(1) parents plan to and do leave positive bequests to their children; (2)

parents plan to and do receive substantial support from their children during

retirement; and (3) a corner solution with no significant intended bequests or

gifts in either direction.

     Consider first the case with planned bequests that was emphasized by Barro

and the others who developed the current argument. The parent generation

chooses an optimal life cycle plan which, because their children's utility

enters their own utility function, includes making a bequest to their children.

An increase in social security benefits entails a transfer from children (who

will pay the future social security taxes) to the parents. This upsets the
                                       — 10 —




parents'   initial equilibrium by reducing the effective net value of the

bequests that parents make to their children. To counteract this, the parents

must increase the size of their cash bequest by enough to offset the extra

taxes that their children will pay. The extra saving for this enlarged

bequest just offsets the reduced saving that would otherwise result from the

larger social security benefits.

     The process is actually more complex than this because each future gener-

ation also receives benefits that are in turn financed by their own children.

But since the real rate of return on real capital exceeds the

pseudo—return on social security taxes (Samuelson, 1958),

each future generation is worse off under social security.

Restoring the initial equilibrium requires the first generation of parents to

provide an extra bequest that will in effect endow an annuity for all future

generations to compensate them for this difference. Barro has shown that the

extra saving to establish this endowment just offsets the reduced saving that

would otherwise result from the larger social security benefits of the first

generation.

     This model of offsetting private bequests requires an unlikely degree of

rational planning and foresight. More important, it is wrong to assume that

parents who are concerned about the utility of their children will necessarily

wish to leave bequests. A parent who believes that, because of generally

rising productivity and real incomes, his children will be richer than himself,

may well decide that the optimal "bequest" is negative, i.e., a transfer from

his children to himself. Since this decision cannot be enforced, the

"constrained optimum" for the parent is no bequest. This may remain the

parent's chosen position after an increase in social security: the increase

in social security could alter the parent's unconstrained optimum but have no
                                     — 11 —



effect   on actual bequests.

     It is clear that, for the vast majority of the population and therefore

for most social security recipients, there are no significant bequests to

children even in the presence of our current social security system. There is

no evidence that the typical retiree wishes to offset social security inter-

generational transfers from young to old. To the extent that there is no

induced offsetting private transfer, social security reduces saving by substi-

tuting for private wealth.

     Some supporters of the theory of offsetting bequests have tried to broaden

their argument to include such other parent—child transfers as the financing

of the child's education, the child's consumption at home, and even the amount

of parental attention given to the child. There is of course no evidence that

any of these have responded to the increase in social security. Moreover, none

of them involves the accumulation of physical capital. Thus even if social

security did induce such offsetting transfers from parents to children in the

form of education or increased childhood consumption, it would still be true

that social security reduced real saving and capital accumulation.

     Consider therefore the seemingly more plausible second mechanism by which

changing intergenerational transfers could offset the basic effect of social

security. In this case, parents make no bequests but, in the absence of social

security, rely on their children to finance their retirement consumption. In

the extreme form of this argument, our pay—as—you—go system of public social

security replaces a private pay—as—you--go system of private intrafamily trans-

fers. In this extreme case, social security has no effect on private saving

precisely because no such saving would have occurred in the absence of social

security. More generally, the effect of social security on saving is reduced

to the extent that parents rely on children for part of their support in old
                                    — 12 —




age and expect their children to reduce their gifts by any increase in the
amount of the social security benefits.

     The survey evidence on gifts from children to retired parents shows that

this second case is also of very limited importance (e.g., Wintworth and Motley,

1970). At no time in recent decades has more than a small fraction of retirees

received gifts from their children; moreover, the average gift was extremely

small in comparison to concurrent income levels or to the corresponding ratio

of social security benefits to income today. I have recently analyzed the

experience of older retirees whose total incomes, including social security

benefits but excluding gifts received from children and others, is below the

official poverty line (Feldstein and Bernheim, 1979). Even among this very

low income group, only a small fraction receive gifts from their children and

the value of these gifts is very small.

     It is beyond belief that the current working generation would, in the

absence of social security, have made gifts totalling nearly $100 billion to

retired parents in 1978. Moreover, it seems reasonable to believe that, even

without social security, the rise in incomes during the past few decades would

have made most workers choose to finance their own retirement consumption rather

than be dependent on the much lower level of voluntary support that their

children might later provide.

     The dominant form of behavior is therefore likely to be the "corner solu—

tion" in which there are neither bequests nor the general support of retirees

by their children. Parents might like to receive gifts from their generally

more affluent children but have no way to coerce such behavior. They therefore

save to finance their own retirement consumption and reduce their saving when

social security benefits are increased. The econometric evidence summarized

below supports the conclusion that this "corner solution" case is more
                                      — 13 —




important   than either of the two cases in which changes in private intergener-

ational transfers offset the savings effect of social security.

     In addition to induced changes in retirement and in transfers between

parents and children, there is a third way in which the character of private

behavior may partly offset the depressing effect of social security. To somo

extent, social security substitutes for private pension plans. In the United

States, many of these pension plans are only partly funded; i.e., the expected

present value of future pension benefits exceeds the value of the assets owned

by the pension funds. To the extent that social security merely substitutes

for unfunded private pensions, an increase in social security is only the

substitution of an unfunded public program for an unfunded private one. There

is, however, an important difference. An unfunded private pension is a net

corporate liability and should, if correctly perceived by investors, depress

the value of corporate equity by an equal amount. The equity owners of the company

should respond to this      reduction in their wealth by increasing their saving.

More explicitly, the effect of a private pension on total saving will not

depend on whether or not it is funded if the stock market is efficient in

reflecting the full extent of the unfunded liability and if share owners are

rational savers whose consumption level depends only on their real lifetime

budget constraint.

     Although the study of the effect of pensions on private saving is far from

complete, a preliminary analysis of time series data on the relation between

private pension accumulation and other forms of saving implies that private

pensions have not altered the total volume of private saving in the United

States (Feldstein, 1979). Moreover, studies of data for individual firms

indicate that each dollar of unfunded vested pension liability reduces the

market value of a firm's equity by approximately one dollar (Oldfield, 1977;
                                      — 14 —



Feldstein   and Seligman, 1979). Taken together, these two analyses suggest

that private pensions do reduce the direct saving by individual employees and

that this is offset through increased pension funding and the saving by indi-

vidual shareholders. The combination of pension funding and induced share-

holder response makes private pensions fundamentally different from social

security and imply that substituting social security for private pensions is

likely to depress total saving. Again, however, this is not a fully settled

issue and is not one on which a priori arguments are fully convincing.

     Even if we disregard the role of pensions as well as any induced changes

in retirement and in private intergenerational transfers, there are reasons

why rational savers might not regard "social security wealth"——i.e., the

present actuarial value of future social security benefits——and ordinary

private fungible wealth as perfect substitutes. First, the social security

program provides an annuity rather than a fixed sum at retirement. Even

before price indexing was formally incorporated in 1972, benefits were periodi-

cally adjusted for rising prices. Because of this "real annuity" character of

social security, risk—averse individuals might reasonably regard a dollar of

social security wealth as a substitute for more than a dollar's worth of

fungible assets. Alternatively, since "social security wealth" lacks the

liquidity of ordinary savings, a dollar of social security wealth might

substitute for less than a dollar's worth of fungible assets. Second, social

security benefits are not a contractual obligation of the government but are

determined by legislation. Pessimists might therefore underestimate the value

of social security wealth while optimists overestimate it. Finally, social

security is not an actuarially fair program but alters lifetime budget

constraints; such changes in real lifetime resources will alter consumption

and saving.
                                    —15—


    The implication of the theoretical issues that I have been discussing is

that the question of whether social security increases or decreases capital

accumulation cannot be answered from theoretical consideration alone. The
                                                       in favor of the conclu-
basic life cycle model suggests a strong presumption

sion that the unfunded social security program depresses national saving. But
                                                 individuals, the induced
the possibility of irrational behavior by some
                                            intergenerational transfers, the
earlier retirement and changes in private
                                                     characteristics of social
role of unfunded private pensions, and the special

security wealth all imply that the promise of social security benefits may not

cause an equivalent reduction in private wealth accumulation. Only by the

analysis of data on private saving and wealth can we hope to assess the actual

effect of social security.
                                       — 16 —



                      Econometric Evidence on the Effect
                           of Social Security on Saving



     Economists are now beginning to use different bodies of data to estimate

the impact of social security on saving. In the remaining part of this

lecture, I will suniniarize some of the major findings of that econometric

research. I will focus this necessarily brief summary on the studies dealing

with the United States and on my own research. I hardly need say that empir-

ical findings for the United States economy should not be extrapolated to

other countries where differences in institutions could result in a quite

different response to social security.




The Time Series Evidence



              During the late 1930's and the succeeding war years, there was a

general expectation among economists that the saving rate would continue to

rise as people became more affluent and as retirement at age 65 became increa-

singly common. That increase in saving did not materialize. Even as incomes

rose very substantially in the 1960's and the fraction of men over 65 who were

still working dropped to less than half of the rate in the 1920's, the aggregate

saving rate did not increase significantly. This was also the period in which

social security was introduced and in which it grew rapidly. It is worth

noting that early American Keynesians like Seymour Harris (1941) and even

Keynes himself' predicted that the U.S. social security program precluded the



     1My colleague Richard Musgrave recalls the occasion when Lord Keynes
visited the U.S. Treasury and commented that the new U.S. Social Security
program would prevent the excess saving that many economists then feared.
                                           17 —




rapid   growth of private saving. Time series analysis of aggregate saving

behavior permits a test of this view and, more generally, an estimate of the

effect of changes in the level and scope of the social security program.

     The basic problem in doing such time series analysis is measuring the

magnitude of the social security program in a way that corresponds most closely

to its potential effect on private saving. Surveys confirm that individuals

do not have precise estimates of the likely value of their future social

security benefits. Although legislative changes create benefit entitlements

immediately, these new benefits are only recognized slowly by the individuals

affected. There is no completely satisfactory solution to this problem. In

practice, all of the researchers have used "social security wealth," i.e., the

present actuarial value of the future benefits to which the working population

is entitled.1 This overly precise measure cannot provide an accurate picture

of year to year variations in the public's perception of the extent to which

they can rely on social security but, hopefully, it does capture the broad

sweep of changes including the original introduction, the major extensions of

coverage and the provision of dependents' benefits.

        When a social security wealth variable is added to a standard aggregate consump-

tion function that is estimated with annual data for the period 1929 through

1974 (without the 6 war years) ,   its   coefficient is 0.024 (with a standard error

of 0.009).2 Adding this variable has relatively little effect on the coeffici-

ents of the other variables. Since the aggregate value of social

security wealth in 1972 was $1.85 trillion (Feldstein and Pellechio,



     1The idea of social security wealth is introduced and described in
Feldstein (1974).

           particular equation, presented in Feldstein (l979b), is the same
specification as reported in Feldstein (1974) but with a longer sample period
and the new national income account revisions that were published in 1976.
                                      — 18 —




1979), a coefficient of 0.024 implies that social security increased consump-

tion (and thereby depressed private saving) by $44.4 billion. In 1972, total

private saving (including real corporate retained earnings) were $75.3 billion.

A reduction in saving of $44.4 billion is thus equivalent to 59 percent of

actual saving in 1972.

     With any statistical equation there is always the possibility that an

estimated coefficient really reflects the effect of some important variable

that has been inadvertently omitted. In the first time series study of this

question (Feldstein, 1974), I tested the unemployment rate toassess whether

the coefficient of the social security variable was only reflecting changes in

unemployment rates between and within      the pre—war and post—war periods.

Including the unemployment rate had the effect of cutting the coefficient of

the social security wealth variable by half (to 0.10) and to less than its

standard error while the coefficient of the unemployment variable was slightly

greater than its standard error. The problem of collinearity between the two

series made it impossible to arrive at any firm conclusion unless the unem-

ployment rate could be excluded on a priori grounds. Fortunately, shortly

after the publication of my 1974 paper, the U.S. Department of Commerce

published revised estimates of national income and its components which embody

a number of improvements over the information that was previously available.

Analysis with this new and better data eliminated the ambiguity previously

introduced by unemployment. The unemployment variable became only a fraction

of its standard error and its presence had almost no effect on either the

coefficient of social security wealth or its statistical significance (Feldstein,

1979 .

     In   an interesting extension of this analysis, Alicia Munnell (1974) added

the retirement rate of men over age 65 as an additional variable. This
                                       - 19   -




specification   makes the social security wealth coefficient a measure of the

pure wealth replacement effect; as expected, MunneJi's coefficient of 0.30 is

greater than my estimated net effect of 0.24. The impact of induced retirement

thus offset       an average of one—fifth of the pure wealth replacement effect

of the traditional life cycle model.

     Robert Barro (1978) recently presented estimates that suggest that the

effect of social security wealth is more ambiguous. His analysis modifies the

basic specification of the consumption function by adding the government

surplus as an additional variable. Barro's rationale for this novel specif i—

cation is that a government surplus implies a reduction in government debt

which, in an economy in which operative intergenerational transfers link all

generations together, is equivalent to an increase in current disposable

income. Adding the government surplus variable reduces the coefficient of

social security wealth from 0.24 to 0.14 with a standard error of 0.10. The

depressing effect of social security appears to be smaller and statistically

less significant.

     I believe Barro's analysis is misleading. I have already explained why

the assumption of an operational intergenerational transfer process is not

likely to be a realistic description. More specifically, I believe the govern-

ment surplus variable does not belong in a properly specified consumption

function. Although the variable appears to be statistically significant, I

believe that the significance is spurious. The government surplus is not an

exogenous variable that directly affects consumption, as the Barro specifica-

tion assumes, but an endogenous variable whose value changes with cyclical

variations in consumption. What we really see in the positive coefficient of

the government surplus variable is that an increase in consumer spending tends

to expand the economy, raising tax collections and therefore increasing the
                                      — 20 —



government surplus. This interpretation is confirmed by dividing the surplus

into its two components (government spending and tax receipts); the government

expenditure variable is insignificant and the tax receipts variable is

significant.

      In concluding this summary of the time series evidence, I should note

that data for the postwar period alone appear to be incapable of providing

useful information on the effect of social security. In all of the studies

using postwar data, the standard error of the coefficient of the social

security wealth variable is so large that no economically interesting hypo-

thesis can be rejected. This reflects riot only the shorter period but also

our inability to measure accurately enough the perceived changes in the publicts

expectation about future social security benefits. This inadequacy of the

postwar data makes it important to examine other types of information, inclu-

ding cross—section data on individual households and cross—country studies of

international differences in saving rates.



Individual Household Evidence


      The best microeconomic data on the wealth of individual American house-

holds remains the Survey of Consumer Finances that was conducted in 1963 by

the U.S. Census Bureau (Projector and Weiss, 1966). This survey of more than

2000 households greatly oversampled the high income population. On the basis

of the information collected in the survey, I estimated the social security

wealth of each household in the sample with a male between the ages of 35 and

64.

      In the first analysis of this data (Feldstein, 1976), I compared the

characteristics of the distribution of ordinary "fungible wealth" with the
                                      — 21 —



characteristics   of the distribution of "total wealth" (defined as the sum of

ordinary fungiblewealth and social security wealth). The key conclusion of

that comparison is that the distribution of total wealth is much less concen-

trated than the distribution of ordinary fungible wealth. For example, while

the top one percent of wealth holders had 28.4 percent of fungible wealth in

1963, they only had 18.9 percent of total wealth. Since the concentration of

ordinary wealth has shown no trend over the past 50 years, this evidence indi-

cates a substantial reduction in the concentration of total wealth over this

period.

     This reduction in the concentration of total wealth is what would be

expected because of the reduced concentration of disposable income over this

century as well as the growing importance of estate taxes. This helps to resolve

the apparent paradox of a stable concentration of wealth as conventionally measured

and suggests that the concentration of fungible wealth has remained stable

because of the growth of social security wealth.

     Within each age group, the distribution of income among income classes is

more similar to the distribution of total wealth than to the distribution of

fungible wealth. The life cycle theory of wealth accumulation is thus more

consistent with the distribution of total wealth than with the distribution of

 fungible wealth. This provides further indirect evidence that the prospect of

social security benefits induces households to reduce their accumulation of

 private fungible wealth.

     To test this relation between social security wealth and individual wealth

accumulation more explicitly, Anthony Pellechio and I used these data to esti-

mate the effect of each household's social security wealth on that household's

pre—retirement accumulation of ordinary fungible wealth (Feldstein and

Pellechio, l979a). For this study, we limited our sample to households in
                                     — 22 —



which there was an employed man aged 55 to 64; households with very low or

very high incomes were also eliminated. The basic parameter estimates indi-

cated that social security substantially reduces the accumulation of household

wealth as traditionally defined. More specifically, the point estimates generally

indicate that each dollar of social security wealth reduces ordinary net worth

by somewhat less than one dollar. The standard errors are too large to reject

the implication of the traditional life cycle model that there is dollar—for—

dollar replacement, but the estimates are also consistent with a rather wide

range of other replacement rates. In general, however, the estimates are not

compatible with the hypothesis that social security does not depress private

wealth accumulation. This microeconomic evidence therefore supports the

conclusion reached on the basis of the time series evidence.

     New data on household wealth and on social security are just becoming

available at this time. These new data represent substantially larger samples

and contain information on potential social security benefits based on admin-

istrative records. They will therefore provide important opportunities to

refine the existing analysis of household behavior,



International Evidence


     I turn finally to the evidence on the relation between international dif-

ferences in social security and the saving rates in the corresponding countries.

As I noted at the beginning of my talk, there are very substantial and relative-

ly stable differences in saving rates. There is also substantial variation

in the extent of social security coverage and in the ratio of social security

benefits to income. More specifically, in a study of fifteen countries for

which data could be compiled, I found that benefits per aged individual

averaged 40 percent of per capita income during the period from 1954 through
                                  —23—


1960 and that the standard deviation of this ratio was 26 percent of

per capita income (Feldstein, 1977).

     To assess the effect of these difIerences in social security benefits,

I used data on this cross—section of countries to estimate a model of the

saving and retirement behavior implied by the extended life cycle theory.

The savings function in this model builds on earlier studies of international

savings differences by Houthakker (1961, 1965) and Modigliani (1970).    The

basic life cycle model implies that a country's saving depends on the growth

rate of aggregate income and the demographic structure of the population.

To this specification I added an estimate of the ratio of social security

benefits to average per capita income and a measure of retirement behavior.

     The parameter estimates of this model imply that social security has a

powerful effect on both saving and retirement. More specifically, if the

retirement rate is held constant, an increase in the social security benefit

ratio from one standard deviation below the sample average to one standard

deviation above implies a reduction in the net private saving rate by 5.4

percentage points or 43 percent of the sample mean rate of saving.     This

 overstates the net impact of social security on saving because an increase in

 social security benefits reduces the labor force participation of older men

which in turn increases the saving rate. In the reduced form of the model,

 with the retirement rate no longer held constant, the net effect of social security

 on saving is some 80 percent of this pure wealth replacement value; i.e., an increase

 in benefits from one standard deviation below the average to one standard

 deviation above reduces the saving rate by 4.3 percentage points.

      One of the most worrisome things about the data used in the study is the

 crude measure of the social security benefits that employees expect. The

 observed ratio of actual benefits per aged individual to average per capita
                                     —24—


income may reflect past practices and previous income levels. A new set

of data, produced by the U.S. Social Security Administration in cooperation

with officials of foreign governments, provides measures of the actual

statutory ratio of benefits to the preretirement earnings of typical employees

in twelve countries (Olsen,                                      -




1978).   I have been studying these data in the context of the extended life

cycle model. Although this study is not yet complete, the coefficient

estimates appear to confirm the results obtained with the cruder measure of

social security benefits. It is quite reassuring that, despite the obvious

problems of international comparability, the data appear to be rich enough

to yield estimates of the impact of social security that are similar in magni-

tude to the estimates obtained with time—series data and with individual

household observations.



Conclusion


     This brings to an end my review of the theoretical and empirical analysis

of the relation between social security and private saving. There will

undoubtedly be further research on this subject in the future. New data and

new conceptual insights will refine and could modify significantly the conclu-

sions that emerge from existing research. Additional studies for other coun-

tries can indicate the extent to which they share the experience of the

United States.

     In my opinion, the existing research indicates that social security does

substantially depress private saving and therefore national saving in the

United States. Each dollar of social security wealth appears to reduce private

wealth accumulation by somewhat less than a dollar but more than 50 cents.
                                   — 25 —




These studies have also contributed to our understanding of the basic process

of saving and capital formation, showing the explanatory power and appropriate—

ness of the life cycle framework as well as the need to extend the traditional

life cycle model to a less restricted form of behavior. The more general lesson

about the importance of the unintended but adverse consequences of a well—

meaning government policy should also not go unnoticed.
                                         — 26 —


                                      Ref erences


Ando, A. and F. Modigliani (1963), "The 'Life Cycle' Hypothesis of Saving:

     Aggregate Implications and Tests," American Economic Review (March),

     vol. 53, pp. 55—84.

Barro, R. (1974), "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political

     Economy (November/December), vol. 82, no. 6, pp. 1095—117.

Barro, R. (1978), "The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving," The

     American Enterprise Institute Studies #199.

Cagan, P. (1965), The Effect   of   Pension Plans as Aggregate Savings, New York.

Feldstein, M. (1974), "Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate

     Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy (September/October),

     vol. 82, no. 5.

___________ (1976), "Social Security and the Distribution of Wealth," Journal
     of the American Statistical Association (December), vol. 71, no. 356,

     pp. 800-7.

___________ (1977), "Social Security and Private Savings: International
     Evidence in an Extended Life—Cycle Model," in The Economics of Public

     Services, an International Economic Association Conference Volume,

     M. Feldstein and R. Inman (eds.).

___________ (1978), "Do Private Pensions Increase National Saving?" Journal
     of Public Economics (December), vol. 10, no. 3.

____________ (1979), "The Effect of Social Security on Private Saving: The

     Time Series Evidence," National Bureau of Economic Research working

     paper no. 314.

___________ and B. Bernheim (1979), "The Empirical Irrelevance of Intergen—
     erational Transfers for the Effects of Social Security and Government

     Deficits," forthcoming.
                                    — 27 —




___________ and C. Horioka (1979), "Domestic Savings and International Capital
     Flows," National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 310.

___________ and A. Pellechio (1979), "Social Security Wealth and the Impact
     of Alternative Inflation Adjustments," in Cohn Campbell (ed.), Social

     Security, forthcoming.

___________ and A. Pellechio (1979a), "Social Security and Household Wealth
     Accumulation: New Microeconometric Evidence," Review of Economics and

     Statistics, forthcoming.

___________ and S. Seligman (1979), "The Effect of Unfunded Pension Liabili-
     ties on Share Prices," forthcoming.

Fisher, I. (1930), The Theory of Interest, New York: Macmillan.

Harris, S. (1941), The Economics of Social Secur4y. New York: McGraw—Hill.

Harrod, R. (1948), Towards a Dynamic Economics,London: Macmillan.

Houthakker, H. (1961), "An International Comparison of Personal Saving,"

     Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute, #38, pp. 56—59.

Houthakker, H. (1965), "On Some Determinants of Saving in Developed and Under-

     developed Countries," in Problems of Economic Development, E. Robinson

     (ed.). London: MacMillan, ch. 10.

Katona, C. (1965), "Private Pensions and Individual Saving," Survey Research

     Center, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.

Kochin, L. (1974), "Are Future Taxes Anticipated by Consumers?" Journal of

     Money, Credit and Bank (August), vol. 6, pp. 385—94.

Meyers, R. (1965), SocIal Insurance and Allied Government Programs. Homewood,

     Illinois: Richard D. Irwin.

Miller, M. and C. Upton (1974), Macro—economics: A Neo—classical Introduction.

     Homewood, Illinois: Irwin Publishing Company.
                                            —28--



Modigliani, F. (1966), "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, the Demand for

     Wealth and the Supply of Capital," Social Research (Summer), vol. 33,

     no. 2, pp. 160—217.

___________ (1970), "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving and Intercountry
     Differences in the Saving Ratio," in W.A. Eltis etal. (ed.), Induction,

     Growth and Trade, Essays in Honor of Sir Roy Harrod, Oxford.

___________ and A. Ando (1957), "Tests of the Life Cycle Hypothesis of
     Savings, Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Statistics (May),

     vol. 19, pp. 99—104.

___________ and R. Brumberg (1954), "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
     Function: An Interpretation of Cross—Section Data in K. Kurihara (ed.),

     Post Keynesian Economics, New Brunswick.

Munnell, A. (1974), The Effect of Social Security on Personal Saving, Ballinger

     Publishing Company.

Oldfield, G. (1977), "Financial Aspects of the Private Pension System,"

     Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (February), vol. 9, no. 1, pt. 1,

     pp. 48—54.

Olsen, Leif Haans— (1978), "Earnings —Replacement Rate of Old—Age Benefits,

     1965—75, Selected Countries," Social Security Bulletin (January), vol. 41,

     no. 1, Pp. 3—14, Table 1 —   p.   4.


Pechman, J., H. Aaron and N. Taussig (1968), Social Security: Perspectives

     for Reform. Washington: The Brookings Institution.

Projector, D. and C. Weiss (1966), Survey of Financial Characteristics of

     Consumers (August). Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal

     Reserve System.

Samuelson, P. (1958), "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest with or

     without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy

     (December), vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 467—482.
                                     — 29 —




Schulz, J., etal (1974), Providing Adequate Retirement Income: Pension
     Reform in the United States and Abroad. Hanover, N.H.: Published for

     Brandeis University Press by the University Press of New England.

Wintworth, F. and D. Motley (1970), Resources After Retirement, Monograph

     No. 34, Office of Research and Statistics Research Report, Social

     Security Administration. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing

     Office.
