                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TAX INTEGRATION IN THE U.S.:     A GENERAL
                     EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH

                         Don Fullerton
                        A. Thomas King
                        John   B.   Shoven

                         John   Whalley

                     Working Paper No. 337R




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138

                          March 1980




The authors are grateful for financial support from the Office of
Tax Analysis, U.S. Treasury Department. Development of the
Theoretical model structure has been supported through NSF Grant
#SOC—78—07l7. This paper has benefited from comments by George
Borts, Peter Diamond, Harvey Galper, Robert Haveman, Jon Kesselman,
Nicholas Kiefer, Hudson Mimer, Franco Modigliani and an anonymous
referee. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Taxation, and Finance, and the Bureau's special project
on Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 337
                                                               April 1979


       Static and Dynamic Resource Allocation Effects of Corporate
                and Personal Tax Integration in the U.S.:
                     A General Equilibrium Approach
                                  by
                  Don Fullerton, Princeton University
             A. Thomas King, Federal Home Loan Bank Board
                 John B. Shoven, Stanford University
              John Whalley, University of Western Ontario

                                SUMMARY


     This paper presents estimates of static and dynamic general equilibrium

resource allocation effects for four alternative plans for corporate and

personal income tax integration in the U.S. A medium—scale numerical general

equilibrium model is used which integrates the U.S. tax system with consumer

demand behavior by household and producer behavior by industry.

     Results indicate that total integration of personal and corporate taxes

would yield an annual static efficiency gain of around $4 billion (1973

dollars). Partial integration plans yield less. Dynamic effects are larger,

and our analysis indicates that full integration may yield gains whose present

value is as large as $400 billion or 0.8% of the discounted present value of

the GNP stream to the U.S. economy after correction for population growth.

Plans differ in their distributional impacts, although these findings depend

on the nature of replacement taxes used to preserve government revenues. The

size of dynamic resource allocation effects are sensitive to the choice of

the replacement tax, while static gains are reasonably robust.



                                    Address inquiries to:

                                          Professor John B. Shoven
                                          Department of Economics
                                          Fourth Floor, Encina Hall
                                          Stanford University
                                          Stanford, California 94305
                                          (415) 497—4108
         This paper presents estimates of static and dynamic general
equilibrium resource allocation effects for four alternative plans
for corporate and personal income tax integration in the U.S. A
medium—scale numerical general equilibrium model is used which integrates
the U.S. tax system with consumer demand behavior by household and
producer behavior by industry.
         Results indicate that total integration of personal and corporate
taxes would yield an annual static efficiency gain of around $6 billion
(1973 dollars). Partial integration plans yield less. Dynamic effects
are   larger, and our analysis indicates that full      integration   may   yield
gains whose present value is as large as $400 billion or 1.0% of the

discounted present value of the GNP stream to the U.S. economy after

correction for population growth. Plans differ in their distributional

impacts, although these findings depend        on the nature of replacement
taxes used to preserve government revenues. The size of dynamic resource
allocation effects are sensitive to the choicfe of the replacement tax,
while Static gains are reasonably robust.

                      I. The Taxation of Corporate Income
         A corporate tax which operates separately from the personal income
tax   is widely acknowledged to lead to a number of problems. It creates

a ttdoubletI taxation of   corporate income. Dividends     are paid out of

net   of corporate   tax profits and   are   further taxed under the personal

income   tax. Retained earnings, to the e:tent they are capitalized in
higher   share values, are also taxed twice, although      only fractionally

                                         1
                                         2

 and on a deferred basis by the personal incon tax. This double taxation
may reduce overall rates of return and adversely affect capital accumu—
latiori. A second problem is often referred to as the ttlO_iflIt effect.
The efficiency of capital markets is iaired due to the deferral advantage
given to retained earnings; firms can reinvest retained earnings in
projects with a low yield and their shareholders can still earn a higher
net of tax return than if the funds were distributed as dividends and
reinvested      elsewhere. Thirdly, since only equity returns are subject to

corporate taxes, there is a bias towards debt finance, potentially dis-

torting corporate financial policies. Finally, the corporate tax

introduces higher effective tax rates in soms industries than others,

due to special provisions in the corporate tax law and to the varying

degrees    to   which industries are incorporated. These tax rate differentials

further disrupt an efficient allocation of capital. 1 Integration plans
seek to remove or mitigate these features by linking personal income
tax liabilities of stockholders (either on dividends or on all earnings)
to the corporate tax liabilities of the firms.
          A variety of plans have been proposed over the   years, but these

typically  move only part way to a full integration of personal and
corporate taxation. The coon objective of all these tax integration
plans is to improve the efficiency of the ecOnomy through beneficial

resource   reallocation in both a static and a dynamic sense. In this

paper four corporate tax integration alternatives are considered, each

differing in the extent to which they remove the undesirable features

of the present corporate income tax mentioned above.
                                         3

          Plan 1: Total Integration: Under this alternative the corporate

income tax is eliminatd, and the personal income tax is modified to
tax total shareholder earnings rather than just dividends. When capital
gains are realized, the tax basis is set at the original purchase price
plus the retained earnings cumulated during the holding period. This
last feature avoids a double tax on retained earnings capitalized in
higher stock prices. However, if the basis is not re—setfor inflation,
the base for capital gains tax will include pure nominal appreciation.
This amounts to a capital wealth levy. We evaluate this partnership
integration plan with and without inflation       indexation   of capital gains.
These    total integration plans are the most comprehensive we consider

and contain modifications to the income tax which, if they had originally

been made, would   have   dispensed with the need for a separate corporate

tax. Industrial distortions through the corporate tax          are   removed as

is the corporate tax distortion of interteniporal consumption choice.

          Plan 2: Dividend Deduction from      Corporate   Income Tax Base: This

approach    simply removes the "double" taxation of dividends by making them
deductible from taxable corporate income. Capital gains taxation of
individuals   is unaltered, and the corporate income tax       is    effectively

converted    into a tax on retained earnings only. If current differences
in- retention policies by industry      remain, then some industrial discrixn—

ination would continue within the corporate tax.

          Plan 3: Dividend Deduction from Personal Income Tax Base: An

alternative   way of removing "double" taxation of dividends         is to allow

a   dividend deduction from   the   personal income tax rather than from the

corporate income tax. Capital gains taxation is again unaltered.             Under
                                       4
 this   plan, all corporate earnings are taxed at the corporate tax rate,

 and none are taxed at the persona]. 1ncoa tax rate. As with Plan 2,

 under different retention policies by industry, soa industrial discrim-
 ination will remain under the corporate tax.


        Plan 4: Dividend "Gross Up": This was the plan most actively
discussed in the U.S. tax reform debate during 1977. It seeks to
reduce rather than remove the double taxation of dividends. Part of
the   income tax paid by corporations is   given as an income tax credit
to   stockholders when dividends are distributed.2 The credit is taxable,

hence the description "gross up." Because of the partial nature of the

credit, none of the distortions listed above can be wholly removed.


                   II. A General Equilibrium Model of the
                         U.S. Economy and Tax Systern

          The implementation of an integration plan results in changes
In all relative prices in the economy due to the realignment of industry
tax rates; both short and long—run equilibrium quantities will also
change. Intertemporal decisions will be re—evaluated with a changed
rate of return to capital, and the division of time between labor and
leisure will be altered. The relative positions of groups within the
household sector will change, and therefore a complete evaluation of

integration plans should incorporate the interacting nature of the

efficiency and distributional effects involved. While a new post—•

integration tax system may involve uniform tax rates and may be easy to

evaluate, the existing tax system is nonuniform. Implementation of any

corporate tax integration plan will result in a new set of effective tax
                                        3
 rates on capital income by industry and on      personal     income by consumer
 group, and all equilibrium prices and      quantities   can be expected to

vary;    the direct effects   intended from   an integration plan can be

offset or reinforced by induced changes in economic behavior.

           Because these induced effects are multiple, nonmarginal, and

interlinking, general equilibrium analysis is a natural technique to

use in evaluating the combination of distributional           and efficiency
changes.     A medium-size general equilibrium tidel     of   the U.S. economy
and   tax system, estimated using 1973     is used to analyze the
                                         data,

four corporate and personal income tax integration plans. It combines
a treatment of the U.S. tax system with competitive consumer and producer
behavior.    Equilibrium prices and quantities are determined *ader each
integration plan, and the effects of alternative taxation regimes are
evaluated.    The ide1 possesses a capability for analyzing the impacts

of many different tax proposals concerning not only corporate taxes,

but also, income, social security, sales, property and other taxes.

It incorporates a labor—leisure choice, savings and investment, foreign

trade, and government purchase policies. The full range of taxes
currently operating in the U.S. are incorporated into the iide1.           Both
single—period   and multi—period   behavior can be considered. In       dynamic
analyses, a sequence of single—period equilibria is computed, with capital
stocks and labor supply changing over time. A labor force
                                                            growth rate of
appro)d.mately 2.75 percent per year in efficiency .mits isused. The precise
number is chosen so as to guarantee that the U.S.
                                                  economy is on an assumed
                                        6

 balanced growth path in terms of the 1973 data we use. Savings decisions
 in each period are based on myopic expectations on the rate of retuni
 to   capital; only in a steady state are these expectations correct.

           Nineteen producer good industries, 16 consur expenditure

 items, and 12 consumer types classified by income range are identified

 and shown in Table 1. These dimensions are governed by a trade—off

between model complexity, data availability, and computational expense.

 Capital and labor services are the primary factor inputs used by

industry, and these are owned by consumer groups in different proportions.

These two factors are zobile between industries, and their use is

dictated   by the zero profit conditions of perfectly competitive markets.3
Over time the capital service endowment can      grow through investment,
and   the labor service endowment changes through labor force growth. A
labor—leisure choice for households also enters the model. More details
on the structure and specification of the model and its data are given
in Fullerton,   King, Shoven, and Whalley (l979).


II.A Data Sources and Procedures

          The ndel requires the assembly of a comprehensive and consistent

microeconomjc data set. Such a data set has not been constructed before

for the U.S., but is essential for general equilibrium analysis of tax—

ation policy.4 This data set provides information on factor use by

industry (and taxes paid for these), intermediate use of products, outputs

of both producer and consumer goods, purchases of consumer goods by

household types, incomes by source and by household type, income taxes

paid, and several other items such as business investment and foreign

trade.   The complete 1973   data Set used to   calibrate the model is derived
                                            7



                                         TABLE 1

                Classification of Industries, Consumer Expenditures,
                          and Consumer Groups in the Model


      Industries                                       Consumer Expenditures

1. Agriculture, Forestry, and                      1. Food
        Fisheries                                  2. Alcoholic Beverages
2. Mining                                          3. Tobacco
3. Crude Petroleum and Gas                         4. Utilities
4. Contract Construction                           5. Housing
 5. Food and Tobacco                               6. Furnishings
 6. Textiles, Apparel, Leather                     7. Appliances
       Products
                                                   8. Clothing and Jewlery
7. Paper and Printing
                                                   9. Transportation
8. Petroleum Refining
                                                   10. Motor Vehicles, Tires, and
 9. Chemicals and Rubber                                  Auto Repair
10. Lumber, Furniture, Stone                       11. Services
ii. Metals, Machinery, Miscellaneous               12. Financial Services
       Manufacturing
                                                   13. Reading, Recreation, misc.
12. Transportation Equipment
                                                   14. Nondurable-Nonfood Household
13. Motor Vehicles                                        Items
14. Transportation, Communications,                15. Gasoline and Other Fuels
       and Utilities
                                                   16. Savings
15.   Trade
16.   Finance and Insurance
17.   Real Estate
18.   Services
19.   Government Enterprise


                                   Consumer Groups
              (Households classified by $thousands of 1973 gross income)

                   1.   0—3         5.    6—7            9.   12-15
                   2.   3—4         6.    •7-8          10.   15-20
                   3.   4—5        7.     8—10          11.   20—25
                   4.   5-6        8.    10-12          12.   25+
                                        8

 fromfive major sources including the July,l976 Survey of Current

Business, unpublished worksheets of the U.S. Commerce Department's

National Income Division, the Commerce      Department's Bureau of
Economic Analysis Input/Output tables, the U.S. Labor Department's

1973   Consumer Expenditure Survey, and the U.S. Treasury Department's
merged tax file.
          Inconsistencies between'these data sets and general equilibrium
conditions are resolved using systematic adjustment procedures described
in Fullerton, Shoven and Whalley (1978). Effective tax rates and
parameters for equations in the model are estimated from the benchmark
equilibrium data set so as to replicate the consistent 1973 data base.
Economic effects of each tax policy proposal are then estimated by
changing the tax rates and recalculating a simulated equilibrium.

II.B Production
          Each   industry produces a single producer good from a combination
of capital                               the outputs of other industries.
              services, labor services, and

Factor input decisions are assumed to be made on the basis of cost
minimization, and these decisions are affected by the tax system since
the relative producer prices of inputs are altered for each industry
by   taxes.

          The use of primary factors by each industry is described by a
separate C.E.S. or Cobb—Douglas production function. The model embodies
a capability for preselection of functional form in addition to selection
of parameter values. The intermediate use of products by industries is
described by a conventional fixed coefficient input—output matrix. This
matrix is derived from published 1970 input—output data for the U.S. and.
                                         9

updated to 1973. No substitution between primary factors and inter-
mediate   inputs is permitted.
          A number of ttlegalft taxation instruments are treated as
production taxes and directly affect costs of industries. The corporate
income tax, corporate franchise tax, and the property tax are in
combination    treated as ad valorem taxes on the use of capital services.

The social security tax,      unemployment insurance, and public workman's
compensation    are treated as ad valorem taxes on the use of labor serivces.
It is, of course, debatable whether these treatments are appropriate. Some
recent literature argues for treating the social security tax as a
benefit—related contribution and       for   treating the corporate income tax

as a lump—sum tax or as a tax on the use of equity          instruments.   Our

model abstracts from these controversies, but we are aware of them.

           In addition to taxes on the use of primary factors, the model

includes    taxes on    the intermediate use   of   producer goods by industry

and    taxes on outputs   of producer goods. Intermediate input taxes

include    the registration fees paid on motor       vehicles for business use;

producer output taxes include the Federal manufacturers' excise taxes,

paid by purchases for intermediate or final use. Table 2 describes the
detailed treatment of all these taxes along with an outline of the entire
United States tax system.

II.C      Consumption
          Within the personal sector, twelve consumer groups are identified
by their family gross of tax income as reported in the 1973 Consumer
Expenditure Survey data published by the U.S. Department of Labor. The
number of groups are restricted in order to keep the model of manageable
                                                        TABLE 2

                                 United States Taxes and Their Treatment in the Model


                    Tax                       Treatment in the Model           Difficulties of Model Treatment

1.   Corporate taxes (including state    Ad valorem tax on use of capital      Some argue for treatment as a
       and local) and corporate            services by industry                  lump-sum tax; model treatment
       franchise taxes                                                           ignores role of financial
                                                                                 instruments

2.   Property taxes                      Ad valorem tax on use of             Differential rates across Juris—
                                                                    capital
                                           services by Industry                 dictions ignored

3.   Social Security taxes, Unemploy-    Ad valorem tax on use of labor        Benefit-related nature of con—
       ment Insurance and Workman's        services by industry                  tributions; arbitrary distinc—
       Compensation                                                              tion between public and private
                                                                                 Insurance programs

4.   Motor vehicles tax                  Ad valorem tax on use of motor        In practice, a yearly registration   o
                                           vehic'es by producers                fee and not a purchase tax;
                                                                                averaging over jurisdictions

5.   Retail sales tax                    Ad valorem taxes on purchase   of    Averaging of rates over states
                                           consumer goods

6.   Excise taxes                        Ad valorem taxes on output   of      Taxes often expressed as charge
                                           producer goods                       per unit physical measure such
                                                                                as volume

7.   Other indirect business taxes       Ad valorern tax on output of         Payments depend on output levels
       and non-tax payments to             producer goods                       by industry to only limited
       government                                                               extent; averaging of rates
                                                                                over states

8.   Personal income taxes (including    Linear function for each consumer    Detailed deductions and exemptions
       state and local)                    where tax on capital affects         not specifically considered in
                                           industry allocation                  model
                                           1].


size, but other consumer groupings could be considered by the approach.

Additional characteristics, such as family size, age, marital status

of household heads, and      regional    location could be examined, as done by

Piggott and Whalley (1977) In their del of the U.K. tax system.

           The income of each consumer group in any period is determined

by the ownership of labor and          capital   services and receipt of transfer

income, such as social security payxnents, from the government. Demands

for    the consumer goods, savings and leisure are assumed to be generated

by utility maximization subject to the household budget constraint.

           The nested utility function is given by

                 15    A
                       1 , L),
                      X.
(1)        U(u( TI
                                 Cf)
               1=1

where u is a C.E.S. function determining the allocation of current

 expenditures between consumption goods X.           and leisure   L, while the

 purchase    decisions on the X. are determined by a Cobb—Douglas sub—utility
 function as shown. The elasticity of labor supply with respect to the
 real after tax wage is set at +0.15 (Lewis, 1975). U is another
 C.E.S. function, determining the allocation of income between those
 current   expenditures and expected fubure consumption Cf. The            demand for.
Cf results in a derived      demand for savings, where the elasticity of

savings with respect to      the real net—of—tax rate of return Is taken as

 .4,   consistent with the recent estimates by Boskin (1978).
           Demands for the 19 producer goods are derived from the demands
for the 16 consumer expenditure items using a "G"           transition matrix.

An   element g1. of this matrix        is the atiunt   of producer   good I needed

to   produce one unit of consumer expenditure item j.          The distinction we
make between producer and consumer goods enables us to simultaneously
use national accounts data on a producer good classification and the
                                        12

 and   the recently released 1972—73 Consumer Expenditure Survey defined
 for consumer goods. The G transition matrix solves the problem of
distinguishing consumer demands for outputs of the trade and transpor-
tation industries from the demands for goods purchased at retail. Each
consumer good requires some trade and transportation for its production.

It also solves the problem of rare consumer purchases of goods such as

"mining"    output.
           The 16th   consumer expenditure Item is savings, and the G matrix
permits us    to treat it like other goods. We assume that the demand

for savings depends upon the current rate of return on capital, given by

the    current price of   capital services relative to the purchase price of

new    capital goods.5 We thus assume myopic expectations in the sense that
the current rental and purchase price of capital is expected to prevail
in all future periods. Actual patterns of investment good purchases
are the basis for constructing the co1ui of the transition matrix      which

converts the consumer's demand for savings into demands for producer
goods. This treatment assumes an equality between savings and investment.
Savings of one period result in an equl—proportional increase in the
capital service endowment of households where the conversion between net
investment and capital service units uses a real net—of—tax rate of
return of 4 percent.



          Progressive personal Income taxes are incorporated by a sequence
of linear tax function for each consumer. With an intercept that is
usually   negative and a marginal tax rate applied to all income, we can
                                   13
replicate observed 1973 tax payments and still subject income changes
to the appropriate marginal rate. State and local income taxes are
nxdelled as "piggyback" or percentage surcharge taxes applied to the
Federal levy.
        Treatment of persona]. income taxes is complicated by the need
to recognize the preferential treatment of certain types of capital
income. Corporate retained earnings which are converted to capital
gains have a lower present value tax liability than do earnings paid
as dividends. Similarly, the extent to which capita]. earnings are
sheltered by the unincorporated Investment Tax Credit will differ by
industry. Thus, the effective personal income tax rate on capital
income will differ by industry. Later we discuss the procedure used
to introduce these preferential tax rates on some personal capital
income, and we discuss their treatment in our ndelling of the
integration plans.
        Government purchases are derived from a Cobb—Douglas demand
function defined over producer goods. Government real expenditures
are assumed to equal tax receipts less transfers since the general
equilibrium approach requires that the government budget must be
balanced. The foreign trade sector receives a simple treatment in order
to close the ixdel. By assuming that the net value of exports less
imports for each producer good remains constant, we can calculate the
net quantity transactions at any given vector of   producer   prices and
transform domestic demands to market demands.
                                      14


                     i. Corporate Financial Policies and
                              the Lock—In Effect
       -

           There are two important aspects of corporate tax integration

which our xidel does not directly consider, although we have made some

efforts     to examine the sensitivity of our findings to alternative
assumptions on these issues. One problem is the role of corporate
financial policies and the other is the so—called "lock—in" effect.
           In recent years a number of authors (Stiglitz, 1973, 1976; King,

1974) have emphasized a view of the corporate tax    as a differential tax
on the various financial instruments available for transferring capital
income from firms to individuals. Under this view there are three
different ways by which capital income of corporations can be "paid" to
the owners of capital: through interest payments, dividends, and
retentions which are assumed to be converted into capital gains. Each
of these instruments has tax and non—tax advantages and disadvantages
that govern their relative use by industry. By using debt finance,
interest is deductible from the cotporate tax base. This tax advantage
is counteracted by the disadvantage that a heavily debt financed    company
has   a higher probability of bankruptcy and/or takeover. Equity financing

cannot avoid corporate taxation but may result in a large reduction in

personal taxes if a retention policy is employed. Alternatively, though

they have no tax advantage, dividends may   be paid for a variety of other
reasons.

            the purposes of the present paper, the important point is
           For

that with changes in tax law, fir-ms can be expected to idify their
financial policies. For example, if Plan 2 (dividend deduction from the
                                       13

corporate tax) encourages firms to pay out all earnings in dividends,
then Plan 1 (total. integration) and Plan 2 are identical in their effects.
          Lacking good estimates of financial policy elasticity parameters,
we examine various extretre behavioral reactions and calculate the effects
of the tax change given the assumptions involved. We thus cannot claim
a "true" general equilibrium treatnt of corporate financial policies
since adjustments are made to the dividend/retention ratio to estimate
vdel equivalent tax rates before we make our general equilibrium
calculation.
      -   With   the "lock—in" effect, the issue is that the deferral advantage
under-the existing personal and corporate tax structure gives a tax
preference to retention by existing firms. New firms entering financial
markets must borrow at higher interest rates than those at which existing
firms can implicitly borrow through retentions. Thus, if existing firms
are slower growing and less efficient, the proper reallocation of
resources to new firms need not take place.
          Since we consider a general equilibrium model with constant
returns to scale technology, we do not incorporate an explicit theory
of individual firm behavior, and a reallocation of capital between firms
within an industry does not affect the industry production function. We
ar therefore unable to incorporate efficiency aspects of the lock—in effect.
          The resource allocation effects of corporate and personal tax
integration we consider are restricted to interindustry and intertempora].
distortions. Interindus try distortions enter through differential
capital incorre tax rats by industry, and intertemporal distortions affect
savings behavior in the economy and change capital allocation over time.
                                          16

                    IV. Representing the Tax Integration Plans in
                               Model Equivalent Form

         Each of the tax integration plans described in SectIon I ía

represented in      model equivalent   form   for   the purposes of analyzing its

general equilibrium impacts. For each plan we calculate a new set of

appropriate     effective tax rates and use these to        compute a simulated

equilibrium     for comparison with the data generated by the model under
a no policy change situation.
         We first calculate each industry's capital income net of
corporate income tax, corporate franchise tax, and property tax. For
each of the twelve consumer classes,           data on marginal tax rates r.

are   obtained from the Treasury Department's merged tax file and a
weighted average marginal tax rate t is calculated.
       For each of the nineteen industries and government, we define

a fraction, f1,     which denotes the proportion of that sector's capital

income   which is subject to full personal income taxation. The average
fraction of capital which is fully taxable by the personal income tax
is denoted f. The f.1fraction differs across industries for a number
of reasons, but primarily because of their different dividend and
retention policies. In addition to the corporate income tax, corporate
franchise tax, and property tax, we add another factor tax at the
industrial level, termed the personal factor tax, and collected at
rates tf by industry
          The personal income tax applied to capital income at the consumer
level is given by

(2)         t   =   (t. —         j    = 1,   12
                                          17

 where      is the capital income received by the             consumer class.

 These   consumer income taxes on capital income are both positive and
 negative and when aggregated over the twelve consumer classes yield
 no revenue. The modelled system operates exactly as a withholding
 system under which each industry pays tax on             of the capital used,
 at rate T.       consumer income taxes in expression (2) correct the
                  The

 tax rate for each consumer clash (those with rates above r pay more
 taxes while those below get refunds). Since T is chosen as the capital

weighted    average of marginal tax rates, the corrections sum          to   zero.

          To   calculate the    f1, we make   use of data on capital income
types by industry, examining corporate profits (dividends and retained
earnings), net      interest payments (monetary and imputed), net rent
payments (including the imputed net rent from owner—occupied homes),
and the return to capital used in noncorporate business. Each
                                                                             type of
capital   income is treated differently by the         personal   income tax, and
each   has a proportion g which is fully taxable by it. An industry's
f. is the weighted average of these g proportions, and each industry
has   different weights or amounts.    of these capital     income types.
          Interest      and rents are fully taxed under the personal income
tax. For the housing industry, imputed net rents of            owner—occupied
homes are not taxable. In 1973 the government's revenue             loss due to
the   $100 dividend exclusion from the personal income tax was estimated

at $285 million.6 We divide this by T          to   get an estimate of nontaxable

dividends, $1164 million. Since total dividends paid is
                                                                    $24,631 million,
the   proportion taxable is .96 and this figure is used as the g applied
to   dividends,
                                     18

         In the case of capital gains;    Bailey   (1969) has shown that close

to   one—half of long term capital. gains are realized in a relatively
short period, while the remainder is held for varying durations,
averaging perhaps 35 years or more. Weighing.. the advantages of exiusion
and deferral in light of these observations on holding periods leads to a
conclusion that about 25% of nominal capital gains are effecive1y included
in the base of the personal inco tax. Accounting for inflation, however,
we calculate that 73% of real capital gains in 1973 were fully taxed at the
personal level, implying .73 as our g for retained earnings, g.

        Each of the four integration plans imply different values for f
and for capital tax rates. Because of the government's balanced budget,
however, it is important that they receive the same real tax revenue in
the simulated equilibrium. Otherwise, the change in the pattern of
government expenditures and transfers would affect the outcome and prevent
the isolation of the effects of the capital tax rate changes. Tax rates
under each plan are therefore modified during computation until the
resulting equilibrium tax yield allows government to make the same real
purchases and give the same real transfers to consumer groups, based on
Laspeyres price indices.7 Different yield preserving taxes, both on
personal income and on capital income by industry, are considered. In
dynamic analyses we consider equal yield tax replacements on a period by
period basis.
         The modifications used in our model to represent each plan are

as follows:
                                             19

           Plan 1: Total Integration: Under this plan, the undesirable

 features of the corporate tax are removed by merging          the   corporate
 income tax and       personal     income tax. Corporate taxes are eliminated

 from the numerator of the new capital tax rate calculation.            The

 personal income tax is changed to tax earnings rather than just

 dividends, implying a g set to one and therefore changes in the

 values of the f1 parameters. These changes imply new personal factor

 taxes and     thus   new capital tax rates by industry.

          Plan    2: Dividend Deduction from Corporate Tax Base: This
plan's corporate income tax base is undistrjbuted profits of corporations.
It is represented in model equivalent terms for each industry by removing
a portion i.of the corporate tax paid from the 1973 capital taxation
figures and recalculating the capital tax rate. The portion of corporate
tax removed is        given by the ratio of dividends to net of tax corporate

profits   by industry              Current Business, July, 1976). Neither
                           (Survey of

the   f1 nor   the personal income tax function change.
        Plan 3: Dividend Deduction from Personal Income Tax Base: This
plan removes the taxation of dividends from the redistributive power
of the income tax system. In model equivalent terms, it is specified
by considering the effect of dividend deductibility on the income tax
functions of households. The value of the g proportion of dividends
taxable by the personal income tax is set to zero and all   are
recalculated. Other adjustments are analogous to the description of Plan 1.
          Plan   4:       "Gross Up": This scheme gives stockholders an
                        Dividend

income tax credit of a. 15% portion of the corporate taxes paid by their
firm. It is      most   satisfactorily modelled as a reduction in corporate
                                        20

taxes of each industry by the aximt of the credit. This ainoimt is
then treated as additional dividends in the calculation of new f1
values. The new effective tax rates then include 85% of corporate
income taxes   and the new personal factor taxes. The higher dividends

relative to retained earnings result in higher f and         f   values so that

consunrs experience an increase in taxable capital income. The taxable

nature of the credits are thus captured.


                                     V. Results

          Tables 3   and 4 present   static efficiency and   distributional
resultsfrom the integration plans. Table 5 presents our calculation
of dynamic effects. Although it is not arealistic policy proposal,
we also report, as a basis     of comparison, results from complete

equalization of capital tax rates by industry i.mder an          equal government
revenue   constraint. In this case we eliminate tax discrimination on

capital   use among industries, use a single tax rate for all industries,
and equally tax all capital income at the personal income tax level.
Capital tax rates are set to a common rate providing government with
enough revenue to make the same real purchases, and f parameters are
all reset to f, the overall fraction of capital income which is

effectively fully taxed by the personal income tax system. The result-

ing   efficiency gains are larger than those of the four integration plans
and   represent the maximum possible increase in expanded national income
from the elimination of interindustry capital tax distortions.
       The static measures of efficiency displayed in Table 3 are the
changes in national income plus leisure valued at pre and post           policy

change prices. We use these quantity indices rather than compensating
                                                     21

                                                   TABLE 3

                          Change in    Real   Expanded* National Income under
                                             Various Assumptions
                                      (in   billions of 1973 dollars)


 Tax Replacement                    Price Index           Types of Scaling to Preserve Tax Yield
                                                                       Scale Conmon   Rate
 Equal      capital tax     Paasche (lower bound)                           7.377
 rates on industry**        Laspeyres (upper bound)                        10.220
                            Geometric mean                                   8.682
     Plan 1
 Full integration
                                                          Lump—sum     Multiplicative        Additive
                            Paasche (lower bound)            10.029         5.282             5.448
 with indecing              Laspeyres (upper bound)          12. 363        7.292             7.446
                            Geometric mean                   11.135         6.206             6.369
      Plan 1                Paasche (lower bound)             8.883         5.120             5.223
 Full integration           Laspeyres (upper bound)          10.628         6.646             6.748
without inded.ng            Geometric mean                    9.716         5.833             5.936

    Plan 2              Paasehe (lower bound)                 4.864         2.713             3.253
Dividend deduction from Laspeyres (upper bound)               5.268         3.021             3.598
corporate income tax    Geometric mean                        5.061         2.862             3.42].


      Plan 2               Paasche (lower bound)             10.236         5.284             5.470
With extreme behavior      Laspeyres (upper bound)           12. 716        7.418             7.588
assumption                 Geometric mean                    11.408         6.260             6.442

    Plan 3              Paasche (lower bound)                 3.720         2.440             2.500
Dividend deduction from Laspeyres (upper bound)               3.964         2.653             2.706
personal income tax     Geometric mean                        3.840         2.544             2.600

   Plan 3                  Paasche (lower bound)             5.611          2.992             3.151
With extreme behavior      Laspeyres (upper bound)           6.367          3.642             3.777
assumption                 Geometric mean                    5.977          3.301             3.449

    Plan 4                 Paasche (lower bound)             3.590          2.681             2.712
Dividend Gross—up          Laspeyres (upper bound)           3.748          2.820             2.850
                           Geometric mean                    3.668          2.749             2.780
        *
         This
            incorporates the change in the valuation of leisure through induced variations
in labor supply. Additive and multiplicative scaling refer to the marginal tax rates of
the   personal income tax system.
      **
       These results are for complete equalization of capital tax
                                                                  rates by industry
(including property tax, corporate franchise tax, investment tax credit, etc.) They
are presented for comparison purposes.
                                        22

or equivalent    variations because the utility contribution of savings
may be inaccurately assessed by consumers due to their myopic expectations.
For the dynamic welfare effects shown in Table 5 we evaluate the instan-
taneous utility function (u)        from equation (1). We report the sum of
present value   analogues   of   compensating variations using these utility

functions. This   measure   reflects the amount     in   1973 dollars which would

have to be given to the twelve consumer groups to leave them indifferent

between the present tax system and the tax integration plan.

         Results in Table 3 indicate that the efficiency gain from equal-

izing capital taxes by industry is about $8.7 billion per year in 1973

dollars. The single—period change in         the   real after—tax income of each

of   the twelve consumer classes is presented in Table 48 The efficiency
gain   turns out to be distributed in such a way that every group experiences

an   increase in real income, and thus a Pareto improvement occurs.9 Dynamic
gains in this case (Table 5) are $340 billion, which is about 0.8 percent
of the discounted present value of the future U.S. income stream after
correction for population growth. We have calculated but do not report
percentage changes in price and in output by industry for this replacement
and for each tax plan. Other information on new capital and labor use by

industry,    taxes paid, and all types of demands are available for each tax
replacement)0 The findings for each of the .integration plans are as
follows:
           Plan 1: Total Integration: This plan removes only part of

industrial   discrimination in the taxation of capital income because property
taxes   remain as differential capital taxes by industry. Intertemporal

distortion is substantially reduced. We consider equal            yield tax   replacements,
                                                                            TABLE 4

                                            Percentage Changes in Expanded Real Income* after Income Taxes
                                                and Transfers by Income Class, for Each Tax Replacement


                                   Plan 1         Plan 1         Plan 2            Plan   2         Plan 3          Plan 3       Plan 4
                                                                 Dividend                        Dividend
                        Equal                                        COrorate With                onal               With       Dividend
                       Capital       Full           Full         Income Tax         Extreme        Income Tax       Extreme     Gross Up
                         Tax      Integration Integration        (Multi—           Behavior      (Multiplica—     Behavior          (Multi—
  Consumer             Rates on    (Additive    (Multiplica— plicative            (Multiplica—   tive            (Multiplica—   plicative
    Group              Industry    Scaling) tive Scaling) Scaling)            tive Scaling Scaling)              tive Scaling       Scaling)
  o       —
               3,000 0.786          1.945         3.471            1.112            3.488         0.215             0.210           0.796
  3       —
               4,000 0.650          1.386         2.682            0.951            2.702         0.272             0.346       •
                                                                                                                                    0.648
  4 —          5,000   0.585        0.928         2.022            0.808.           2.040          0.274            0.387            0.524
  S    —
               6,000 0.606          0.930         1.926            0.764            1.941         0.284            0.384             0.509
                                                                                                                                               p.,,
  6    —       7,000   0.704        0.920         1.850            0.736            1.866         0.297             0.426            0.500
       —
  7            8,000 0.691          0.786         1.568            0.633            1.580         0.282             0.401            0.446
       —
  8                                 0.626         1.222      .    0.485
              10,000 0.645                                                          1.227         0.250             0.339           0.378
       —
 10           12,000   0.731        0.733         1.121           0.377             1.125         0.269             0.354           0.363
 12    —
              15,000   0.840        0.747         1.021           0.232             1.024         0.270             0.373           0.350
                                                                              •


 15    —
      20,000 0.863                  0.767         0.672          —0.014       •     0.670         0.274             0.350           0.283
                                          •
 20 — 25,000 1.063                  1.022         0.654          —0.155             0.659         0.359             0.506           0.293
 25+         2.240                  3.202         1.388          —1.523             1.540         1.791             3.130           0.567
      *
    Expanded real          income includes leisure,       valued at the household net—of—tax wage rate.           Numbers shown are the
arithmetic means          of percentage changes to income based        on Faasche and Laspeyres         price indices.
                                                 24

                                               TABLE   5
                  iynamic Welfare  Effects in Present Value of Compensating
                                     Variations over Tjme*
                                (in billions of 1973 dollars)

 Tax   Replacement                         Types of Scaling to Preserve Tax Yield
                                                           Scale Comin Rate
Equal capital tax                                             339.273
rates on industry                                               (.808)***

   Plan 1                           Lump_sum**             Multiplicative**    Additive**
Full integration                     404.f+58                  179.977              229.966
with indedng                           (.963)                    (.429)               (.548)


   Plan 1
Full integration                     350.164                   175.094              213.588
without indedng                        (.834)                    (.417)               (.509)


   Plan 2
Dividend deduction from              195.666                   113.810              131.327
corporate income tax                   (.466)                    (.271)               (.313)


   Plan 2
With extreme behavior                414.722                   179.858              232.322
assumption                             (.987)                    (.428)               (.553)


   Plan3
Dividend deduction from              175.449                   113.413              121.736
personal income tax                    (.418)                    (.270)               (.290)

   Plan 3
With extreme behavior                284.630                   158.464              185.367
assumption                             (.678)                    (.337)               (.441)
   Plan 4
Dividend                             139.558                    96.305              105.335
Gross—up                               (.332)                    (.229)               (.251)
      *
        These     measures involve calculating a sequence of mentary equilibria through
time with increment of the capital and labor service endowments of the economy through
savings and population growth. We consider       e_ui1ibria at 10 year periods with an
appropriate treatment of the terminal conditions. The dynamic compensating variations
are analogues of static concepts applied to the consumption sequence over time assuming
the first period discount factor is unchanged.
        **
          These   are explained in the text.
      The numbers in parentheses represent the gain as a percentage of the present
discounted value of welfare (consumption plus leisure) in the base squence. This
value is $42 trillion for all comparisons, and accounts for only a population the size
of that in 1973.
                                      25

as   described   earlier, such that taxes are scaled up to   meet tax revenues

from   the corresponding period of the previous tax regime. We consider
lump—sum adjustments to income taxes along with additive and multiplicative
scaling of marginal income tax rates.
          Interindustry discrimination is reduced enough to provide a $6
billion static welfare gain ineach year (in 1973 dollars) for the cases with
either   multiplicative or additive scaling and inflation indexation of capital gains

taxes. Without this price level correction, the efficiency gains are

slightly   less. Dynamic gains are sensitive to the replacement yield
preserving tax considered. With lump—sum replacement a gain of $404
billion occurs, and with multiplicative scaling a gain of $180 billion
occurs. These figures are to be compared with a $42 trillion discounted
present value of the future income stream for the U.S. economy under the
present tax system (after correction for population growth, in 1973 prices).
The sensitivity of these dynamic results to the replacement tax can be
explained   by the positive correlation between income and proportion     of
income saved. Since multiplicative scaling collects more tax revenue
from high—income groups, it creates a greater distortion in their inter—

temporal   choices.
        Static equity effects provide progressive gains to income brackets,
shown in Table 4, with every class enjoying increased real income. The

importance of the structure of the replacement yield preserving tax is
apparent from Table 4, multiplicative scaling helping lower—income groups
substantially more.
          We do not need to consider changes in financial policies under this

plan. With full integration, all forms of capital income are taxed
                                      26

 identically. Since the tax does riot depend on whether capital inco

 is paid in interest, dividends, or retained, a change in either the

 debt/equity or dividend/retention ratio will not alter the new effective

 tax rates or the new f1 for the revised equilibrium calculation. The

 resulting solution would thus be the same even if the ratios changed.

          Plan 2: Dividend Deduction from Corporate Income Tax Base: Here

dividends are treated like interest for tax purposes, and we first assume

that   corporations continue to retain the same portion of income. The
reduction of the corporate income tax base causes some levelling of
capital tax rates and a resulting $3 billion increase in yearly national
income. Dynamic gains der multiplicative scaling of tax rates are $114
billion. Under a lump—sum    replacement,     dynamic gains are $196 billion.
The reduced spread of dynamic   results    is due to the smaller revenue loss
associated with Plan 2: there is less distortion of intertemporal choice
through scaling. The static distributional impacts are disadvantageous
to   the higher—income groups, reflecting the fact that less income is

taxed at the flat corporate rate and more at the progressive personal rates.


          Under our "standard" treatment of Plan2, dividend/retention ratio

is assumed constant even though there does exist an incentive to replace

retained earnings with now non—taxed dividends. For this reason we also

consider the extreme case where all corporate earnings are distributed.

The corporate income tax would thus be effectively eliminated, and

calculations would proceed on the assumption that all corporate earnings
get multiplied by the higher .96 for      The static gain for such a tax

replacement is around $6 billion per year, the same as under Plan 1; the
dynamic gains are also comparable. These welfare gains are substantially
above the fixed—behavior estimate because corporate decision makers have,
                                      27

in effect, reduced the distortion of the corporate income tax with its

differing effective capital tax rates. The static distributional results

of the Plan 2 extreme—behavior case show nre progressive gains among

consumers.

          Plan 3: Dividend Deduction from Personal Income Tax Base: The

reduced tax on dividends again implies lower tax rates on heavily incor-

poratedindustries and a levelling of all rates in general. This occurs
through the lower f for dividend paying industries. Static welfare
gains    are about $2 billion per year; dynamic gains under multiplicative

scaling are about the same as Plan 2, at   $113 billion, but under lump—
sum replacement are lower than Plan 2, at $175 billion. The multi-
plicative results reflect the importance of the deduction from the upwardly
scaled income tax. As might be expected, Table 4 shows that Plan 3 has
re regressive effects than the second plan, since dividend income is

all taxed at the corporate rates instead of being taxed at progressive

personal tax rates.                             -




          Under extreme financial policy behavior, where firms no longer

retain   earnings, both the static and dynamic gains are somewhat
larger.     The corporate tax remains the same, but new f1 include all
corporate earnings as dividends with a of zero. Less corporate income
is subject to the personal income tax. The •difference between results
with and without the extreme—behavior assumption is less than for Plari 2
because the personal income tax deduction does less to eliminate interindustry dis—
crimination than does the corporate income tax deduction of dividends.
Equity effects are still regressive for the extreme—behavior case.
                                      28

          Plan   4: Dividend "Gross Up": All plans that decrease the
corporate income tax only on dividends can   termed partial integration
                                             be

plans. The fourth plan, because it reduces only part of the tax on
dividends, might be called a partial—partial plan. The tax system is
changed to a lesser degree, and the static welfare gain is small, at
$2.8 billion per year. Dynamic gains under multiplicative scaling are
$96 billion, under additive scling are $105 billion, and under a lump—
sum replacement    are $140 billion.12 Equity effects are closer to pro-
portional than    under Plan 1, but with smaller gains.

          Perhaps the most interesting of our results for all   the   integration

plans are the dymamic results which suggest significant potential gains
from corporate tax integration, provided replacement taxes do not exces-
sively interfer with intertempora.1. consumption choice. There appears to
be a trade—off between achieving progressive or proportional income gains
through multiplicative scaling and maximizing the dynamic efficiency
gain: the largest intertenoral gain could be secured by taxing the
poor   who do not save.


                                VI. Conclusion

          In this paper we have analyzed four alternative plans for corporate

and personal income tax integration in the U.S. by using a recently con-

structed medium—scale general equilibrium model of the U.S. economy and

tax   system. The paper includes a brief discussion of the model and its

use of data, in addition to outlining characteristics of the integration

plans and their representation in model equivalent form..

         Total integration of personal and corporate income taxes is shown

to yield static efficiency gains of $6 billion per year using 1973 data;
                                    29

 and the present value dynamic gains range from $414 billion to

 $96 billion in 1973 prices, depending on the yield preserving

 tax. Dividend deductibility from either the corporate income

 tax or the personal income tax results in a static efficiency

increase of slightly less than half of the gains from full

integration. A 15 percent dividend gross—up scheme yields

somewhat less than dividend deduction from the corporate tax but

a little more than deduction from the personal income tax. The

distributional impacts vary among plans; full integration with

a multiplicative scaling of marginal income tax rates to preserve

tax yields is shown to imply a progressive change in the distri-

bution of real income even though every class is better off.

Dividend deductibility from the personal income tax is shown to

have a beneficial impact slightly more advantageous to high—income

groups, while dividend deductibility from the corporate income

tax redistributes from high to low income groups. The dividend

gross—up plan is roughly proportional. In the sensitivity of

dynamic gains to the yield preserving tax we find an interesting

result. It suggests that the potential gains under integration

from removal of intertemporal distortions would be significantly

reduced if marginal income tax rates are raised, particularly if

the higher—income groups, who are also larger savers, face larger

tax rate increases.
                                             30


                                        REFERENCES


M. .3.    Bailey,   "Capital Prices and Income Taxation." In A. C.

           Harberger and N. 3. Bailey (eds.), The Taxation of Income

            from Capital. Washington, D. C.: The Brookings Institution, 1969.

N. .3. Boskin, "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest,t' 3. Pout.

            Econ., 1978, 86, no. 2 part 2, pp. S3—S27.

D.   Fullerton, A. T. King, 3.         B. Shoven, and   J. Whalley, "Corporate
            and Personal Tax Integration in the U.S.: Some Preliminary
            Findings from a General Equilibrium Analysis." In R. Haveman
            and K. Hollenbeck (eds.),       Nicroeconomic Simulation. Madison,

            Wisconsin, Institute for       Research on Poverty, 1979.
D. Fullerton, .3. B. Shoven, and 3. Whalley, "General Equilibrium Analysis

            of U.S. Taxation Policy," 1978 Compendium of Tax Research,

            Washington, D. C.: Office of Tax Analysis, U. S. Treasury

            Department, 1978.

N. A.     King, "Taxation and the Cost of Capital," Rev, of Econ. Studies,
            1974,   XLI,   no.   1, pp. 21—36.

H.   C. Lewis, "The Ecomomics of Time and Labor Supply," The Amer. Econ.

            Rev., 1975, LXV, no. 2, pp. 29—34.

3. R. Piggott and J. Whalley, "General Equilibrium Investigation of U.K.

            Tax Subsidy Policy: A Progress Report." In M. .3. Artis and

            A. R. Nobay (eds.), Studies in Modern Economic Analysis. Oxford:

            B. Blackwell, 1977.

3.   3.   Shoven and 3. Whafley,       "Equal    Yield Tax Alternatives: General

            Equilibrium     Computational Techniques," 3. of      Public Econ.,

            1977, 8, pp. 211—224.
                                     31

J. E. Stlglitz, "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the   Cost

       of   Capital," J.of   Public Econ., 1973, 2, no. 1, PP. 1—34.

        —, "The   Corporation Tax," J. of Public Econ., 1976, 5, no. 3,
       pp. 303—311.
J. Whalley, "A General Equilibriu Assessment of the 1973 U.K. Tax
       Changes," Econonilca, May 1975, pp. 139—161.
                                    32


                                 FOOTNOTES


     Fullerton, Princeton University; A. Thomas King, Federal. Home
Loan Bank Board; John B. Shoven, Stanford University and National
Bureau   of Economic Research, and John Whalley, University of

Western Ontario.

1. The competitive model implies net of tax rates of return on capital

    are equalized across industry. In a situation where capital tax

    rates vary by industry, this equalization requires that the gross

    marginal   productivity of capital differ among the industries. The
    efficiency gain accomplished by reducing the differential capital
    tax rates is   due to the reallocation of capital towards industries

    where it is more productive.

2. A 15 percent credit was often mentioned and is modelled here. A

    further possibility discussed was that differential credits might

    be given depending on the industry in which a company operates; this

    is not modelled.

3. Future extensions of this approach could disaggregate labor into

    skill types since these might have different rates of substitution

    for capital. Similarly, capital could eventually be broken down

    into land, equipment and structures, or some other useful definitions.

4. Earler data sets of this type for the U.K. have been used by Whalley

    (1975) and Piggott and Whalley (1977).
                                        33
5.   In order to capture the tax exempt nature of saving through pensions,

     Keogh    plans,   Individual Retirement Accounts, and   life   insurance, we

     model a 30% savings subsidy within the income tax framework. This

     proportion reflects data from Flow of Funds accounts. Another 20%

     of savings through owner occupied housing is also taxed on an

     expenditure tax basis, indicating that the U.S. is approcLniately

     half—way   between income and expenditure taxation. Housing tax
     preferences are also captired by the model as discussed below.
6. 1976 Tax Expenditures, U.S. Congress.
7. Operation of the equal yield calculation is discussed in Shoveri and
     Whalley (1977).
8. Because of the general equilibrium nature of these calculations,
    both sources and uses effects are included in the Table 4
      distributional results. The rental price of capital rises in the
      simulated equilibrium. Low—income consumers tend to purchase outputs
      of lightly—taxed, capital—intensive industries like housing, agriculture,
      and petroleum. Thus the uses side of income has some regressive
      effects. On the sources side, note that the capital/labor ratio of
      income from our data is bowl—shaped over income groups. This is
      largely due to their age structure. Since our model calculates a
      long—run equilibrium, where homogeneous capital is reallocated
      among industries, the new higher return to capital is earned by all

      capital owners regardless     of their original portfolio. The higher
      price   of capital causes bowl—shaped gains on the sources side of

      income.

9.    Although the simulated equilibrium is a Pareto improvement over the
      benchmark 1973 equilibrium, we have said nothing about the possible
      paths between the two. Short—run losses and transition costs should
                                     34

     beconsidered before enacting such a change. Our sodel is essentially
     comparative static and does not measure these disequilibria or
     temporary influences.
10. This additional information is available from the authors on request.
11. The U—shaped gains of the additive replacement can be explained by
     the higher return to capital in the simulated equilibrium. The
     capital/labor   ratio of ino is greatest for the low—income (retired)

     individuals  and again for high—inco individuals.
12. Here, again, the spread between the dynamic welfare gains is less
     than that of full integration because this plan involves smaller
    revenue   loss than full integration. Multiplicative scaling makes

    up   most revenue from high—income, high—saving consumers, and it
    thus reduces future capital stocks and incomes. The dynamic lump—
    sum and additive cases show that the dividend gross—up does
    substantially    less to improve interindustry resource allocation

    than other plans.
