                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ON ACTIVIST MONETARY POLICY WITH
                    RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS



                       Stanley Fischer



                   Working Paper No. 341




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge, MA 02138

                         April 1979




     The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The paper was prepared for the NBER's
Conference on Rational Expectations and Economic Policy held
at Bald Peak Colony Club in Melvin Village, New Hampshire, on
October 13—14, 1978.
                                                     NBER Working Paper 341
                                                                 April 1979




         ON ACTIVIST MONETARY POLICY WITH RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS


                            Stanley Fischer


                                ABSTRACT


    The paper examines the case for activist monetary policy. It

accepts the view that expectations are formed rationally, but not

the implication of flexible price, equilibrium, rational expectations

models, that monetary policy cannot and should not be used to affect

real magnitudes. The paper starts by asking why the economy has not

insulated itself from monetary disturbances through the adoption of

indexing and other provisions that would effectively shorten contracts,

and suggests that the costs of doing so must be substantial. These

costs provide the rational for activist policy, whose aim should be

to adjust for aggregate disturbances that the private sector has not

made provision to handle. The arguments about activist policy then

become those familiar from earlier discussions by Milton Friedman,

concerning the long and variable lags with which policy operates,

and the alleged propensity of the Fed to misbehave. It is argued

that an activist policy that does not respond to minor disturbances,

but does respond to actual and prospective major disturbances, would

provide a stabilizing force for the economy.


                                        E5 2—2 80A
                                        Massachusetts Institute of
                                          Technology
                                        Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139
                                        (617) 253—6666
                                                         Revised: January 1979



        ON ACTIVIST MONETARY POLICY WITH RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS


                                Stanley Fischer*



     This paper discusses the potential effectiveness and desirability of

activist monetary policy,1 and also rules versus discretion. Recent

academic discussions of the role of monetary policy have been heavily

influenced by the rational expectations approach to macroeconomics: it

has been argued that from the viewpoint of the behavior of output, any

strictly adhered to monetary policy rule is as good as any other (e.g.,

Sargent and Wallace, 1975, Barro, 1976). This theoretical viewpoint

receives support from empirical work by, among ot1 ers, Sargent (1976)

and Barro (1977, 1978), which appears to show that: only unanticipated changes

in the money stock affect output.

     This paper accepts both rational expectations, as a theory of expec-

tations, and the view that "unanticipated" changes in the money stock have

a greater impact on real output than anticipated changes in the money

stock. It argues nonetheless that systematic countercyclical monetary

policy can affect the behavior of output, and that activist monetary

policy should be used for that purpose.

     The argument starts by asking why economic agents have not made con-

tingent arrangements ——   for   example, wage rates indexed to the money

stock or very short contracts ——     that   would insulate them from the effects
*
Department of Economics, M.I.T. I am grateful to David Modest for re-
search assistance, and to Olivier Blanchard, Rudiger Dornbusch, Jacob
Frenkel, Robert Gordon, Robert Hall, Michael Rothschild, Frank Schiff,
and members of the M.I.T. Money Workshop for comments. Research support
was provided by the National Science Foundation.
1While I concentrate on the same issue as Franco Modigliani in his 1977
 AEA Presidential Address, the approach will be seen to differ from his.
                                   —2—




of   unanticipated changes in the money stock. The answer is that such

contingent arrangements are costly; the private sector is therefore w:Llling

to bear the costs that output deviations caused by unanticipated money

changes impose on it.

       The potential role for monetary policy is created by those same costs

of insulating the private sector from disturbances. The case for active

monetary policy is that it is more efficient for the Fed to offset aggregate

disturbances than it is for the private sector to do so    The efficient

division of labor between the private and public sectors leaves It to

macroeconomic management to deal with aggregate disturbances.

       The perspective of this paper is one that views the private and

public sectors as potentially co—operating in responding to economic

disturbances; it contrasts with the view associated with rational expec-

tations theorists that tends to regard monetary policy as working mainly

through deception. Once the co—operative view of policy is adopted, the

relevant   questions about the desirability of activist monetary policy
become those familiar from Milton Friedman's (1960) argument for a con-
stant growth rate rule: they concern the possibility that attempts     to con-

trol the economy could be destabilizing (long and variable lags), and the

alleged propensity of the Fed to misbehave.

       Although this paper does not accept the policy perspective of

much of the rational expectations literature, it is not an attack

on the rational expectations hypothesis. The rational expectations

theory of expectations, which says that individuals form expecta-

tions optimally on the basis of the information potentially available

to them, and the costs of using that Information, has become and will
                                     —3—



remain the leading theory of expectations.1 But there is nothing inherent

in the hypothesis that implies that activist policy is either impossible

or undesirable.

       Since the paper ranges widely, it is useful to outline the argument.

Given recent claims about the ineffectiveness of systematic monetary policy,

and apparent supporting evidence, I have first to establish that there is

something to talk about. Sections I and II therefore lay the groundwork

for the claim that, rational expectations oriented work notwithstanding,

systematic monetary policy matters for the behavior of output. Assuming

that   claim   is established, the issue of whether activist policy should be

used remains. Section III discusses the desirability in principle of ac-

tivist policy; Section IV discusses activist policy in practice; and

Section V considers rules versus discretion.

       In more detail, it is shown in Section I that there is a variety of

mechanisms through which even fully anticipated monetary policy can affect

the behavior of output. However, these mechanisms are not central to the

case for countercyclical monetary policy, which hinges on short—run

considerations.



11t is worth distinguishing between tFe "strong form" of rational expectations,
 which assumes that individuals' subjective probability distributions are
 the dame as those implied by the models in which they are presumed to be
 agents, and the "weak form", which is defined in the text. ("Semi—strong"
 forms of rational expectations may be     defined to require that the first n
 moments of subjective probability distributions co—incide with those of
 the model.) I believe that rational expectations, in the weak form, will
 be the leading theory of expectations in the same sense that utility theory
 (or its equivalents) is the leading theory of consumer behavior. We fre-
 quently use models in which behavioral functions are not explicitly derived
 from maximization, but are uneasy in doing so, and are reassured if it
 can be shown that the behavioral functions are consistent with maximization.
 Similarly, economists will continue to use adaptive and other pre—specified
 models of expectations, but will feel constrained to apologize for, and
 attempt to justily, doing so.
                                  —4—



     Section II therefore reviews some of the evidence that only urian—

ticipated changes in the money stock affect the behavior of output.

If it could be established that any systematic' monetary policy had

no real effects on output, then there would be little to discuss about

countercyclica]. policy except to the extent that price level behavior

matters. Recent empirical work by Barro (1978) does indeed appear

to establish that only unanticipated money matters for the behavior of

output. I argue In Section II that Barro's results are quite consistent

with the view that systematic monetary policy can be used to affect

output: the crucial issue for the potential effectiveness of policy is

whether output is affected by expectations that were formed before the

monetary authority had to commit itseLf to a particular level of the money

stock. Results presented in the appendix show that if Barro's mechanism

of expectations formation is accepted, then the data do not reject the

hypothesis that two year ahead forecast errors of the money stock affect

the behavior of output. Since the Fed can clearly react to events with

less than a two year lag, Barro's results do not force an end to further

discussion of countercyclical monetary policy.

     Section II argues that systematic monetary policy can be used to

affect the behavior of output. The case in principle for activist

policy is made in Section III, where it is argued that the same factors

that make the economy vulnerable to "unanticipated" money suggest that

monetary policy should be used to offset aggregate disturbances ——    if
the use of active policy is not itself destabilizing. The discussion

in Section IV accordingly centers on older arguments about monetary

policy, relating to the long and variable l gs with which policy works

and the lessons of history.
                                      —5—



         The issue of rules versus discretion Is examined in Section V,

    which concludes with a presumption in favor of a monetary policy that

    leaves the Fed an important measure of discretion.


    I. guilibrium Considerations: Non—Neutralities of nticipated Money

        Since any systematic monetary policy would eventually come to be

anticipated, it seems that systematic monetary polic can continue to affect
                                                                        1
output only if anticipated changes in the money stock can affect output;

accordingly, the natural place to start in considering the case for

activist monetary policy appears to be with the non—neutralities of

anticipated money. In this section, I discuss the non—neutralities of

fully anticipated money, by which term is meant changes in the money

stock that are anticipated at the time decisions relevant to the deter-

mination of output are made.

        The neutrality of money has always been a central concern of

monetary theory, precisely because it has long been obvious that money

is not neutral. The implications of the latter fact for monetary

policy depend on the source of the non—neutralities. Traditional dis-

cussions of neutrality distinguished between the transitional effects

of a once and for all change in the money stock, which were generally,

thought to affect real variables, and the long—run or equilibrium

effects of the change, which analysis suggested were insubstantial.2


      shall argue below that this statement is in important respects mis-
    leading. A systematic policy, i.e., a rule that specifies money supply
    responses to disturbances, will itself eventually be anticipated, but
    actual changes in the money stock under such a policy may not have been
    anticipated as of an earlier date when decisions relevant to the deter-
    mination of output were made.
2
    See, for instance, Irving Fisher (1922).
                                  —6—




Modern analysis has added two important distinctions to the discussion:

that between the neutrality and superneutrality )f money, correspond-

ing respectively to the effects of changes in the stock of money and

growth rate of money, the latter producing changes in the inflation

rate; and the distinction between anticipated and unanticipated changes

in the money stock.'




Anticipated Inflation

     In this section we concentrate on non—neutralities of money that

arise from anticipated changes in the money stock and consequent changes

in the expected rate of inflation. Informational considerat1ors are

deferred to Section II.   As long as money pays no interest, changes

in the expected rate of inflation change the ecpected real return from

the holding of money, affecting the demand f or real balances, and creating

the possibility that anticipated changes in the growth rate of money

affect real variables.2



1Both distinctions were at least implicit in the older discussions.
First, there was typically mention of the elasticity of expectations,
suggesting awareness of the importance of changes in the expected
rate of inflation. Further, the typical money stock change had people
waking in the morning to discover the good news of a doubling of their
holdings, reflecting awareness also of the distinction between anticipated
and unanticipated events.

     assumptions are maintained until further notice. First, there
are no interest payments on money. Second, the government does nothing
other than distribute money to the economy through transfer payments, which,
however, are not related to individual holdings of money by the transfer
recipients. The second assumption is designed to rule out, for the
moment, real effects of anticipated inflation arising from the tax system.
                                      —7—




       Consider first the standard two—period lifetime consumption loans

model in its simplest form in which there is no production and each

individual has   an   endowment of a non—storable consumption good in the

first period of his life; money is the only vehicle for saving.

Changes In the growth rate of money affect the inter—generational

allocation of resources in such a model if, say, the lump    sum transfers
are   made to the old. If endowments varied stochastically   over time,

and   there was a somehow agreed upon social welfare function for weighting
generational expected utilities, the government might optimally want
to vary the growth rate of money. However, since output is exogenously
determined, monetary policy obviously does not affect the level of

output.

       The monetary authority's ability to affect the allocation of

resources depends in this case on Its ability to affect the real Interest

rate and thus saving. Higher rates of monetary expansion reduce the

real interest rate by raising the expected rate of inflation. If we

now allow for the inclusion of an endogenous labor supply (but do not

yet add productive capital to the model), it will still be tru3 that

the monetary authority affects the real Interest rate by varying the

growth rate of money. Labor supply, and thus output, will respond to

variations in the real rate of Interest. A case for activist monetary

policy In a context in which there were variations In the productivity

of labor, could once again be made, given a social welfare function.
                                      —8—




      Expansion of the menu of assets makes it necessary to provide a

 rationale for portfolio diversification, particularly the holding of

money. The simplest rationale lies in the existence of some form

 of transaction costs in buying and selling assets other than

money.1 Putting money in the utility function will also generate

portfolio diversification; this device is best thought of as being

justified by the existence of transaction costs that are not explicitly

included in the analysis, but rather implicitly :reated as foregone

utility. A third possible source of diversifica:ion is risk aversion,

though here it is necessary to ensure that money is not a dominated

asset.

     Sidrauski (1967) has elucidated the very strict conditions under

which the rate of inflation does not affect the level of output in a

model with both labor and capital as factors of production, and money

and capital as assets. Money is superneutral if the optimizing units

in the economy are infinitely lived, if the quantity of real balances

does not affect the economy's production possibilities, if labor is

inelastically supplied, and if consumers have a constant discount factor

for comparing utilities over time. The steady state capital stcck is

determined by the modified golden rule condition that the marginal

product    of capital be equal to the sum of the consumers' rate of time
preferene    and the growth rate of population. Even this set of restric-

tions does not strictly speaking imply super—neutrality, since economic

agents are not indifferent to the rate of inflation.

1At this stage the consumption loans model becomes more difficult to
use, since it tends to emphasize the store of vahie function of money,
while the transaction costs arguments rely on the medium of exchange
function. See    Bryant and Wallace   (1978)   for the   attempted incorporation
of money   in a consumption loans model     with other   assets.
                                       —9—




        Relaxation of the specified conditions will again produce non—

neutralities of anticipated money. If labor supply is not exogenously

fixed1, or if consumers do not effectively maximize over an infinite

horizon2, or if money enters the production function, money will not

be superneutral. Nor does the superneutrality apply to the behavior

of the economy before the steady state is reached;3 more rapid rates

of money growth tend to produce more rapid rates of accumulation of physical

capital in the transition to the steady state.

     Once there is a rationale for the holding of money, expansion of

the menu of assets, held on grounds of risk aversion, introduces no

fundamentally new issues. It is therefore useful to step back to

examine   the two basic mechanisms at work rather than continue to catalog
possible   non—neutralities. The first mechanism arises from the pos-

sibility that changes in the real return on holding money affect

interest rates on other assets, thus portfolio composition, and possibly

the rate of saving and labor supply. The second mechanism operates

through the effect of an increase in the expected inflation rate on

the level of      real balances. Lower real balances may imply more trans—
actions and less     resources available for production; they may also produce

wealth   effects that will   affect spending on goods and services, and

labor   supply.


'Brock   (1974).

2Drazen (1976).

3Fischer (1979).
                                     —10—




        The empirical significance of these mechanisms is not known. But

there is a priori reason to think the effects will be small. First,

they do not all work in the same direction; the accumulation of

physical assets induced by anticipated inflation tends to increase

output, while the diversion of resources from the production of goods

to the production of transactions tends to reduc2 final output. Second,

the base on which the real balance effect works Ls small; the stock of

non—interest bearing money is less than N1, since some implicit interest

is paid on demand deposits.1 Further, it is likely that explicit

interest payments on demand deposits will soon become legal, leaving

currency as the only non—interest bearing nominal asset.



Institutional Effects of Anticipated Inflation


     Up    to this point, we have confined the government to making lump
sum transfer payments in determining the growth rate of money. We
want now briefly to consider the real effects of anticipated inflation
arising   from the nature of the tax system and other government regulations.
     There 18   first   the inflation, tax itself. Changes in the growth
rate of money affect the real revenue the government obtains from the
creation   of high—powered money, and make it possible   to vary other taxes,
given   the level of government spending. Changes in the pattern of

taxation will have real effects, though little more definite can be




1Startz (1978) estimates the implicit rate to be half the competitive rate.
                                     —11—




said without considering the details of the tax tructure.
     However, the primary non—neutralities of th tax system arise
from non—indexatlon of taxes. The major effects will arise from the
payment of taxes on nominal, rather than real, titerest, (combined with
differential rates   of personal and corporate taxation), and from the use

of historical cost as the basis for depreciation.1 Each of these fea-

tures of the tax system implies that increases in the anticipated rate

of inflation would discourage capital accumulation. Similarly, despite

changes in the method of financing housing investment in the last few

years, anticipated inflation still has potentially large effects in re-

ducing the volume of housing investment;2 the effects muy be attri-

buted in part to the existence of government imposed interest ceilings.

     It is worth noting that the specified characteristics of the tax system

and housing financing are part of the institutional setting of the

economy that has   not   completely adapted to the existence of ongoing

inflation. Their existence thus cannot be relied on as a permanent

mechanism t1rough which monetary policy will affect the economy.
                                                         at least partly
However, it is significant that the institutional features remain/in

place after twelve or more years of continuing inflation. The costs of

changing the institutions of an economy that are based on an implicit

assumption of the stability of the value of money, to those that

are based on the recognition of ongoing Inflation, must be substantial.



'These effects have been emphasized by Feldstein and others; see, f or
Instance, Feldstein and Sunmiers (1978).

2Details are contained in Modigliani and Lessard (1975).
                                     —12—




        The institutional non—neutralities discussed above tend to make in-

creases in the anticipated rate of inflation reduce the rate of investment and

subsequent output. The net effect of anticipated changes in money

on output in the current and subsequent periods is thus difficult to

predict a priori; it will also probably be a delicate matter empirically

to isolate the magnitudes of the mechanisms discussed in this section.

One place to start is by examining the effects of       anticipated   changes

in money on the real interest rate. In the next; section we also discuss

reduced form estimates of the effects of anticipated money on output.

       But even if reliable estimates turned out to show that the non—

neutralities of anticipated money are not trivial, it would still remain

to   make the theoretical case for the desirability of activist monetary
policy. An initial reaction might be that the factors        discussed in

this   section merely suggest that   the growth rate of money should be set

at    that level which would produce the optimal quantity of money,1 and
the   economy otherwise left free of monetary interference. However, in

a context in which there are other distorting taxes, the inflation tax

should   also in general be used to raise revenue.2 Nor, even ignoring

the   inflation tax, is   the optimal quantity   of money provided by keeping
the growth rate of money constant if the marginal product of capital
varies over time. The argument for an activist monetary policy would
1Friedman   (1969)   suggests that the optimum quantity of money obtains
when the economy Is satiated with real balances; this requires that
money pay a real return equal to "the" real interest rate on other
assets. The positive rea1 return on money Is achieved by producing
deflation.

helps (1973).
                                     —13—




 thus be derived from analysis of the optimal inflation tax:       as   government

 expenditure varies, and other disturbances impinge on the economy, the

optimal     use of the inflation tax would   also change. The optimal growth
rate   of   money would therefore change as the state of the economy changed.

       There are three main conclusions from    this   section. First, there

are sound theoretical reasons for thinking that anticipated       money is
not necessarily neutral. Second, we do not at present have empirical

knowledge of the net direction and magnitudes of the mechanisms

underlying the non—neutralities. Third, there is no reason to think

that an optimal monetary policy derived in a model in which non—neutralities

are   present, and in which revenue from the inflation tax accrues to
the government, will be a constant growth rate rule. Put differently,
considerations of the type discussed in this section do not attach any
sanctity    to the constant growth rate of money.

       A fourth conclusion should also be drawn: while the non—neutralities

of this section may eventually be important in designing a framework

for monetary and fiscal policy, they are not of central importance to

the debate over countercyclical monetary policy. We therefore turn

to the non—neutralities of unanticipated money.



II. Non—Neutralities of Unanticipated Money

       Emphasis by Lucas (1973) and others on the importance of the unanticipated

component    of the change in the price level has   led to empirical work, of which
the best known is by Barro (1977, 1978), which appears to show that only unan-

ticipated changes in the money stock affect real output and that
                                    —14—




 anticipated     changes in money have no real effects. A finding that

only unanticipated money affects the behavior of output would be signif 1—

cant for the conduct of monetary policy, though not decisive in estab-

lishing the desirability of a constant growth rate rule. The case for

activist policy would then have to rest on the effects of the policy

on the natural level of output, and on its implications for price level

behavior. The welfar2 case for a monetary policy that operates by

surprise or deception appears to be a difficult one to make, so that

the strong Barro position that only unanticipated money works would tend

to support rules over discretion.

       For the purposes of this paper, I want to show that Barro's results

are not inconsis :ent with the view that sy5telnat-i.c monetary policy can

affect the behavior of output. I therefore do nt have to enter into

a detailed argument about the real meaning of Barro's results, and

particularly into the question of whether he has successfully measured

expectations of the growth rate of money1 though fundamental criticisms

will   doubtless center on this latter issue.
       The key   point in my argument is that anticiations of money

growth for periods other than one year ahead (Barro uses annual data)

are relevant to the determination of output.     I believe that to a useful

first approximation, the long—run Phillips curve is vertical. That

'David Germany (1978) points out that the restrictions Barro needs to
identify the coefficients on unanticipated money in his output equation
are literally incredible: it is assumed that expectations are known
(by the output regress:ion runner) exactly.
                                     —15—




means that fully anticipated changes in the money stock would not

affect unemployment significantly. But one can hardly imagine

a change in the money stock that has always been anticipated: every

change in the money stock must be unanticpated a; of some earlier date.

If the Fed can respond to disturbances occurring after decisiois relevant

to the determination of output are made, then it can systematically
                                 1
affect the behavior of output.



The Barro Output Equation

       I review Barro's procedure briefly in the tect; m're detail is

provided in the appendix. Unemployment, or the deviation of output

from trend, is explained in a regression using annual data with actual

and unanticipated changes in the money stock as regressors. A single

stable money supply rule was estimated and taken to have been used in

forming expectations, based on information avail Lble one year ahead,

of monetary growth over the period.2 Barro find, that unanticipated

increases in the growth rate of money significantly increase the level

of output; the hypothesis that anticipated changes in money also

affect the behavior of output is not acdepted.




1This point is worked out in Fischer (1977). That article implicitly
accepted the view that systematic monetary policy would be used to
"deceive" the private sector, rather than the view of the present paper that
systematic policy can be used to produce desirable outcomes more cheaply
than is possible with a pas8ive policy.
21n an earlier version of his 1977 paper, Barro showed that his results
were not significantly affected if a money supply equation based only on
data available up to the time an expectation was formed, was used in
generating the expected change in money.
                                   —16—



       A relevant question about Barro's results from the viewpoint of

activist policy concerns the time Interval over which ttunanticipatedu

is defined. In an earlier paper (1977) I argued that anticipations of

the price level more than one period ahead might enter the output

equation. Analogously, it is possible that expectations of the money

supply formed two periods back, rather than one period back, could

enter the output equation.

       Using Barro's money supply equation, I have constructed two period

ahead forecast errors for the money stock, and included them in the

output equation. (Details are in the appendix.) As would be expected,

the two period forecast errors are collinear —— though not perfectly so ——

with   the separate one period forecast errors over the same two years.

The inclusion of a two period ahead forecast error in the output equati( n

reduces the standard error in that equation, but not significantly so.

Replacing the first one period ahead forecast errors with a two period error

reduces the standard error of estimate, though not significantly. I

conclude that the data cannot tell us whether only one year ahead or

only two year ahead errors in predicting money, or both, contribute

to explaining the behavior of output —— though if forced to choose,

the data choose the two period forecast error. My belief is that

both types of forecast error are relevant; there is nothing in the Barro

data to reject that view.

       The reason the inclusion of the two—period ahead error matters

is that it is very hard to argue that the Fed cannot use a monetary rule

that reacts within a period of two years to new information. If the

two year expectation is somehow (f or example In labor contracts) locked

in, then the Fed has ample time to act to affect the behavior of output.
                                   —17—




That does not mean it should act, but rather that it can systematically

affect output. Moving in the other direction, though, it is also diff i—

cult to believe that the Fed cannot within the period of a year syste-

matically react to information that becomes available to it, after the

one year ahead expectations are locked in. That is, the length of the

Barro period suggests that the Fed can systematically produce unantici—

pated money —— by acting on information that becomes available within the year.1

     This possibility raises the familiar mutual causation question, as

a potential explanation for the apparent strength of the effects of

unanticipated money. It is somewhat surprising that Barro finds a

stable money supply process over a period during which the Fed moved

from a policy of supporting interest rates to one in which it claims

to pay attention to monetary targets; it is also surprising that there

is no apparent role for interest rates in Barro's equation.2 His

results might reflect the effects on both money and output of movements

of other variables that tend to increase output, with the Fed increasing

money to smooth interest rates.3


The Lucas Supply Function.

     Given the uncertainties raised in the preceding paragraphs, it

would be useful in judging the importance of Barrots results to know

what mechanism might have produced them if they were true. The impact

of an unanticipated increase iii the growth rate of money by one percettage

11t is of course true that whether or not the Fed can systematically
produce unanticipated money depends on private sector contracting
arrangements; I return to this point below.
2See the cotents on Barro's paper in this volume by Robert Weintraub.
3Preliminary evidence indicates that unanticipated increases in money (as
measured by Barro) are positively correlated with unanticipated increases
in short—term interest rates (the expected interest rate is calculated
from the term structure), providing some support to the notion that
increases in the demand for money partly produce unanticipated money.
                                     —18—



 point produces an increase in output of over one percent in the current

 year, and nearly 1.2 percent in the following year. The Fed rolls

 high—powered dice.

      There are two competing explanations for results of the type Barro

has obtained. The first is the standard rational expectations supply

hypothesis, which will be detailed below. The second is a Keynesian

story, wh.ich attributes Barro's results to the stickiness of wages that

are based on expected prices.1 The first explanation tends to rule out

a role for active policy, while the second does not. The Phillips

curve is an implication of both stories, and cannot be used to distin-

guish between them.2

      In this section I discuss the Lucas supply hypothesis, to see

whether there is independent evidence suggesting that 1t underlies

Barro's reduced form results. The Lucas supply function is:

(1)      t =   nt +   b(P —       ÷

where y is the level of output, y is the natural or full employment

level of output, and P is the price level, each in. logarithms; e is a

disturbance term, and the notation          denotes the expectation of P

that is formed on the basis of information available at time (t—l).

The Lucas analysis is most accessibly developed in his 1973 article; the

rationale for (1) builds on information confusions, which cause indi-

viduals to increase their supply of output when nominal prices increase,

under the mistaken impression that the. relative price of their output

has risen.


1Backward looking "catch—up" elements are also typically found empirically
in the Phillips curve; Taylor (1978) has a model with overlapping labor
contracts in which workers are concerned with relative wages, which is
consistent with estimated Phillips curves.
2i am grateful to Robert Hall for emphasizing this point.
                                  —19—



     The key element in the Lucas mechanism is the increase in the supply

of output in response to a rise in the perceived relative price, a story

that is most naturally told as the model of an individual supplier of

labor services, for whom the price of output is the nominal wage.

However, Lucas notes (1977), a very similar mechanism would operate in

the case of firms. The strength of the mechanism would be greatest

in response to an increase in the perceived real wage that was thought

to be temporary, for in that case workers would like to increase the

amount they work in the current period (at a hih wage) and substitute

more leisure next period (when the wage is expected to be lower than

its current level). An increase in the real wage that is expected to

be permanent might not elicit any increase in output, since labor supply

curves may even slope backward.

     Doubts can be raised about the supply mechanism (1). First, as

David Small (1977) has pointed out, the assumed reaction of workers to

an increase in the current price level requires it to signal an increase

(or at least not a large decrease) in the real interest rate; in a

model in which monetary growth affects the real interest rate, monetary

policy can negate the labor supply response to unanticipated inflation.1

Sec md the mechanism provides no real explanation of a relationship

bet teen unanticipated inflation and the unemployment rate ——   it appears
that those who choose not to work when the perceived real wage falls

would not be unemployed. Perhaps, however, the existence of unemployment

insurance makes it profitable to appear to be unemployed even when workers

desire to reduce the amount they work; in addition, movements in the

'Bulow and Polemarchakis (1978) have studied essentially this mechanism.
                                  —20—



 participation rate, as in Sargent (1976), might help explain movements

 in the unemployment rate. Third, if this mechanism were powerful,

 temporary income tax changes would be potent instruments for
                                                                affecting
 the pattern of output over time——and there is little evidence of such

 potency. Fourth, given the crucial importance of the mechanism,

 the empirical support for it is small.1


Unanticipated Money and Sticky Prices

     The evidence supporting the Lucas supply hypothesis is hardly strong

enough to justify the view that it is the main mechanism underlying

Barro's empirical results. Indeed, Barro's (1978) price equation reveals

some stickiness of the aggregate price level, leading him to remark

that the money to price link may be too weak to explain the estimated

effects of unanticipated money on output.2

     The stickiness of prices suggests that a Keynesian mechanism, in

which changes in money affect aggregate demand, which affects employment,

may be at work. The response of some prices, particularly wages, to

changes in demand is sluggish relative to the period over which policy

is formulated;3 Sargent (1976) finds that wage rates may be treated as

exogenous in a quarterly macro model. The most plausible generalization


1Lucas refers to his work with Rapping (1969), to work by Ghez and Becker
(1975), and some more casual evidence. The Ghez and Becker evidence
does not appear to bear strongly on cyclical labor supply substitution.
2Since interest rates are held constant in Barro's price equation, a
more complete analysis might reverse, or for that matter, strengthen,
this conclusion.
3Poole (1976) argues that there is some period sLiort enough that the
price adjustments assumed in the equilibrium supply framework do not
operate.
                                    —21—




of the Lucas supply function is prabably this: the longer in advance

a given type of change in the money supply has been expected, the greater

the effect on prices relative to the effect on output, with the effects

being proximately attributed to the stickiness of nominal prices fixed

over different horizons.1'2

     In the short run (maybe several years) in which prices are sticky,

monetary policy can affect the behavior of output in the manner suggested

by Keynesian disequilibrium analysis, in which quantities are not

necessarily determined at the intersections of supply and demand curves.

There is no presumption that any intervention can only worsen the

situation in such circumstances.3

     The conclusions from this section are that there is no strong

evidence for the view that only unanticipated (with a oiie year horizon)

changes in the money stock affect output. The data are not strong

enough to force acceptance of the view that it is one year ahead rather

than longer or shorter forecast errors that are relevant to the behavior

of output. Similarly, while there is some evidence supporting the Lucas

1This comment applies to the extent that money is neutral, price stick-
iness aside. In Fischer (l979b) I show that when anticipated money
affects output, prices may rise less the longer a given change in money
has been expected —— because the anticipated money then affects output
more.

2Taylor's (1978) model, op. cit., produces such an adjustment pattern.
31t can and has been objected to the view that short—run price stickiness
implies that output is not optimally determined, and can be predictably
affected by monetary policy, that the private sector would not enter
into arrangements that would "predictably" imply a deadweight loss
(Barro, l977b). By the same token, the private sector would presumably
not enter into arrangements that leave it vulnerable to the effects
of unanticipated money.
                                     —22—



 supply mechanism, there is also evidence for price stickiness.

      We are now free to discuss activist policy.


 III. The Desirability in Principle of Activist Policy

      The classical argument for government control of the money supply

is that a fiat money system is unstable, tending to degenerate into a

                                            central banking developed in

response to a slightly different instability: that of a financial system

in which. the quantity of claims on the existing stock of commodity

money was larger than that stock. The Bank of England, for instance,

was driven against its will to manage the London money narkets by

financial crises that threatened private sector financial institutions.1

T1e private sector can manage financial panics,2 but the nineteenth and

early twentieth century record indicates that better management should

not be difficult —— though the Great Depression proves that worse

management is also possible.3

     At a general level, we can agree that     if   the government is to

control the money supply, it should provide a stable monetary background

against which the economy can proceed with its real business of producing

and conswning goods. If there were no disturbances to money demand,

arising from disturbances affecting the level of output or interest

rates, or the random term in the demand function, a stable monetary

background would be a stable (predictable) moiiey supply. A constant

growth rate rule would serve well.


1See Bagehot (1906) and Sayers (1957).
2Friedman and Schwartz (1963) suggest that the pcivate sector would have
handled what became the Great Depression better than the Fed had the
latter not existed.

   assume that enough has been learned (and that Institutions have changed)
so that the Fed would not again act as it did In the early 1930's.
                                        —23—



      But there are of course disturbances to money demand. In the long

run these take the form of changes in the assets that constitute money.

Historically, the process has been one of a broadening of the class of

assets that    serve   as the medium   of   exchange. Pr:Lce level behavior over

the long term would become less and less predictable if monetary policy

were devoted to control of the supply of an asset that constituted

a decreasing proportion of the money supply. We therefore cannot

expect that a constant growth rate rule, or for that matter any other

rule, would remain inviolate over the long term; occasions would arise

when it would be necessary to change the asset whose growth rate was

being controlled)- Such changes hardly constitute activism, however.


The General Rationale for Countercyclica]. Monetary Policy

     The important issues arise in the short run. Short—run disturbances

to money demand arise both from goods          market   listurbances that affect

the level of income and the interest rate, an.1 from random shifts in

money demand; the money demand functThn does not fit perfectly even for

the sample period 1955—73. The evidence reviewed in Section II suggests

that by reacting to these disturbances, the Fed can affect the subsequent

behavior of output, interest rates, and prices, even if the policy

actions constitute a regular pattern of behavior and are in that sense

anticipated.

     I shafl also argue that it is at least potentially desirable that

the Fed seek to offset distrubances. The argument most usefully starts

from the recognition that there would be no reas'rn for disequilibria

to emerge as a rusult of monetary disturbances i the absence of transactions

'The 100 percent noney plan would haie difficu1t' in controlling the
development of morley substitutes.
                                   —24—



 and information costs. In the absence of such costs, the private sector

 would closely monitor the aggregate price level
                                                   and aggregate money
 stock, and make contracts contingent on them.
                                                 tinanticipated money ——
 or   any other disturbance — would
                                    create disequilibrium, or an un-

 satisfactory state of affairs,for only as long as the arbitrarily short

 period over which prices and wages were fixed. There is of course

 noise in both price and money data, but some information is better

 than none.

       It might be suggested that the private sector does not enter into

 complicated arrangements contingent on aggregate variables lecause

 aggregate fluctuations account for only a small part of the risk facing

individual economic units. Such an argument is both correct and

incomplete; it has to be combined with the obvious assumption that there

are costs of acquiring and processing information, of writing detailed

contingent contracts, and of reducing the length of contract periods,

if it is to account for the non—existence of the contracts that would

render the private sector immune to aggregate disturbances.

      The costs that prevent the private sector insulating itself from

aggregate disturbances lead also to temporarily sticky prices that

produce the presumption that private sector output is not continuously

optimal. Those costs are the underlying reason there is a potential role

for activist monetary policy in attempting to offset aggregate disturbances.

      If one takes the view that monetary management has the task of

offsetting aggregate disturbances tbat the private sector has not made

arrangements to deal with, the goals of policy are the standard ones

of full employment (minimizing the deviations of the unemployment rate
                                 —25—



from the natural rate) and price stability.1 Price stability is desirable

in part for the reasons emphasized in the Lucas supply mechanism: it

enables the price system to operate more efficiently.2 But this cannot

be the full explanation for the weight that inflation aversion has in
                        3
public opinion polls.

     To say that monetary policy should have worthwhile goals is hardly

a policy prescription. Detailed pre;cription cannot be expected from a

paper that does not present an empir:cal model as a basis for prescrip-

tion, though I do in the next two se':tions discuss general characteristics

of desirable monetary policy. In principle, tht optimal monetary

policy to be used for stabili7.ation can be stu ied using an appropriately

specified macroeconometrjc model, which pays du attention to the effects


1This sentence glides over some difficult issue;, particularly in relation
to price stability versus price predictability.
21t has, of course, been recognized that a desire for price level stability
would support an activist monetary policy even if anticipated money did
not affect output. (Sargent and Wallace, 1975). But it is important to
realize that price level predictability, as well as stability, can in
principle be increased by the use of active feedback rules. The predic-
tability at issue is that of prices in the more distant future. In a
number of models, the one period ahead variance of the price level is
the same whatever the monetary rule that is bei1g followed. But the
uncertainty today about the level of prices in the distant future in
general is greater if monetary policy does not respond to current dis—
turbances than if it does attempt to stabilize prices. To the extent
that price level predictability more than one period ahead is relevant
to the allocation of resources, activist monetary policy might be desirable
on those grounds alone.
 Fischer and Modigliani (1979) list many of the real effects of inflation
on the economy; these may in part account for popular attitudes to inflation.
which are frequently ascribed to Irrationality.
                                      —26—




 of   changes in policy regime on the structure of the model.     Such models

 are not inherently impossible to build.



IV. Activist Policy in Practice

          There is no inconsistency in accepting the generaa argument of



of    a                        rule (CGRR). Afterawe_do not know the
optimal      activist policy. In this section I concentrate on a comparison

among a number of monetary policies, leaving the rules versus discretion

issue to Section V.

          The first policy is the most difficult to describe: it is the

current system, in which the Fed makes monetary policy as best it can,

with inputs from business, academic, and other sources of pressure, and

in ways that change over time. The second is the constant growth rate

policy (CGRP) or a passive policy. Most studies of alternative monetary

policies have compared these two, with history serving as the repre-

sentation of Fed policy. Third I will consider a policy that is intermediate

between the first two —— one in which policy is basicaily passive

except in the face of major actual or anticipated disturbances.

          The major arguments for CGRP as compared with actual policy are

familiar from earlier discussions: they are that ignorance of



'The warning by Lucas (1976) that the structure of econometric models
will not remain invariant to policy changes applies also to the struc-
ture of contracts. The monetary policy of the last three decades has,
by some accounts, been largely in error but the private sector has allowed
itself to be left in the position where, by some estimates, a 1% unanticipated
change in the money supply affects output by lZ within a year, and more the
next year. If monetary policy were to improve, the private sector would make
itself more vulnerable to the (ffects of unanticipated money, by adopting
longer term contracts ind payitg less attention to monetary variables.
                                   —27—



 the structure of the economy makes policy intervention destabilizing

  ("long and variable lags"); that most serip; disturbances   bve been
 caused by inept policies; and that political prtssures lead to monetary

 mismanagement. Underlying these arguments is an interpretation of the

 historical record that claims the Great Depression would have been

 more moderate had the Fed followed a CGRP (Friedman and
                                                           Schwartz,

 1963), and that macroeconomic behavior in a number of subsequent

 episodes would likewise have been better had the Fed been following such

 a policy.    (Friedman, 1960),1

      At the theoretical level it is correct that increased uncertainty

 about the structure of the economy supports the use of more passive

 policies. Similarly, it is entirely possible for naive policies to be

destabilizing. Whether ignorance and naivete have in practice caused

policy to be destabilizing, and will do so in the future, are difficult

questions to answer. The historical record, to which we turn

shortly, casts some light on these qltestions.

     Before we examine the record, though, we have to ask whether the

entire post—1913 history of the Fed, including the Great Depression,

should be thrown into the scales, or whether it is reasonable to assume

the Fed has learned something. As previously noted, I will proceed on the

assumption that the Fed can and has learned from history, and that deposit

insurance, memory, and the persuasive evidence of Friedman arid Schwartz,

will prevent repitition of the behavior of the monetary authority during

the early 1930's. Similarly, I believe that the Fed is now more aware of

the potentially dastabilizing influence of stabilizing nominal interest

1Pool's contribution to this volume makes that claim for the 1971—75
period.
                                 —28—



rates than it was in the sixties, and that it pays more attention to the

behavior of the monetary aggregates than it did)



The Historical Record

     The record of monetary policy up to 1960 was studied by Friedman

(1960), who emphasized the debacle of the Great Depression, and regarded

post World War LI monetary policy as less obviously defective (p94).

     The evaluation of monetary policy in the pos: World War II period

(or in any other period) presents substantial difficulties. The natural

way to proceed appears to be to use an econometr:ic model to compare

the historical performance of the economy with that which would have

occurred under CGRP. Such experiments tyDically show actual monetary

policy outperforming, or not being markedly worse than, a passive

policy (for example, Modigliani, 1977, Eckstein, 19782). Unfortunately

these experiments are subject to the reservatiors emphasized by Lucas

(1976) in his discussion of econometric policyEv-aluation.

     The other method of evaluating policy is lEss formal. It is to

select particular episodes for discussion, criticism, and comparison

with the results of a passive policy. For instatice, it is reasonably

clear that the growth rate of money .zas too high in 1968 and early 1969

and that a policy that maintained the growth rate of money at say the

average rate oE the sixties would have been better.


1The need for this paragraph may not be obvious to all readers. How-
ever, some cotmnents on the first draft of this paper persuaded me that
the question of whether the monetary authority has learnt anything is
central to disagreements about CGRP.
2Ecksteln's passive policy controls the growth rate of unborrowed re—
serves rather than Ml. The growth rate of money under such a policy
is not much more stable than the historical path.
                                      —29—



      Similarly, Poole provides an interesting evaluation of the 1971—5

 period in his contribution to this volume. Poole argues convinc1nly

 that monetary policy was too expansionary in
                                                 1971—2, especially given

 the existence of wage and price controls. He also suggests that more

 expansionary monetary policy in the first half of 1974 —— as urged

 at the time by, for instance, Modigliani (1974) —— would have produced

substantially more inflation but little more output than actually

occurred. He argues, interestingly, that the Fed could not really have

followed a more expansionary policy In the first half of 1974 because

such a policy would not have looked right at a time of high inflation

and relatively low unemployment. He absolves the fall in monetary

growth in the second half of 1974 from most f the blame for the

recession. And he argues for a constant growth rate rule.

     Although exercises of this type are subject to both the Lucas cr1—

tique and selection bias, the argument is sufficiently interesting to be

worth pursuing. The initial appearance is that Poole's analysis does not

support the case for CGRP. The implication of Poole's argument is that

monetary growth should have been reduced below the trend rate in 1971—2

to accompany wage and price controls, and it should have been increased

above its trend level in the second half of 1974.      (Poole seems to be

agnostic about the first half of 1974.) If political forces indeed

restrained monetary growth in the first half of 1974, then one of the

major arguments for rules ——   that   they remove the Fed from unfortunate

political pressures —— appears redundant.

     However, there is more to be said in defEnse of CGRP.

In the first place, although optimal policy in 1971—2 would not have

been CGR.P, the latter would have been better than actual policy. And
                                   —30—




second, it is open to proponents of CORP to argue that there would have

been no need for wage—price controls in 1971 if the rule had been

in effect in the sixties.

     Although Lucas's critique of econometric policy evaluation

makes any statements about the historical record difficult to support

strongly at this stage, the following remarks are in order. First,

monetary policy in the post—World War II period has not on average

been markedly worse than a constant growth rate rule, and has

probably been somewhat better. Second, it is easy to find particular

episodes for which one can confidently assert that actual policy was

worse than a constant growth rate policy. Third, we can on general

grounds be sure that a 4% growth rule would have produced a lower

inflation rate between 1960 and the present than actually occurred.

But without an econometric model, we do not know whether overall

economic performance ——   including the behavior of the unemployment
rate —— would   have been better under such a policy.
     The historical record since World War II does not tell the
unambiguous story that proponents of CGRP find in it, even though
there are episodes in which CGRP would have been better than actual

policy.


Modified Activist Policy

     The arguments against activist policy outlined in this section,

and the evolution of actual policy, point in the same direction ——

towards a policy that responds very little or not at all to minor

actual and prospective disturbances, but with proportionately more
                                      —31—




vigor to actual and potential major disturbances. For want of a

better term, I shall refer to this policy as modified activist policy,

or MAP.

        The arguments made by Friedman against activist policy are telling

against fine tuning: given uncertainty about the structure of the

economy,    policy has   to be cautious in reacting to information con—

tamed    in minor disturbances, in part because aata revisions are often
large. However, there is no reason why policy should not react to
major                                   when it is clear that
        disturbances, actual or prospective,

either expansionary or contractionar policy is required) In
saying this, I assume that major disturbances could occur even in the
absence    of.government policy: the nineteenth and early twentieth century

record suggests that possibility. If it should be the case that

large disturbances have been the fault of the Fed, the absence or

mildness of fine tuning would soon establish itself as a major

success ——   unless   political pressures make it impossible to run

a cautious pol:Lcy.

     The discussion of the three policies of this section can

conveniently be continued in the next section, under the heading of

rules versus discretion. In practice, a nnetary rule would almost

certainly be written as a constant growth rate rule, and discretion

would mean continuance of the present evolving system of monetary

control. In operation, a monetary rule would be much like MAP,

for the rule would likely be adapted or changed In response to an

1The monetary policy required in the case of a demand disturbance is
usually clear, but the response to supply disturbances presents greater
difficulties.
                                      —32—



anticipated or actual crisis.



V. Rules versus Discretion

     The general issue of rules versus discretion in monetary policy

amounts to the question of whether the Fed should be given a narrowly

defined task by legislation specifying the behavior of variables

fairly directly under its control (rules), or alternatively, should

be left to decide the appropriate means of achieving ultimate targets

of monetary policy (price stability, full employment, etc.) specified

by legislation (discretion). As with most convenient distinctions,

there is no hard and fast line: a rule that would leave the Fed

with a minimum of discretion would prescribe the behavior of its

own portfolio; the current situation in which various ultimate

targets are mentioned in legislation, but the appropriate weights

and the means of reaching those goals are not, gives the Fed a much

larger measure of discretion. For convenience, we can draw the line

between legislation that   controls   the behavior of a (or several)

monetary aggregates, as being a rule, and legislation that prescribes

the goals of stabiliation policy without specifying the behavior

of monetary aggregates, as providing discretion)

     Any monetary rule would have to be amended as the financial

system evolved, as we have already noted. Changes in the rule might

also have to be made in the short run, if it proved defective in

1                            .                       .     .
 On this definition, Henry Simons (1952) argued for discretion in the
1930s; his proposed monetary rule was that the Fed aim to achieve price
stability. At the time he was concerned about the instability of the
demand for money. He argued that an optimal system would have 100%
money and a fixed amount of it, and he believed that such a system could
eventually be set up.
                                     —33—



operation. Indeed, the proposal for a monetary rule is equivalent

 to the suggestion that monetary policy be subject to the same

legislative process as tax changes unless it is seriously suggested

that the rule be embodied in a constitutional amendment. The latter

suggestion reflects excessive confidence (or hubris) in conclusions

reached on the issues discussed in Section IV.

        Two complementary methods for changing the monetary rule suggest them-

selves. First, there could be hearings on the performance of the rule at

fixed   intervals: the Fed ntight be requird to report regularly on the
workings of monetary policy and make recommendations for changes.
Second,   changes could be proposed as the Congress or the Fed or any

other agency saw the need.




The Case f or Discretion

        The benefit of discretion, or leaving monetary policy in

the hands of the Fed, is flexibility. There are two aspects

of flexibility. The first relates to the classic lender of last

resort function of the central bank, in which flexibility enables

the central bank   to   intervene in potential financial crises. Such

intErvention was useful in the Penn Central and Franklin National

cases, even if the methods of intervention in the latter case were

not optimal. In neither of these cases, though, did it seem that

there was any threat of a run on high—powered money, and it may

be that the advent of the FDIC has indeed removed the need for a lender

of last resort. Further, a rule that fixes the growth rate of Ml

would provide an element of built—in stabilization since increases
                                  —34—



 in the demand for currency at the expense of demand deposits would

 be accommodated automatically. However, the basic source of the

 instability that underlies a panic ——   the   multiple expansion of credit ——
 would not be removed by CGRR.

      There is thus no certainty that panics would be avoided under

 CGRR and accordingly it is important that. there be some agency in a

 position to deal with potential panics in the financial markets.

The most natural agency for this purpose would be the Fed, which should

have left open to it the possibility of discounting freely and/or

 conducting large scale open market operations.

     The second type of flexibility is that which permits the Fed to

react to business cycle developments. The argument here would be

that there might be business cycle deelopments to which the Fed

should react, and that the details ara too subtle to spell out in

legislation. If a rule were in operation, the Fed could ask the

Congress for authorization to engage in extraordinary measures if

the need were foreseen, but delays in the legislative process and un-

certainty about its outcome might well exacerbate any underlying

disturbance.

     The loss of flexibility that a constant growth rate rule would

imply for the Fed in dealing with run—of—the—mill small disturbances

would probably not be any great loss; it would essentially be the

end of fine tuning. But economic instability might be seriously

worsened if the legislative process made   it impossible for the Fed
to react to a financial panic, or to react in a situation, such as

a deep recession, when action was clearly called for.
                                    —35—



The Case for a Rule

        The advantages of a rule are in large part the disadvantages of

discretion. The alleged tendency of the Fed to undertake action

that is too much and too late would be reduced by the introduction of

CGRR, or any other rule, for the decision lag of discretionary

policy would be avoided. Policies that reduce the money stock at a

time when it should be increased —— as during the Great Depression ——

would be avoided. The accountability of the Fed for its actions

would be enhanced, since its task would be well defined. The record

shows that CGRR would not have been much worse than actual monetary

policy during the post World War II period.

        Another argument against discretion has recently been advanced

by Kydland and Prescott (1977)1. The Kydland and Prescott argument

is essentially that the Fed always or usually has an incentive to

change monetary policy (the argument is a general one that applies

to any policy) once the private sector has committed itself to a

set of plans based on given expectatiors of policy. For instance,

to take a not irrelevant example, if the public has adjusted to a

relatively low rate of inflation, it might be in the Fed's interest

to accelerate the inflation rate, apparently improving the short—run

situation.

        If the Fed has discretionary power, and a different set of aims

than the public, it might sometimes face the incentive to exploit

1A similar problem is examined by Calvo (1978). The remarkable feature
of the Kydland—Prescott result is that it can apparently occur even
if the policy authority is maximizing the expected utility of the re-
presentative individuaL, and ii individual tastes are consistent through
time.
                                  —36—




 the short—run Phillips tradeoff. By a similar token, it rarely seems

 a good time to reduce the inflation rate. But why should the Fed

 have a different utility function than the public? The typical

 argument is that the Fed reads the election returns, and that it,

discretely to be sure, does the bidding of the presicent. This

argument implies the not novel view that political success can be

bought by policy which is not in the public's real interest.     (It

also implies that the Fed can systematically affect output.) Al-

though democracy is frequently invoked in the argument for rules,

it is not clear what democracy requires in this case.

     I believe there is in fact a conflict between the short and

long run interests of the public in the political business cycle, and

that some weight should on that account be given to rules. But I

would feel much easier about this argument for rules if I did not

have the suspicion that it is a rationalization of the typical

economist's belief (shared by the public) that inElation is a more

serious problem than the revealed prference of the political process,

or any serious economic analysis, suggests, and that inflation control

has therefore to be imposed, if necessary by rule.


A Modified Constant Growth Rate Rule or MAP

     Friedman (1960) made only modest claims for CGRR —— namely, that

it would prevent the Fed from making major mistakes. The major

drawback of a strict form of CGRR is the possibility that monetary

policy will be immobilized precisely ata time when it is obviously

useful.
                                 —37—



     The question that then arises is whether CGRR would not in practice

be the best of all worlds, given the right of the FecL to ask for changes

in the rule. There would then be CGRR in the ordinary course of events,

and active monetary policy when circumstances warranted —— which is pre-

cisely the modified activist policy described in Section IV. However,

given the delays of the legislative process, CGBR in practice could well

be destabilizing,1 particularly in the case of a financial panic.

     A similar solution, which I favor, would leave the initiative for

taking action with the Fed, but would maintain the presumption that

in the ordinary course of events, monetary policy would be passive.

Under such a solution, the Fed would be expected to maintain a con-

stant growth rate rule, and would be required to explain ex post

(within some specified period) all deviations from the constant growth

rate path to a congressional oversight panel.

     This latter solution is very close to the current situation. It

Is beyond the scope of this paper, and my ability, to specify the

legislative formula that would be required to make the Fed follow its

targets more closely than it has since 1975. More Congressional over-

sight, and more publi explanation from the Fed of what it is doing,

are both to b.e welcomed in any event.

     It is not clear to me whether the proposed policy is a rule or

discretion. It is a rule in that it prescribes expected conduct for

the monetary authority, but it leaves the Fed with sufficient discretion

to take rapid action if that is necessary.

1Tax rates are not typically changed rapidly,
                                         —38—



VI. Concluding Comments

        I will not repeat the summary of this paper, which is contained

in the introduction. I want to make three final points. First, the

purpose of the paper was to discuss the possibility of countercyclical,

activist monetary policy in the light of developments in macroeconomics

associated with rational expectations. Much of the paper was there-

fore devoted to the question of whether systematic monetary policy can

have          real effects on output. Given the need to concentrate on that

question, and the absence from the paper uf a well specified macro model,

only the most general of policy prescriptions could be made.

        Second, the reader will have been struck by the number of places

in the paper at which it is asserted that there is no very strong. evi-

dence favoring one position over another. The only strong statement the

evidence on adoption of a constant growth rate policy supports is that we

do 1ot know how such a policy would work. The eonservative course is not

to immobilize monetary policy when it might be useful in a recession or

panic.

       Third, the terms in which the argument is couched may seem unusual,

But the general argument that is made for activist policy is not new,

In eynesian terms', the is-sue that is being discussed is whether "we

should, in effect, have monetary management by the Trade Unions, aimed

at full employment, instead of by the banking system". The answer given

in this paper is that       the   central banking system rather than the private

sector should provide       monetary   management.


1
    General                 -
              Theory, p. 26,'.
                                     —39—




 4ppertdix: The B&rro Output Equation

       A typical Barro output equation, estimated from data in Barro

 (1978), over the sample period 1948—76 is:1


 (1)       log y 5.98 + 1.03 DMRt + 1.18 DMRt_i + 0.49 DMRt_2
                    (O.0L6) (0.23)          (0.23)          (0.24)


                   + 0.20    DMR3 + 0.55 MU.t + .035 t
                    (0.25)           (0.11)           (.0004)


           S =     0.0168, SSR = .00622,      DW = 1.81


In this equation, y is the level of real GNP, DMR is the unanticipated

component of the growth In the money stock, MIL is a measure of the

proportion of the prime age male labor force that has been draf ted,2

and t is time. If one adds the current and three lagged

values   of the actual growth rate of money to the regression (this
is   equivalent to including the anticipated component of       the growth
rate   of money), the sum of squared residuals falls to .005872. An

F—test indicates that the hypothesis that the anticipated component

of money contributes to the explanation of the behavior of output,

given the inclusion of the variables in (1), is not accepted.

       Barro also estimates an equation in which the actual rather than

unanticipated growth rates of money serve as regressors, and fails to

accept the hypothesis that the coefficients on the anticipated and

unanticipated growth rates are the same, for his sample period. I

1Barro expresses some dissatisfaction over the iiiclusjon of the MIL
variable in the output equation.

      sample period was chosen because I later litroduce a variable
that was only conveniently available over these iears.
                                 —40—




 find that I do accept that hypothesis for the 1948—76 period, but the

 power of the test is very weak. Further, there is really no good

 reason to have a null hypothesis that the coefficients on anticipated

and unanticipated money are the same, since verticality of the long—

run Phillips curve is inconsistent with that view.

     As noted in the text, a more relevant question about Barro's

results from the viewpoint of activist policy, concerns the time

interval over which "unanticipated" is defined. I have constructed

a variable 2DMT that is the anticipation, based on information

available at the end of period (t—2), of the growth rate of money

in period t. The construction is straightforward insofar as the

money rule depends on lagged growth rates of money. It also depends

on the unemployment rate, for which I formed expectations using

Barro's 1977 unemployment equation. Finally, the exogenous variables

FEDV, MIL, and MW1, were assumed known with perfect foresight. As

might be expected, the constructed variable is collinear with DMR

(correlation coefficient of 0.65) and DMR lagged once (correlation

coefficient of 0.82).2 As might also be expected, the data are not

able to tell us whether the two period ahead unanticipated growth

rate of money has significant independent effects on output. Adding

the variable (DM — 2 DMT) to the Barro equation (1) reduces the sum

of ;quared residuals from .00622 to .00547.   If the current value of

the DMR variable is then deleted from the regression, the sum of squared



1For definitions see Barro (1977, 1978).
2The sample period 1948—76 was used because (DM — 2DMT) was available
only over that period.
                                     —41—




residuals rises only slightly to .00553. Neither variable has a

significant coefficient when both are included in the equation. We

conclude that   the   data cannot tell us whether only one year ahead or

only two year ahead errors in predicting money or both contribute

to explaining the behavior of output.1




   tests are inconclusive: given the inclusion of the two year forecast
error, the hypothesis that the DMR variable is irrelevant to the explana-
tion of output is accepted, and vice versa.
                                 —42—




                             BIBLIOGRAPHY



Bagehot, Walter (1906). Lombard Street, London: Kegan Paul.
Barro, Robert J. (1976). "Rational Expectations and the Role of
     Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics (Jan.), 1—32.

           (1977). "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in
     the United States," American Economic Review (March), 101—115.

           (1977b). "Long Term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary
     Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics (July), 305—316.

           (1978). "Unanticipated Money, Output, and the Price Level
     in the United States," Journal of Political Economy (Aug.), 549—580.

Brock, William A. (1974). "Money and Growth: The Case of Long—Run
     Perfect Foresight," International Economic Review (Oct.), 750—777.

Bryant, John and Neil Wallace (1978). "Open Market Operations in a
     Model of Regulated, Insured Intermediaries," Research Department,
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Staff Report #34.

Bulow, Jeremy and Heraclis Poleinarchakjs (1978). "Retroactive Money,"
     unpublished, MIT.

Calvo, Guillermo (1978) "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy
     in a Monetary Economy", Econometrica (Nov.), 1411—1428.

Drazen, Allan (1976). "Essays on the Theory of Inflation," unpublished
     Ph.D. Dissertation, M.I.T.

Eckstein, Otto (1978). The Great Recession. Amsterdam: North—Holland,
     Chapter 7.

Feldstein, Martin and Laurence Summers (1978). "Inflation, Tax Rules,
     and the Long—Term Interest Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity (1), 61—99.
Fischer, Stanley (1977). "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations
     and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Poittical Economy
     (Feb.), 191—205.

          (1979). "Capital Accumulation on the Transition Path in a
    Monetary Optimizing Model," forthcoming in Econometrica.

          (1979b). "Anticipations and the Non—Neutrality of Money,"
     forthcoming in Journal of Political Economy.

          and Franco Modigliani (1979). "The Real Effects of Inflation,"
    unpublished, M.I.T.
                                      —43—




 Fisher, Irving (1922). The Purchasing Power of Money, New York:
      Macmillan.

 Friedman, Milton (1960). A Program for Monetary Stability, New York:
      Fordham University Press.

            (1969). "The Optimum Quantity of Money", in The Optimum
      Quantity of Money, Chicago: Aldine.

            and Anna J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United
      States, 1867—1960, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

 Germany, J. David (1978). "Can the Effects of Unanticipated Policy be
      Estimated?," unpublished, M.I.T.

 Ghez, Gilbert and Gary Becker (1975), The Allocation of Time and
      Goods Over the Life Cycle, New York: Columbia University Wess.

Keynes, J.M. (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and
     Money. London: Macmillan, 1936.

 Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1977). "Rules Rather Than
      Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of
      Political Economy (June), 473—491.

Lucas, Robert E.. Jr. (1973). "Some International Evidence on Output—
     Inflation Tradeoffs," American Economic Review (June), 326—334.

     ————(1976). "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique" in
     K. Brunner and A. ltzer (eds.) The Phillips Curve and Labor
     Markets, Supplement to the Journal of Monetary Economics, 19—46.
       ——  (1977). "Understanding Business Cycles," in K. Brunner
     and A. Meltzer (eds.), Stabilization of the Domestic and International
     Economy, Supplement to the Journal of Monetary Economics, 7—29.
—          and L.A. Rapping (1969). "Real Wages, Employment and the
     Price Level," Journal of Political Economy (Sept./Oct.), 721—54.

Modigliani, Franco (1974). "A Critique of Past and Prospective Monetary
     Policies", American Economic Review (Sept.), 544—557.

        —   (1977). "The Monetarist Controversy or, Should We Forsake
     Stabilization Policies?," American Economic Review (March), 1—19.

            and Donald Lessard, eds. (1975).  NewMortgae Designs for
     Stable Housthig   man   thflatIonary,riyironnt Federal Reserve
     Bank of Boston,   Conference Scrie,. Nt). 14.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1970). "Money Wag' 1)ynamics and Labor Market
     Equilibrium", in Phelps (ed.), Microeconotnjc Foundations of
     rnent and Inflation Theorv, New York: W.W. Norton.
                                 —44—




           (1973). "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance,"
     Swedish Journal of Economics (March), 67—82.

Poole, William (1976). "Rational Expectations in the Macro Model,"
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2), 463—514.

Sargent, Thomas J. (1976). "A Classical Macroeconomic Model for the
     United States," Journal of Political Economy (April), 207—237.

           and Neil Wallace (1975), "'Rational' Expectations, the
     Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"
     Journal of Political Economy (April), 241—54.

Sayers, R.S. (1957). Central Banking After Bagehot, London: Oxford
     University Press.

Sidrauski, M. (1967). "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a
     Monetary Economy," American Economic Review Proceedings (May),
     534—44.

Sitnons, Henry C. (1952). "Rules Versus Authorities in Monetary
     Policy," in Readings in Monetary Theory, London: George Allen
     and Unwin.

Small, David N. (1978), "The Endogeneity of Rational Expectations
     and Labor Supply," unpublished, Northwestern University.

Start, Richard (1978). "Interest Bearing Demand Deposits," unpublished
     Ph.D. Dissertation, M.I.T.

Taylor, John B. (1978). "Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts,"
     unpublished, Columbia University.
