               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE RATE OF OBSOLESCENCE OF KNOWLEDGE,
            RESEARCH GESTATION LAGS, AND ThE
               PRIVATE RATE OF RETURN TO
                   RESEARCH RESOURCES

                       Ariel Fakes
                    Mark Schankerman

                  Working Paper No. 316




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                         May 1979


The research reported here is part of the NBER's program
of research in Productivity. We have benefitted greatly
from discussions with the participants in an informal
seminar on technological change at Harvard, chaired by Zvi
Griliches. Helpful comments were also received from Gary
Chamberlain and Shiomo Yitzhaki. All remaining errors are
ours. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Financial assistance from NSF grant GS—2726X is gratefully
acknowledged.
                                                      NBER Working Paper 346
                                                                    May 1979




     The Rate of Obsolescence of Knowledge, Research Gestation Lags
          and the Private Rate of Return to Research Resources


                                 SUNMARY


     This paper points out the conceptual distinction between the rates

of decay in the physical productivity of traditional capital goods and

that of the appropriate revenues accruing to knowledge—producing activities,

and notes that it is the latter parameter which is required in any study

which constructs a stock of privately marketable knowledge. The rate of

obsolescence of knowledge is estimated from a simple patent renewal and

the estimates are found to be comparable to evidence provided by firms

on the lifespan of the output of their R&D activities. These estimates,

together with mean R&D gestation lags, are then used to correct previous

estimates of the private excess rate of return to investment in research.

We find that after the correction, the private excess rate of return to

investment in research, at least in the early 1960's, was close to zero,

which may explain why firms reduced the fraction of their resources

allocated to research over the subsequent decade.



                                    Ariel Pakes
                                    National Bureau of Economic Research
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                     (617) 868—3921


                                    Mark Schankermart
                                    National Bureau of Economic Research
                                    15—19 West 4th Street, 8th Floor
                                    Washington Square
                                    New York, N.Y. 10012
                                     (212) 598—7038
THE RATE OF OBSOLESCENCE OF KNOWLEDGE, RESEARCH GESTATION LAGS, AND THE

PRIVATE RATE OF RETURN TO RESEARCH RESOURCES


        The recent interest of economists in knowledge-producing activities

has had two main strands. The first is an attempt to explain the growth in

the    measured productivity of traditional factors of production by incor-
porating research resources in production function and social accounting
frameworks; (for a review see Griliches, 1973, and idem,      forthcoming)

The second derives from two fundamental characteristics of knowledge as
an    economic commodity, its low or zero cost of reproduction and the diffi-

culty of excluding others from its use. These features give knowledge the

character of a public good and suggest that the structure of market incen-

tives may not elicit the socially desirable level (or pattern) of research

and development expenditures. In particular, it has been argued that mar-

ket incentives may create an underinvestment in knowledge—producing activi-

ties (see Arrow, 1962, for a discussion) .    In   order to investigate this

possibility, economists have applied the techniques of productivity analysis

and estimated the private (and social) rate of return to research from pro-

duction functions incorporating research resources as a factor of production.

The estimates of the private return for the late 1950's and early 1960's

fall in the range of 30—45 percent.1 Despite these high estimated private

rates of return, the share of industrial resources allocated to research

expenditures declined steadily over the succeeding decade.2 This suggests

1For example, see Griliches (forthcoming) and Mansfield (1965). Note that
 both these studies are based on firm or micro data. More aggregative data
 bases are not directly relevant to estimates of the private rate of return
 to research.
2

    The share of net sales of manufacturing firms devoted to R&D has declined
    from 0.046 in 1963 to 0.029 in 1974, or by about 40 percent. See NSF
    (1976, Table B—36)
                                  —2—


a paradox: why has research effort been receiving less attention from

industrial firms if the private rate of return to research is so attractive?

     o important parameters in these calculations of the   private   return

to research are the rate of decay of the private revenues accruing to in-

dustrially-produced knowledge and the mean lag between the deployment of

research resources and the beginning of that stream of revenues. These

parameters, of course, are necessary ingredients in any study which involves

a measurement of the stock of privately marketable knowledge. The rate of

decay in the returns from research has not previously been estimated. In

this paper we present a method of explicitly estimating that parameter.

We also use information provided by others to calculate the approximate

mean R & D gestation lags. Since previous research has not included the

latter and seems to have seriously understated the rate of decay of appro—

priable revenues in calculations of the private rate of return to research

expenditures, we then use our estimates to improve on previous results on

this rate of return.

     Of course, all previous work in this area has been forced to make some

assumption, either implicit or explicit, about the value of the decay rate.

The problem arises because it has been assumed to be similar to the rate of

decay in the physical productivity of traditional capital goods. The fact

that the rate of deterioration of traditional capital and the rate of decay

in appropriable revenues from knowledge arise from two different sets of

circumstances seems to have been ignored..3

     The employment of research resources by a private firm produces new

knowledge, with some gestation lag. The new knowledge or innovation may be

31t is common to find an assumed rate of decay of the knowledge produced by
 firms of between 0.04 and 0.07 (Mansfield, 1965). Griliches (forthcoming
 1978) noting some of the conceptual distinctions between the rates of decay
 in traditional capital and in research, assumes an upper bound of 0.10 for
 the latter.
                                   —3—

a cost—reducing process, a product, or some combination of the two. The

knowledge—producing firm earns a return either through net revenues from

the sale of its own output embodying the new knowledge, or by license and

non—monetary returns collected from other firms which lease the innovation.

Since the private rate of return to research depends on the present value

of the revenues which accrue to the sale of the knowledge produced, the

conceptually appropriate rate of depreciation is the rate at which the

appropriable revenues decline for the innovating firm. However, as Boulding

(1966) noted, knowledge, unlike traditional capital, does not obey the laws

of (physical) conservation. The rate of decay in the revenues accruing to

the producer of the innovation derives not from any decay in the produc-

tivity of knowledge but rather from two related points regarding its market

valuation, namely, that it is difficult to maintain the ability to appro-

priate the benefits from knowledge and that new innovations are developed

which partly or entirely displace the original innovation. Indeed, the

very use of the new knowledge in any productive way will tend to spread and

reveal it to other economic agents, as will the mobility of scientific

personnel. One might expect then that the rate of decay of appropriable

revenues would be quite high, and certainly considerably greater than the

rate of deterioration in the physical productivity of traditional capital.3a

       In Section I we examine two independent pieces of evidence bearing on

the rate of decay of appropriable revenues. Next, the information from var-

ious sources on the mean lag between R&D expenditures and the beginning of the

3aIt should be noted that the models used in this paper do not assume that
  the rate of decay in appropriable revenues is exogenous to the firm's
  decision—making process. In a dynamic context, a firm possessing an inno-
  vation has to choose between increasing present revenues and inducing
  entry, and charging smaller royalties in order to forestall entry. This
  choice is the basis of Gaskin's (1971) dynamic limit pricing analysis of
                                                     —4—


  associated revenue stream is summarized. In Section III we attempt to gct a

  rough idea of how seriously the existing estimates of the private rate of

  return to research overstate the true private rate of return. Brief concluding

  remarks follow.

  3.1. The Rate of Decay of Appropriable Revenues

  The first piece of evidence on the rate of decay in appropriable revenues

  (    hereafter,       the rate of decay) is based on data presented in Federico (1958).

  Federico provides observations on the percentage of patents of various ages

 which were renewed by payment of mandatory annual renewal fees during the period

  1930-39 in the United Kingdom, Germany,
                                                           France, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.

 A theoretical model of patent renewal will lead directly to a procedure for

 estimating the rate of decay from these data.

        Consider a patented innovation whose annual renewal requires payment of a

 stipulated fee. Letting r(t) and c(t) denote the appropriahie revenues and the

 renewal fee in year t, the discounted value of net revenues accruing to the

 innovation over its lifespan, V(T),                 is
 (1)                 V(T) =    I [r(t)   -   c(t)]   e_tdt,
 where i is the discount rate and 1' is the expiration date of the patent.

 Differentiating (1) with respect to I, the optimum expiration date, T*, is

 written implicitly as

 (2)                 r(T*) =   c(T*)
 provided that r'(t) <           c'(t)   for all t.       Equivalently,   the condition for renewal
 of the patent in year t is that the annual revenue at least covers the cost of

 the    reilc'wa I   fec'


 (5)                 r( t     c(t).


;i Lui t. Ions involving
                       temporary monopoly power. Gaskin 's model can be used to
sl'iow that the Optimal revenue stream will decline over time and that the
oF (1('CIIfle will depend on certain appropriability                       rate
                                                     parameters.
                                                                 —5—


     Let the annual renewl fee grow at the rate g, and let the 8ppropriarle rev:aucs

     decline at rate .                  Then condition (3) can be written as

     (4)               r(O) >

            Partition 6 into             an econony average rate of decay (*j       id   a patent specific
     deviation       from that average                   and let f(r) denote the relative dens it    function

 of initial appropriable revenies adjusted for differences in the decay rate among

 patents Er. =          r.(O)e            1]•   Thn   the percentage of patents renewed in each year, P(t),
 is

     (5)              P(t) =        J      f(r)dr,
                                    C(t)

 where C(t)

 It        follows that

 (ôa)                 P'(t)     =
                                        -C'(t)f(C)
 and

 (ob)                 P' '(t)       =    -f(C)C"(t) ri   +   C


where the primes denote derivatives. That is, as long as (g + 6) > 0, the

percentage of patents renewed will decline with their age. The curvature of

P(t), however, will depend on the distribution of the values of the innovations
                '4

patented.             In particular, if £(r) is lognormal, P(t) will have ne point of

inflection, being concave before it and convex thereafter (sce curve I, Figure la).



'4
           Since the value of patents [equation (1)]is a monotonic transformation
                                                                                  of
           the adjusted initial revenues, we shall use the two terms interchangeably.
               —6—




                      N

    o
    00


                C.,
    0)
    ".4




          //




                          //   ,/


          /
    /
/                              j
/ ----
                                       —7—




Alternatively, Scherer (1965) cites evidence presented in Sanders and others

(1958) which indicates that the value of patents tends to distribute Pareto-Levy.

If f(r) is strictly declining (e.g. Pareto-Levy), P(t) will be a stricfly

decreasing, convex function of patent age, as shown by curve 2. Figure lb

presents the actual time paths of P(t) from Federico (1958). Four of the five

curves tend to support Sander's data and are consistent with an underlying

Pareto-Levy distribution of patent values. The time path for Germany, however,

indicates that the underlying distribution for that country has at least one

mode. Since it is futile to estimate both the parameters of the underlying

lognornial (for example) and the decay rate in appropriable revenues from only 18

observations available on Germany, we shall disregard the German data in the

remainder of the empirical work.

      We now use this simplified model to obtain rough estimates of the decay

rate of appropriable revenues .    Consistent   with the evidence in Figure ib,

the relative density function of initial revenue is taken to be of the Pareto-

Levy type:

(7)           f(r) =                                rm > O•   >   0


where r is the minimum value of r in the population. Then the percentage of

patents which are renewed in year t can be expressed as

(8)          P(t) =    [r/c(0)]e*)t
                                                               —8—


       There are two error terms differentiating the observed value of the lugarithm
                                                                                             5
of Plog J', from the value predicted by equation (8).                                            The first, v1, is a
sampling or measurement error while the second, v                                   ,   is   a structural error in
                                                                                2

the model. Assuming that P is derived from a binomial sampling process around

the actual value, that is, P -
                                                         b(Pf,   N),

it follows that


                 v 1 -V(l ogP)l_P,
                                                    PN

where N is the (unobserved) number of patents sampled. The structural error,

v ,
 2
       will   be assumed to be an independent, indentically distributed normal deviate

with variance o.
              2



       Letting j index a country, for sufficiently large N the logarithmic transform

of          can be written as
       ti

(9)              log P. = a 03.+a .t. +
                      3          lj J                     tj
                                                                                                                       r
                       -
                           N[0,o       (1       -                                                                       m
where                              +
                                                     Pt)/PtjNj],         a1.3
                                                                                    -.(g. +
                                                                                        .1   3
                                                                                                     ,   and



       Consistent estimates of a0., ajj                        and   their standard errors can be derived

from the following two-stage procedure. First estimate (9) by ordinary least

squares. Next define e2 as the squared residuals from (9) and regress.
                               m

                             +
                            —

(10)              t 02
                 e2.
                                            m




Letting       F be the fitted value from (10), use F to weight, and perform

weighted least squares on (9).

            is bounded by zero and unity. As a result, the composite error cannot be
       independently and identically distributed. The analysis which follows

       corresponds closely to the treatment of similar problems in logit
       regressions. See Berkson (1953) and Amemiya and Nold (1975)
                                                  —9—


            If our model is correct, and
                                           if 6 and   cS* do not   vary   between countries, icn
    (1l            a. .66* - 6g..

    Since g., the rate of growth of
                                   renewal fees, is available from Federico's data, 6
    (11) can he tested by using F4 to
                                      weight and performing weighted least squares
    on the equtio.-




     (12)                               .5*• -
                       log                        6(g.t.)
    where all symbols are as defined above.

    If (11) is the true
                             specification, then ..2 times the logarithm of the likelihood

    ratio from (12) and the weighted
                                           least-squares version of (9) will distribute
    asymptotically as a X deviate. Moreover,
                                                      equation (12) will provide estimates
    of both the rate of decay of
                                     appropriable revenues (6*), and the underlying
    distribution of patent values (8).




6
      These growth rates were calculated from
                                                      a semi-log linear regression of costs
      against time for each country. The
                                                 growth rates (and their standard errors)
      for the Netherlands, the United
                                       kingdom, France, and Switzerland were
      0.085 (.0.002), 0.129 (0.015), 0.089 (0.006) and 0.143 (0.008).
                                       —10—


 Table 1. Estimates from the Patent Renewal Model-" b,I



     A. Common parameters                        B. Country-specific parameters
        (57 observations)

                                                               (tj
*                              0.14
                               0.01
                                              France           0.04
                                                               0.02
                                                                       0.00014
                                                                       0.00016

                              0.57            United Kingdom   0.55    0.00016
                              0.07                             0.02    0.0001k

*                                             Netherlands      0.09    0.00040
                                                               0.02    0.00008
               c/
 Point estimate—              0.25
                                              Switzerland      0.32    0.00032
 Confidence Intrva1 0.18-0.36                                  0.02    0.00012

2                           0.0002
                            0 • 0007



R4                           0.996



a/ The data on patent renewal are taken from Federico (1958). These data cover
     the percentage of patents of different ages in force during 1930-39 which were
     renewed by payment of a mandatory annual renewal fee. For example, if a patent
     was granted in 1925, it would appear in the data as 5 years old in 1930, 6 years
     old in 1931, and so on. Therefore, the percentage of patents renewed after5 years
     is based on the total number of patents issued 5 years earlier in a particular

     Country.

b/ Small numerals are standard errors.
c/ *     =

d/    The confidence interval corresponds to the 95 per cent Fieller bounds
      (n *.
                                        —11—


Table 1 summarizes the empirical results. The observed value of the

test statistic is 5.4, while the five percent critical value is 5.99. Though

a little high, the test statistic does indicate acceptance of the hypothesis

in (11). The estimates of l/N and a2 are all positive thereby lending

support to the weighting procedure described above.

              to the parameters of interest, the point estimate of 8 was 0.57
         Turning

with a standard error of 0.07. One can check this estimate against an inde-
pendent source of information. As mentioned earlier, Sanders et. al. (1958)
provide      evidence on the distribution of the value of patents in the United
States. Fitting a Pareto—Levy      distribution   to these data, we obtain a point
estimate for of 0.63 with a standard error of 0.06. That is,          the estimate

of      from Sanders' data is very close to that obtained using our model and
Federico's data.7
        Our primary interest is in 5*, the     (average) decay rate in appropriable
revenues.       The point estimate of   is   0.25, while a 95 percent confidence

interval places the true value of S* between 0.18 and 0.36.8 An estimated


7These data correspond to appropriable revenues minus costs associated with
 the patent, but since cost data were not available we were forced to use
 net-value data. A cumulative Pareto—Levy distribution was fitted to the
 five positive net—value observations on expired patents which therefore
 have observable net values. The R2 from this regression was 0.97. Note
 that Pareto-Levy distributions with 8 < 1 do not have either a finite mean
 or variance and hence do not behave according to the law of large numbers.
 Therefore, if the distribution of patent values approximates the distribu-
 tion of project values, diversification into many independent projects will
 not reduce risk. This point was originally made by Nordhaus (1969). Of
 course, if the returns to different projects are negatively correlated,
 diversification may still reduce risk.
8
    Note that  since the estimate of &' is obtained as the ratio of two coeffi-
    cients, its confidence interval (obtained by using Fieller bounds) is not
    symmetric around its point estimate. Three remarks on the robusthess of
    these results are also in order. First, the assumption that the revenue
    stream     be described by an exponential rate of decay can be viewed as
             can
    a first—order (logarithmic) approximation to a more general stream of
                                          —12—


6*   of   0.25, though consistent with theoretical arguments concerning the

unique characteristics of knowledge as an economic commodity, implies that

earlier researchers have assumed values of 6* which are far too small. In

particular, the lower bound of the 95 percent confidence interval for 6* is

nearly twice the maximum value of the rate of decay of private returns used

in previous research.

          There is, of course, the possibility of sample selection bias in our

estimate of 5*.      The rate of decay of patented innovations may differ from

that of all innovations. The direction of the bias is indeterminate since

it depends on the correlation between the patent selection process and the

rates of obsolescence in the universe of all innovations. However, there

are two reasons to believe that the estimates of 6* may be biased downwards.

First, the fact that patents create property rights in the embodied know-

ledge may result in a lower rate of obsolescence for those innovations which

can be patented. Second, given an innovation which can be patented, it is

easy to show that the innovator will actually take out a patent only if

patenting thwers the rate of decay. As we show presently, however, evidence


 revenue. We also experimented with a second-order approximation, namely,
 r(t) = r(O)eAt+Bt . The estimates of B and its standard error were both
 zero to two places of decimals, and the rest of the results were almost
 identical to those reported here. Apparently, market—induced obsolescence
 is well approximated by an exponential pattern. Griliches (1963) reaches
 the same conclusion with respect to the obsolescence component of the
 deterioration in the value of traditional capital goods. Second, the results
 from the unweighted regressions were similar to the ones reported above.
 The unweighted version of (12) yielded a point estimate of 6*   0.22, with
 Fieller bounds of 0.16 to 0.33, and an estimate of = 0.62.
      Finally, we can use the unconstrained version of the estimating equa-
 tion to provide six different estimates of the combination W,6*). The
 constrained version, in effect weights the various estimates in an optimal
 manner. Five of these unconstrained estimates were (0.63, 0.22), (0.49,
 0.32), (0.55, 0.26), (0.65, 0.21), and (0.47, 0.34). The sixth is obtained
 from comparing the estimates of     and g. from France and the Netherlands.
 However, since        =        to two decimal places this comparison contains almost
                           g,
 no new information and therefore receives almost no weight in the constrained
 regression.
                                       —13—


 of a completely different nature tends to show that whatever bias exists

 is negligible.

        The second source of evidence on the magnitude of the decay rate of

 appropriable revenues is derived from data presented in Wagner (1968) on the

 lifespan of applied research and development expenditures.       Survey data on

 applied research arid development were collected from about 35 firms with long
 R     D experience in 33 product fields, using the product field description

employed by the NSF in its annual industry reports. Included in the survey

was a question on the lifespan of R       D, defined as the period after which

the product of the R       D was "virtually obsolete."

       This definition does not correspond directly to the decline in the

appropriable revenues accruing to research and development. However, a rough

correspondence can be established by assing that R          D is virtually obsolete

when the appropriable revenues reach some small fraction of the initial value, anu

then experiment with different fractions to examine the sensitivity of the

implied    decay rate to the assumption. Table 2 presents the average    lifespan
of R & D    for durable and non-durable product field categories, product and
process—oriented R & D,    and the implied decay rates based on various reasonable
definitions of   virtual   obsolescence. While   the implied decay rates do vary
with the definition of virtual obsolescence, the range of values is nearly
identical to the Fieller bounds on ó in Table i.
       The responses of firms to Wagner's question can also be used to check
the reasonableness   of the rates of obsolescence commonly assumed in the

9The only other estimate of the decay rate in produced knowledge of which we
 are aware is reported in a footnote in Griliches (forthcoming). A regression
 of productivity growth against R & D flow and stock intensity variables in
 his micro data set yielded an estimated 6' of 0.31. Griliches points out
 the discrepancy between this result and the rest of his analysis but offers
 no reconciliation.
                                            —14—




  Table 2. Estimates of 6* from Average Lifespan of R &




Ratio of revenue in year T
 to initial revenue (x) (i.e.,
  'virtual obsolescence')                    o.is           0.10             0.05
                                                              b/
                                            Revenue decay rate—         *
Durable-goods    R D                                                  (6 )

Product IT =    9)                           0.21            0.26            0.33
Process CT = 11)                             0.17            0.21            0.27

Nondurable-goods R     D
Product (T = 9)                              0.21            0.26            0.33
Process CT = 8)                              0.24            0.29            0.38


a/ Taken from Wagner (1968,
                                   P. 196, Table 5), which refers to 'applied research and
    development' (ARD). These lifespan figures (in parentheses) are averages of
    survey responses, weighted by 1965 product-field expenditures and by frequencies
    of the response distribution.
b/ Calculated as 6* =      -(log   x)/T.
                                          —15—


  literature. If in fact 6* = .05 (.10), that would imply (using T = 9 from

  Table 2) that firms consider the product of their R & D virtually obsolete

  even though the annual revenue flow is still 64 (41) percent of its initial

 value.



 3.2. Mean R & D Lags

 Two independent sources of information are used to estimate the mean
                                                                            R      D lag,
 defined as the average time between
                                         the outlay of an R     D dollar and the
 beginning of the associated revenue
                                         stream. This lag consists of a mean lag
 between project inception and
                                   completion (the gestation lag), and the time
 from project completion to
                                commercial application (the application lag).

     Rapoport (1971) presents detailed data on the distribution of Costs and
time for 49 commercialized
                           innovations and the total innovatkon time for a
subset of 16 of-them in three product groups -
                                               chemicals, machinery, and
electronics. The innovation process is
                                        decomposed into five stages: applied
research, specification, prototype or pilot
                                                  plant, tooling and manufacturing
facilities,    and manufacturing   and marketing start-up. Since the expenditures
on    manufacturing and                                                definition
                          marketing start-up are not included in the NSF
of R      D expenditures, the time involved in that stage is treated here as the
application    lag. Th remaining     data are   used to calculate the gestation lag.
The   first part of   Table 3 suiarizes the R D gestation and application lags

for   the three product groups.0

10The details of all calculations are omitted here for the sake of brevity
  but are available upon request. However, the limitations of these esti-
  mates should be noted. First, all the projects analyzed by Rapoport
  resulted in significant innovations, and as Scherer (1965) and Mansfield
     (l96
        have noted, mean lags tend to be longer for more significant
  technical advances. Second, we have not taken into account the time
                                       —16—




  Table    3. Estimates of the Mean R & D Lag (6)


                      R   D gestation lag           Application lag   Total lag



Rapoport
Chemicals                      1.48                      0.24             1.72
Machinery                      2.09                      0.31             2.40
Electronics                    0.82                      0.35             1.17
Wagner
Durables                       1.15                      1.47             2.62
Nondurables                    1.14                      1.03


Source: Calculated from data contained in Rapoport (1971) and Wagner (1968).
                                            —17—



        Additional information on the average R          D and application lags is

 provided in Wagner (1968). Survey data on process and product oriented R               D

 were gathered from about 36 finns with long R            D experience in a variety of

 durable and nndurable goods industries. Included was information on the

 duration of applied research and       development,    project duration for projects

 successfully completed in 1966, the distribution of R            D expenditures for

 successfully completed projects classified by project duration, the percentage

 of total funds accounted for by projects abandoned before
                                                                    completion, together
 with the time of abandonment, and the interval between the completion of R               D
 and   commercial application of the innovations. These data are used to calculate

 both an application lag and a mean       gestation    lag which, unlike those based on

 Rapoport's data, take into account expenditures on both technically successful

 and   unsuccessful   projects. The results are given in the second part of Table 3.

       The gestation    lags based on   Wagner's   data are broadly similar to those

deriyed from Rapoport but the application lags are considerably longer,11

causing some discrepancy between the two sets of results. Mansfield (1968),

using data gathered from extensive personal interviews with R            D project

  overlap  between stages which, according to Rapoport, is considerable. Both
   of these factors would tend to cause upward biases in our estimates of 0.
   On the other hand, the R & D costs of technically unsuccessful projects
11 should be taken into account, which would tend to raise the estimates of 0.
   Since Wagner does not precisely define the "end of AR&D" or the "application
  of innovations," some caution should be exercised in interpreting the appli-
  cation lags. Wagner does indicate that the longer application interval in
  durables reflects in large part the defense—space—atomic-energy oriented
  fields, so that the application       lag for other industries is probably closer
  to the nondurables estimate. On the other hand, Rapoport's 'manufacturing
  and marketing start-up' stage may understate the actual application lag.
                                       —18—



evaluation staff, concluded that the mean application lag was about 0.53 years.

Substitution of this number for Wagner's would bring the two sets of results

closer together and put the total lag at about 1,75 years. For present

purposes, however, a range of values somewhere between 1.2 and 2.5 years is

good enough.12
3.3.    Implications for Measuring the Private Rate of Return to Investment
        in Research

The preceding sections of this paper provided estimates of the
                                                               decay rate and
the mean R     D lag whose values are substantially higher than those assumed

in previous research. These estimates are now used to get a rough indication

of the implicatjons for production function estimates of the private rate of

return to research expenditures,

     Let     denote the increment in value added (or sales) generated by a unit

increase in research resources 0 years earlier. Then the equation for the

private (internal) rate of return to investment in research is




12
     It is interesting to note that the maximum of this
                                                        range is considerably
     shorter than the midpoint of the interval between project
                                                               inception and
     marketing, reflecting the fact that the distribution of research
     expenditures on projects is
                                   considerably skewed to the left.
                                     —19—




(13)                       1 =
                                 1QRe
                                 0


where 8 and t5 were defined earlier and r is the private rate of return, or

the implicit discount rate that would make investment in research marginally

profitable. In the special case where 0 = 0, (13) reduces to r           -   , which
corresponds to the equation used by previous researchers. In general, however,

the private rate of return is found by solving the following equation for r


(14)                       r -
                                 QR)0          +      o.

       Two points should be noted here. First, since research expenditures

are already included in the measures of traditional capital and labor

expenditures in the production functions used to estimate R' the calculated

private rate of return to research represents an excess return above and

beyond the normal remuneration to traditional factors (see Griliches, 1973).

That is, r may be interpreted as the risk premium attached to research

activity. Second, the estimates of          obtained by other researchers are

calculated by multiplying the estimated sales (value-added) elasticity of

the stock of knowledge tines the ratio of sales to the stock of knowledge.

The stock of knowledge is taken as the undepreciated s.un of research

expenditures over the period of observation; For the calculations in (14)

to be consistent, however, the stock of knowledge must be calculated

according to declining-balance depreciation. We therefore calculate the

depreciated sum of research expenditures with a decay rate of         and then

use this stock of knowledge to convert the estimated sales elasticity into
                                    —20—


a value of        This has been done for the three values of , corresponding

to the point estimate and FieJier bounds obtained earlier (0.18, 0.25, and

0.36), and for three different values '   Q (0.25,   0.30, and 0.35). The

results are presented in Table 4 for values of 8 equal to 1.75 and 2.0.




13 We thank Zvi Griliches for pointing out this problem and suggesting a
   solution. The data for the calculations are taken from NSF (1976,
   Table B-i). Three additional points should be noted. First, Griliches'
   aggregate gross excess rate of return estimate was about 0.30, while
   his estimates for research intensive and non-research intensive industries
   were 0.40 and 0.20 respectively. Mansfield's estimates (averaged over
   the ten firms he used) range from about 0.20 to 0.30 depending on the
   specific assumptions made. Since Griliches' data are far more
   comprehensive, we based the calculation of the conversion factor
   on them. Second, if private returns to knowledge do in fact decay,
   there is an error in the measured stock of knowledge used as an

   independent variable in Griliches' regression. However, it can be
   shown that the ratio of the variance in measurement error to the
   variance in the true stock is less than 0.0026, which can safely be
   ignored. That is, the sales elasticity of the stock of knowledge can
   be taken directly from Griliches' regression. Finally, the private
   rates of return are much less sensitive to changes in 8 than to different
   values of *.
                                           —21—




      Table 4. Estimates of the Net Excess Private Rate of Return to Research




      .*
      V
                                    C)
                                    'R
                        0.25       0.30       0.35




o =    1.75

 0.18                   0.053      0.085      0.114

 0.25                   0.015      0.047      0.081

 0.36                  -0.051     -0.015      0.021



  —
  —




 0.18                   0.043      0.073      0.100

 0.25                   0.004      0.033      0.065

 0.36                  -0.067     -0.032      0.000
                                          —22—..



     Turning to the results, it is apparent that the measured private (net.
excess) rates of return to investment in research are greatly reduced by our
adjustments.     For example, Griliches (forthcoming) reports a gross excess

return of 0.30 which, after correction for an assumed decay rate of 0.10,

translates into a net excess rate of return of 0.20. By contrast, Table 4

indicates that the rate of return associated with           =
                                                                0.30, evaluated at
our point estimate of ,      is   between 0.033 and 0.047. In     view   of the

abnormal riskiness associated with research expenditures, these risk premia

would appear to be modest.

     in short, Table 4 suggests that the private rates of return to investment

in research and traditional capital are roughly equated at the margin. Another

way of checking this possibility is to ask: what is the decay rate of

appropriable revenues implied by the assumption that firms equate, at the margin,

the private rates of return to investment in research and traditional capital?

With a mean R F4 D lag of 6, the return to a dollar of research is (r1*+l)(l÷r)0,

while for traditional capital, with depreciation rate               it   is (r +   *+
Using       =   0.06 and r = 0.08 from Griliches (forthcoming) , the value of
which equates these two terms is &k      = 0.22    if 0   1.75 and 6 0.25 if 0 = 2.0.

These values are nearly identical to the point estimate of               in Table 1.

3.4. Concluding Remarks

     In   this paper we stress the conceptual distinction between the rates

of decay in the physical productivity of traditional capital goods and that

of the appropriable revenues which accrue to knowledge-producing activities.

An estimate of the private rate of obsolescence of knowledge is necessary
                                         —23—


in    any study which requires constructing a stock of privately marketable

knowledge. We estimate this parameter from a simple patent renewal model

and    find the estimate comparable to evidence provided by firms on the
lifespan of the output of their R &   activities. The empirical results
                                           D

indicate that the rate of obsolescence is considerably greater than the
rates typically assumed in the literature. The estimated decay rates,
together with mean R &    gestation lags, are used to calculate the private
                            D

excess rate of return to investment in research. Our results suggest that
the private rate of return to research expenditures, at least in the
early 1960's, was    not   unreasonably high. It is important to emphasize,
however,    that in order to     come to conclusions regarding the divergence
between the private and social rates of return to knowledge—producing
activities, information on the social rate of return must be added to the
information contained in this paper." Nonetheless, if our calculations of
the                        return are even approximately correct, they do
       private excess rate of

suggest a partial resolution to the paradox presented in the introduction
to this chapter: why did private firms steadily reduce the share of
their resources devoted to R & D if their previous research effort was so
highly    profitable? Part of the answer may     be that research was not as pri-
vately profitable as has been thought.
1k
     In this connection, it     should be noted that the social rate of decay
  may    well be smaller than the rate of decay of appropriable revenues.
     See Hirshleifer's (1971) distinction between real and distributive
     effects in the production of knowledge.
                                  —24—

                             REFERENCES


 Ameiniya, Takeshi, and F. Nold. "A Modified Logit Model," Review of
        Economics and Statistics, Vol. 57 (1975), 255—57.

 Arror, Kenneth, J. "Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for
        Invention." In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic
        and Social Factors. Edited by R.R. Nelson. (National Bureau of
        Economic Research: Universities—National Bureay of Conference Series
        No. 13.) Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1962, PP. 609—25.


Berkson, J. "A Statistically Precise and Relatively Simple Method of
      Estimating the Bio—Assay with Quantal Response, Based on the
      Logistic Function," Journal of the American Statistical
      tion, XLVIII (1953), 565—99.


Boulding, Kenneth E. "The Economics of Knowledge and the Knowledge of
      Economics," American Economic Review. Proceedings, LVI (May
      1966), 1—13.


Federico, P.J. Renewal Fees and Other Patent Fees in Foreign Countries.
       (Study of the Subcommittee of Patents, Trademarks, and Copyrights
       of the Coimnittee of the Judiciary, United States Senate; Study
      No. 17.) Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1958.


Gaskins, Darius W., Jr. "Dynamic Limit Pricing: Optimal Pricing Under
       Threat of Entry," Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 3 (September
       1971), 306—323.
Griliches, Zvi. "Capital Stock in Investment Functions: Some Problems
       of Concept and Measurement." In Carl F. Christ and others,
       ment in Economics: Studies in Mathematical Economics and Econometrics
       in Memory of Yehuda Grunfeld. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
       Press, 1963. Pp. 115—37.


_____________    "Research Expenditures and Growth Accounting." In Science
       and Technology in Economic Growth. Edited by B.R. Williams. London:
      Macmillan, 1973.
                                    —25—



Griliches, Zvi. "Returns to Research and Development in The Private Sec-
       tor." In New Developments in the Measurement of Productivity.
       Edited by J. Kendrick and B. Vaccaro. (Studies in Income and Wealth.)
       National Bureau of Economic Research, forthcoming.


Hirshleifer, Jack. "The Private and Social Value of Information and the
       Reward to Inventive Activity," American Economic Review, LXI
       (September 1971), 561—74.


Mansfield, Edwin.   Industrial Research and Technological Innovation: An
       Econometric Analysis. New York: Norton, 1968.


Nordhaus, William D. Invention, Growth, and Welfare: A Theoretical
       Treatment of Technological Change. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press,
       1969.



Rapoport, John. "The Anatomy of the Product—Innovation Process: Cost
       and Time." In E. Mansfield and others, Research and Innovation in
       the Modern Corporation. New York: Norton, 1971. Pp. 110—35.


Sanders, J., J. Rossman, and L. Harris. "The Economic Impact of Patents,"
       Patent, Trademark and Copyright Journal of Research and Education
       (September 1958).


Scherer, Frederic M. "Firm Size, Market Structure, Opportunity, and the
      Output of Patented Inventions," American Economic Review, LV
       (December 1965), 1097—125.


Wagner, Leonore U. "Problems in Estimating Research and Development In-
      vestment and Stock," American Statistical Association. Proceedings
      of the Business and Economic Statistics Section (1968), 189—98.
