                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            TECHNICAL SYSTEMS AND INNOVATIONS
                   IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES


                      Malcolm Getz



                  Working Paper No. 317




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                         May 1979




This study was supported by grants from the Book of the
Month Club and the Scherman Foundation to the NBER. The
author is solely responsible for the views expressed.
                                                    NBER Working Paper 347
                                                                  May 1979




         Technical Systems and Innovations in Public Libraries


                                SUMMARY


    The extent of use of twenty innovations in the operation of public

libraries is examined in 31 large public library systems across the

country. The innovations include the use of computers in ordering,

cataloging, and circulating materials. The pattern of diffusion of the

innovations across the systems is explored using contingency tables and

discriminant analysis. All the large library systems seem to participate

in early adoption of some innovations; none seem to be pace—setters for

all innovations. The extent of diffusion of some innovations may be

reduced by the development of successive innovations that replace them.

Only some of the innovations seem to be climax technologies that are

likely to persist for longer periods of time.




                                       Malcolm Getz
                                       Department of Economics and
                                         Business Administration
                                       Vanderbilt University
                                       Nashville, Tennessee 37235
                                          (615) 322—2872
                                                          March 13, 1979
                                                          Malcolm Getz

            TECHNICAL SYSTEMS D INNOVATIONS IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES

      Most    libraries divide. their operations into two parts: public services

and technical services. Public services deal directly with. users in
operating facilities and giving advice. Technical services deal with

preparing and    maintaining materials for use. While the specific functions

may   not   he divided in exactly the same manner   in every library, technical
services generally involve the selecting, ordering, cataloging, and

processing of materials for use in the. library system. On average, the large

public library systems assign 12.8 percent of their staffs to technical

services. This      essay will   be concerned with technical systems   in   public

libraries including selection,cataloging and airculation control.


      Technical    services are concerned with the flow' of   newly acquired

materials     into the library. The main difference between a warehouse stacked
with books and a library- is the character of technical services applied.
Technical services give order to the materials so that they can be matched
to users as directly as possible. The selection of materials puts emphasis
on getting materials that will be used. The cataloging enterprise gives a
shelf number to each item so that the materials will be shelved near related
material. The catalog itself gives reference to the shelf number in a
variety of ways so that a user can find materials based on. titles, authors,
or subjects. Technical services may put labels, covers,. bin4ings, or anti—
theft devices on materials before placing them on shelves. Older materials
may also get preservative treatment, but that is a secondary function of
most technical service operations.

       Several other activities will be discussed here even though they
are not normally performed by technical service divisions of the libraries.
                                     —1—
                                                                      2



These activities,      however, are of a technical character and are important

areas for innovation. The èontrol of circulation records is of particular

Importance because circulation control is necessary if materials are to

be: located for use. and if theft is to be curtailed. Anti—theft activities

also   influence th.e preservation of library materials.     Other services

concern the use of microfilm materials and the availability of photocopying
services.
       Technical services are defined and possible criteria for evaluation of
technical services are discussed in a general way.         The main emphasis of the

essay   is on the pattern     of use of particular techniques. How rapidly are

particular innovations diffused over all public libraries? What features

of the public, library systems are associated with early adoption of

innovations?

                    The'   Quality of Technical Services
     The quality of technical services is an important consideration in
evaluating alternative techniques. Some ideas about judging quality are

presented here as the different technical activities are described.
Selection
       A   first problem of technical services is material selection. In some
lThraries book selection is performed by individual unit librarians, say a
branch     librarian or a subject specialist in a central.   library. Selection
aids    may include Publisherts Weekly, a periodical that lists new titles

with. brief descriptions, and other book review media. Single copies of

new    titles may be   received by libraries on approval from publishers under

an arrangement called the Graenaway Plan. tinder this regime, the. books

themselves 'may be     examined   before acquisition decisions are made by the
individual library units. Eight—one percent of 31 large public library
system surveyed currently use the Greenaway Plan as indicated in Table 1.
                                                                              3


                                        Table 1
                          Selection and Cataloging Activities
                    Means and Standard Deviations by Geographic Type


Selection                    City         Netropolitan    Suburban      All       ' or
  Greenaway Plan             13 àf 15        8 of 9       4 of 7     25 of 31
    (binary)                  86.7%           88.9%        57,1%      80.6%          3.217

 Approval Plan                1 of 15        1 of 9       3 of 7     5 of 31
    (binary)                  6.7%            11.1%        42.9%     16.1%          4.857*

 Acquisition Lag             13 of 23         11.00        7.60        11.46        0.421
   in weeks                   (9.58)         (17.01)      (4.04)      (11.51
                                  13            8           5           26

Computer   Based              5 of 15        3 of 9      4      7    12 of 31
   Ordering                   33.3%          333%        57:'j%         38.7%       1.295
   (binary)
Cataloging
 LC—MARC    Based             6   of 15      1 of 9       5 of 7     12 of 31       6.049**
   Computer Produced 40.0%                   11.1%         71.4%        38.7%
   Catalog     (binary)
Network
   cataloging                 11 of 15       5 of 9      0 of '      16 of 31       3.724
   information used           73.3%          55.5%       o.oz           51.6%
    (binary)

 .cataloging Lag              77.83           38.33       19.17      51.63          2.319
    in days                   (82.32)        (29.37)     (20.62)     (61.93)
                                  12           9            6          27

Libraries Surveyed                15           9            7          31


Source:     the author's survey of large public library systems.
          For binary variables, the number using the technique of those
          responding is indicated with the percentage given underneath.
          The chi—square statistic is reported to test for significant
          variation across the geographic types.

          For continous variables, the mean is reported with standard
          deviation in parenthesis. If not all libraries responded
          the number responding is Indicated below the standard deviation.
          An F—statistic from an analysis of variation is reported to
          test for differences in means across the geographic types.

          Statistical significance is indicate:        .01 level; ** .05 level; * .10 level.
a. OCLC, the       Ohio   Co1lege Library Center, is usei for cataloging infqrination in
most cases. The San Francisco Public Library uses Stanford University's PALLOTS
system and The San Antonio Public Library uses TRINCO. BALLOTS and TRINCO are
similar to OCLC and are treated here as if they were OCLC.
                                                                           4




Some libraries have abandoned the Greenaway Plan. Book election may
                                                                               be

centralized. In St. Louis County Library,        the   same books are. ordered for

each. branch with selection a central responsibility.         A substantial effort

is made to     order books requested by users   of the library.

      Some   libraries   use an approval plan such that a profile describing the

reading needs of the library is prepared in substantial detail and a jobber

ships books that fit the profile without individual titles having been ordered.

For example, in the fiction area a library might specifiy 10 percent

science fiction, 20 percent mystery, 10 percent romance novels, 2Q percent

westerns, and     so   on. Similar specification may    be made for each subject
area.    A variety of language and quality stipulations may       also   be made. The

bookjobber makes a detailed classification of each new title that is announced,

and sends     books that match the library's prof.ile within the constraints of
the library's budget. The library        is free to reject books received under

the approval plan and it can order books outside the plan. Five of the
31 large public libraries use some form of approval plan as indicated in
Table 1. Approval plans maybe more widespread among academic libraries.

       Brooklyn Public Library works closely with a bookjobber in selecting
      The

books. The jobber, Bookazine, prepares a list of new titles with descriptions
several weeks before publication date. TJnit librarians in the Brooklyn system
select   books from the list. The      jobber orders the books and makes them
                                                arrangement   allows the bookjobber to
available before publication date. This

order    materials prepublicat ion. from the publishers on the basis of the library's
orders. The library gets fas:ter service while retaining control of selection
in the library.
    The quality of book selection may reflect errors in acquisition, the
timing      of acquisition, and the costo selectIon. Two kinds of errors can occur
                                                                         5


in   book selection. The library can fall to buy material that would have
been used—a type L error. Alternatively, the library can buy materials
that are little or never used—a type II error. A most successful book
selection system would buy only materials that are most used and avoid
buying books that are. little. used. One. might want to assign different
values   to different uses, for example., reflecting the intensity of use

or the value of use to the user as Newfmuse and Alexander propose)
Because selections must he made before use occurs, selections are made on

the basis of expected     use.    Consequently, both type   I and   type II errors

will occur. Alternative selection methods, however, might be.           evaluated
ax   post in light of the actual type I and type II errors observed. A

circulation control system       that   tracked use by title might indicate how

many new titles had not been      used within the   first year of acquisition, an

indicator of type II error. An accounting of requests for materials not

acquired might indicate the degree of type I error. (Of course, most users

will be unaware of materials the library did not acquire.) Current library

record keeping does not measure these errors nor would        such. recordkeeping
be   justified for this purpose alone. More sophisticated control systems may

generate   such information as a byproduct. Alternatively, sample studies
might   he made at moderate cost for the purpose of comparing alternative

selection systems.

      A. second dimension of the quality of technical services is the speed

with which   materials   become available in the library. New materials are

in high demand   in public libraries;      new acquisitions are more important

in generating use than the size. of the stock of materials.
                                                                         6




The   average   length   of time a boàk spends on   the best seller list is six

months..2 The half life br new       fiction—the    length of time   in which. half

of. all readers whQ will ever read tile. book have read it is about one year,
and somewhat longer for non—fiction. Books obsOlesce. Some books have
advertising campaigns keyed to their publication date. Others have ties

to movies or television. Interest in such materials falls rapidly after

an initial boom. Demand for books          at the library may fall when a

paperback edition beèomes available. The value of materials falls with age,

especially after th.e publication date. Therefore, a library that succeeds
in making materials available to users quickly will be more valuable than a

library that takes six months from publication date to select, order,

catalog, and process new materials.

      Of 26 large public libraries willing to estimate the length of time

from publication date until a book is available on the shelf in the library

on average, the mean lag was ii. weeks. Thirteet central city libraries

averaged 13 weeks; five       suburban systems averaged eight weeks. The estimates
ranged from 52     weeks in Birmingham to zero in Brooklyn. There are important

differences in the acquisition lag across public libraries, and differences

in selection techniques may play a role.

      The public libraries may have automated ordering systems that perform

th.e accounting functions of keeping track of orders and payment. Such systems

may lower costS and increase th.e accuracy of order record keeping. Thirty—

nIne   percent   of the 31 libraries surveyed had automated ordering systems in

1978, as reported in Table 1.
                                                                            7



Cataloging   and Processing

   Once materials enter the door of the. library, they must be made

accessible to users. The first step is assigning each item a place on

a shelf and the second step is creating references to the item          by      title,

author, and subject so that users can easiiy find materials they are

interested in. The     first step   is accomplished by assigning each item a

unique catalog number that indicates where      th.e item   will   be located on

the shelf. The second step is accomplished by inserting suitable
reference to title,. author,. and subject for the new material in a master

list of materials called a catalog. The physical catalog may be a printed

book (dictionary catalog), a card file, or microfilm. The new book or other

material will be processed by the labelling of the spine, the insertion of

a mark of ownership, and perhaps a pocket and card for circulation control

purposes.

    The   quality   of the shelf arrangement will influence the ease with which

users   may browse inhopesof locating materials of interest.           The grouping

together of books on similar subjects facilitates browsing.            The basic choice

in shelf    arrangement is between the Dewey decimal system and.       the Library

of Congress    system. Most public libraries use     the    Dewey system.
     In the Dewey decimal system, each digit is an appropriate aggregation
 of each. subsequent digit: a one digit code given a gross indication of
 subject matter; a two digit code is somewhat more specific; and so on up
 to a full six digit number. For a relatively small, general collection of
 materials, the Dewey shelf order will put like materials together very
 successfully.
     For a large research collection of materials, the Library of Congress
 method may be preferred. When a new topic develops, the Library of Congress

 may introduce   a new label not in sequence with previous labels, thus certain
                                                                     8




new books may not be placed near other related materials. Users of

research   libraries   will welcome the narrower definitions of subjects and

have less concern for proximity of materials not very closely related in

subject. That is, the helrarchical nature of the Dewey system may be less

important while the better definition of individual subjects may be more

important in a large research library. Tile LC system fractures a small

or moderate size general collection because it is not especially heirarchical.

Thus, the Dewey system is used in all but the Boston Public Library among

the 31 large public library systems surveyed. The Dewey arrangement serves

public libraries well.

      The maintenance of a physical catalog once required that each book

be einfned by a skilled cataloger for the purpose of identifying subject.

Investigations may have been required to identify the author in more detail

than given by the title page so that authors with similar names were not

confused. In the first decade of this century the Library of Congress

began selling copies of its catalog cards.3 A library ordered the cards of

books   it purchased and inserted them in its card catalog. Both Dewey and LC
numbers   are printed on the card.     In this way, a library could rely on the

author,   subject and numbering   designations of the Library of Congress. Cards

are   also prepared by bookjobbers.   A library   can buy books from some
bookjobbers with catalog cards and labelling already performed to local
specifications.
      Th 1968, the   Library of Congress began Machine Readable Cataloging (MARC)
in a   form usable by other   libraries.4   The information available on cards
                                                                             9



are   entered into computer       readable form in   a standard format. For about

$2,QQQ per year, a library can         subscribe   to the IC—MARC service and receive

hi-weekly     tapes   reporting the. latest LC cataloging. (A Dewey nber is

included.) For less than $20Q per year a library can              receive   hi—weekly

microfilm     copies   of th.e LC cataloging from    private   firms.   Because    the

microfiche comes automatically as soon as LC information is available,

cataloging     information is available locally much faster         than if cards

are   ordered. Seven of the 31 libraries depend on          the microfiche as the

basic source of       cataloging   information as   reported   in table 2. Two of
the   seven create computer based catalogs locally.

      Once   a computer readable cataloging information base for local holdings
is available, a library can have a computer generated catalog at low
marginal cost. While computer based cataloging can produce dictionary
catalogs,     computer output microfiche (CON) are lower in cost. The              computer
can sort     new    entries   into a catalog much faster and more accurately than

new   cards   can be entered into a card file by hand. Periodically, the computer

file is      used to produce a new physical catalog reflecting holdings at a
particular     date. Computer output microfiche        catalogs   (CONCAT   's)   can   be
produced in     multiple      copies at very low cost; consequently, copies of a
system    catalog could be made available in each branch and outside the

system.       The   cost   of updated catalogs must be balanced against the value
of having public access to current information about holdings. Many
libraries produce revised catalogs quarterly.
                                                                        10
                                        Table 2
                          Cataloging Technique                      Circulation
City                Network      Jobber         Fiche              Control Method
Boston               OCLC                                            computer
Brooklyn                                       manual                microfilm
Chicago              OCLC       Brodart                              manual
Cleveland            OCLC                                            microfilm
Dallas               OCLC.                                           computer
Denver                          Auto                                 microfilm
Hous ton             OCLC        Brodart                             computer
Milwaukee            OCLC                                            computer
Minneapolis          OCLC        Blackwel].                          computer
New Orleans          OCLC                                            microfilm
New York                         Own-NYPL                            microfilm
Philadelphia         OCLC                                            microfilm
San    Antonio       TRINCO      Baker                               micro film
San Diego                                      manual                microfilm
San Francisco        BALLOTS                                         manual
Metropolitan
Atlanta              OCLC        bid 78                              computer
Birmingham                       Baker                               microfilm
Buffalo              OCLC                                            microfilm
Cincinnati           OCLC                                            computer
Indianapolis                                   manual                microfilm
Jacksonville         OCLC                                            microfilm
Nashville                                      manual                manual

Pittsburgh           OCLC                                            computer
Sacramento                       bid 78        manual                microfilm
Suburban
Contra Costa Co.                 Auto                                microfilm
Fairfax Co.                      Auto                                microfilm
Hennepin Co.                     Own—NYPL                            microfilm
Montgomery Co.                   bid 78         computer             microfilm
Prince Geo. Co.                                 computer             computer
St. Louis Co.                    Bordar t                            microfilm
San Diego Co.                    Auto                                microfilm

Source: Author's survey in 1978.
OCLC: Ohio College Library Center; Auto: Autographics; Baker: Baker and Taylor
Not all computer circulation control systems are system wide. Microfilm and manual
methods may also be in use in these systems.
                                                                      11


       The use of the computer as an aid in cataloging has been many

years in coming. In the early 1950's, computer cards were used to sort

cataloging information. Computer cards are limited to 80 characters of

information,, not enough to hold even the full catalog number, author's

name   and   title. Thus, such systems were of limited usefulness because

full catalog information files were not maintained. The Milwaukee Public

Library pioneered in the use of such a card based file, but has not moved

to   more complete use of the computer for cataloging.
       In the mid—1960s more sophisticated systems developed, capable of
handling more complete cataloging information files. One such system,
the Ohio College Library Center (OCLC), began batch processing Library
of Congress cataloging data files in 1968. Currently, OCLC makes cataloging
information available via computer terminals and telephone lines. Library
participants can     search   OCLC files for cataloging information, and purchase
catalog cards published on demand. Participating libraries can enter

original cataloging information for materials not located in the OCLC files.

In this way, original cataloging from a variety of sources can be shared.

Sixteen of the 31 libraries use       such   networks as sources of cataloging

information as indicated in Table 2.

       Individual libraries developed improved systems internally. More

complete cataloging information is maintained in         computer managed data
files,   such   that a variety of formats of catalogs can be ptoduced. Some
such systems have limited usefulness. The Dallas Public Library, for
example, maintains a Master Bibliographic Data Base. The Base is in a
format that does not allow sorting by subject, however, so the Data Base
can not produce a public use catalog. The card catalog must continue to
                                                                  12




    be maintained.5 The Data Base is used to produce spine labels and book

    pockets.

         More recently the Prince George's County Public Library in Maryland

    developed an internal computer produced cataloging capability. The local

    catalog data base, however, is not compatible with Library of Congress

    MARC formats so that the catalog information must be manually entered

    into the Prince George's system rather than simply being copied from

    LC—MARC tapes. The Prince George's system is remarkable because it was

    developed in 1972 after the availability of the MARC system tapes.

    Montgomery County has a similar system but developed it in 1963 before

    MARC was promulgated.

           In 1969 the New York Public Library froze their card catalog and

     began producing dictionary catalogs of new acquisitions using locally

     developed computer software. The format of the computer based catalog

     information files, however, is compatible with the Library of Congress'

     MARC tapes. Thus the New York Public System can locate Library of

     Congress cataloging information by searching computer tapes, and copy

     the information for locally acquired material into computer files repre-

     senting the local collection. The computer file of catalog information

     of locally owned materials is flexible enough to allow production of a

•    full catalog description of each item complete with author, title and

     subject references. The computer programs developed at the New York

     Public Library were transported to Hennepin County in Minnesota and are

     used there. The Bibliotheque Nationale, housed in the Pompidou Center

     in Paris, is also making use of the New York Public's computer programs.

           The nature of the costs of operating a computer generated cata—

     loging capability, however, militate against a library developing and
                                                                  13



implementing in—house systems. The costs of maintaining the capability

of searching LC—MARC tapes for cataloging information and generating a

computer file of catalog information of locally held materials is sub-

stantial. The marginal cost of processing an additional hundred titles,

given that several hundred are already being processed is quite small.

The   fixed costs of the computer based catalog operation can be   spread

over   many libraries by private contractors producing the catalogs for
many libraries.
        The catalog contractor receives a list of titles ordered or
received   by its client library. The library may search LC—MARC micro-

fiche and locate an LC—]fARC number for each new book. If the microfiche

do not contain the material, the cataloging information may be produced

locally. The catalog.jobber then searches the LC—MARC tapes and copies

the full LC cataloging information for each item the library has acquired.

Local cataloging may be introduced. Dewey numbers prepared by LC may be

used and fiction,biography, and local materials may be handled in a

variety of ways according to local specification. The jobber then pro-

duces a computer output microform   catalog reflecting the holdings of the
local library. Perhaps ten firms    offer catalog jobber services including

Autographics,   Brodart, Blackwell NA,and Baker and   Taylor.   A comparative
review   of their services is available.6

        Twelve of 31 large public library systems surveyed currently have

computer generated catalogs with cataloging information copied directly

from LC—MRC tapes and three more were seeking contractors in 1978 as

indicated in Table 2. Except for the New York Public Library and
                                                                  14



Hennepin County, catalog jobbers are used by all of these. Computer

produced catalogs are also generated in Prince George and Montgomery

'Counties   in   Maryland, but catalog information is manually introduced

into   these   systems rather than being copied from LC—MARC. Partial

bibliographic data files are manipulated on computers in Dallas,

Milwaukee, and elsewhere, but these files are insufficient to produce a

computer based catalog.

       The computer generated catalog using LC—MARC tapes as the basic

source of information appears to be the climax technology. That is,

other cataloging techniques are likely to be replaced by the catalog

jobbers using LC—MARC tapes as sources. While more sophisticated use

of computers integrating circulation control with the catalog function

are conceivable, they are likely to be built on the LC—MARC produced

local catalog rather than replacing it. In particular, the use of

catalog cards for new materials is declining and cataloging services

that are linked to cards seem likely to be replaced. The OCLC is

basically a card—oriented service and its value may decline.

        The online network systems are primarily designed to
        support the production of current cataloging materials,
        not the conversion to machine readable form of catalo—
        ging already in existence. The charges and system
        features of these systems are oriented toward the pro-
        duction of catalog cards and other printed products.7

        The conversion of existing manual catalogs to machine based cata-

 logs is costly, and may never take place in the largest libraries.

Manual catalogs can simply be frozen, and the machine based catalog begun

with materials acquired after a particular date. The cost of converting

 a manual catalog to a machine catalog may run between $1.06 and $3.28
                                                                   15



(in    1978 prices) per title depending on the number of characters of in-

formation    included in the machine based catalog.8
         The success of the LC—MARC based jobber produced catalog depends
in    part on the breadth of coverage of Library of Congress cataloging and

the speed with which LC cataloging information becomes available. For

most standard materials acquired by public libraries Library of Congress

cataloging is available in a timely manner. Prepublication cataloging

is often published in books under the Library of Congress' Cataloging

in Publication program. The Cataloging in Publication information may

change   somewhat after the book is actually published—titles, author's

names, and even subjects may have been misspecified, Therefore, most

libraries insist on ultimate LC—MARC cataloging for their catalogs.

The   libraries acquiring less than   10,000 titles annually typically find a very

high   proportion, say over 85 percent,   of the titles available on LC—MARC

at   the time material is to be cataloged.9 The main deficiencies are in
foreign materials—the    BostonPublic Library delays cataloging such
materials until LC information is available—government documents and
music, both recordings and sheet music. The delay in foreign materials
may continue, but the Library of Congress has undertaken ambitious
programs to catalog both government    documents and niusic)° If success-
ful, the   scope of LC—MARC information may   cover   the acquisitions of a
                                                                 16




very high proportion of most public libraries.

       The success of the catalog might be measured by considering the

length of time users take to locate materials, and by considering their

success rate in finding materials, given that the materials are in fact

referenced in the catalog.11 The quality of the catalog is apparently

substantially influenced by the consistency of treatment of materials as

their references are entered into the catalog. While skill on the part

of cataloging librarians in applying standard rules may be important in

maintaining consistency, another procedure may also be important. Cata-

loging systems may maintain authority files. Authority files are irtde—

pendent lists of names of people and subjects, for use in cataloging.

Considerable effort may be put into maintaining the veracity of the

authority file. New materials to be cataloged may, then, be checked

against the authority files to assure consistency in names and subjects.

In this way, materials on South America can be kept together and refer-

enced together whether called Latin America, South America or something

else. Materials by or aboutMuhammad Ali can be referenced together

whether   he is referred to as Muhammad   Au or Cassius Clay. The quality

of   the catalog will reflect the   effort put into maintaining consistency.

       The   creation of local computer based catalogs from LC—MARC tapes
may be enhanced if authority files for the local catalogs are maintained.
The software developed by the New York Public Library included     automated

authority file checks from the late 1960's. In the late 1970's the

Library of Congress is automating its authority files. An important

difference among catalog jobbers may be the extent of local authority

file checks included in the service. Among the jobbers, Autographics
                                                              17



and Library Interface Systems include both subject and name authority

file maintenance. Brodart and Blackwell include only subject authority

file checks. A major complaint with the service of OCLC and a similar

catalog information service based at Stanford called BALLOTS is the

lack of any authority files.'2

       The quality of the cataloging operation may also be indicated by

the length of time required to catalog an item. The length of time from

when an item is delivered to the library until it is ready for use was

estimated by 27 libraries. On average 52 days elapsed from delivery

to shelving as indicated in Table 1. The suburban libraries, however,

average just 19 days compared with the 78 days required on average in

city libraries. The substantial variance in the cataloging lag in each

group, however, means that the differences in means is not

statistically significant across the geographic types.

The cataloging lag may be shorter for libraries using catalog jobbers

because the request for cataloging can be made when the book is ordered,

a possibility that is examined below. Thus, the cataloging may be

available at the time the book is delivered. The cataloging lag will

then be just the time required to process the book, entering labels and

the like.

       A central difficulty with the use of a catalog jobber is the

problem of hiring, monitoring, and replacing the contractor. Many public

library systems are required to accept the lowest bid for a contract and

to rebid contracts every three years. It is difficult to include all

the   dimensions of service quality in the contract. The library will be
concerned with the speed of receipt of the catalog, with the error rate
                                                              18




in cataloging materials, and with the skill of authority file maintenance

and checking. Because contract termination for cause will invite heavy

legal expenses and possible chaos if catalog materials cannot be re-

trieved in usable form from the jobber, libraries will be understandably

reluctant to terminate contracts before they expire. Therefore, it may

be appropriate for the contracts to include penalties for slow delivery,

for high error rates, and for inadequate authority file maintenance.

When the contract is rebid a different jobber may win the contract. The

transition from one jobber to another may be difficult and expensive.

One jobber's computer files may not be compatible with another's. The

library may want to specify formats for the catalog and authority files

so that they can be easily transported to other jobbers. Perhaps a

transition period of a few months should be included in the contracts

so that the old and new jobbers can be brought together. When contracts

are rebid, a locality may want to allow the library board to choose among

the three lowest bidders both so that the contractor need not be changed

unless the gains are significant, and so that a contractor can be dis—

missed for poor performance even if it is the lowest bidder. Sophisticated

management is required of the library if contracting services are to yield

high quality services over a long period of time.


Serials

      Technical   service operations will also handle serials. Serials
include periodicals   (annual or more frequent regular appearance) as well

as other serials (items published in sequence, not necessarily with

regular periodicity). Libraries typically maintain subscriptions to

serial publications. The library   must keep track of subscriptions,
payments,   receipt of materials, alerting publishers when materials   are
                                                                   19




not received, and the cancellation of subscriptions no longer wanted.

Many libraries use computer based systems for keeping track of serials.

This study has not examined the use of computer serials control systems

in public libraries.


Alternative Materials

        The public library can avoid cataloging and processing costs by

buying paperback books and by renting books. For popular titles in

substantial demand, all of the 31 large public library systems surveyed

except the Boston Public Library buy substantial numbers of paperback

books. About 28 percent of the books purchased by the Branch Libraries

of the New York Public Library are paperbacks. The library systems

averaged 40,000 paperback volumes as indicated in Table 3.       Paperbacks

are   usually shelved in wire racks without being cataloged. Since many
paperback titles will be of little interest after a year or two and
multiple copies will not be retained by the library, the library can

lower costs by    buying paperbacks, even though they assume the books will

have   disintegrated or been lost within   two   years. Paperbacks are less
expensive than   hardbacks,   and paperbacks are handled in a way that avoids
the expense of    cataloging. Many   are shipped directly to   branches from

jobbers.

        Twenty of the 31 large public library systems surveyed rent books
as indicated in Table 3. Josten's and McNaughton's are the two principal

firms   that   rent books to libraries. The libraries can contract for    the
maintenance    of a rental collection of a particular number of volumes

in a location, say 480. One hundred and twenty new volumes may be re-

ceived each month. The library can either select titles it wants, or it

can specify a profile of interests, say 40 percent best sellers in
                                                                              20
                                        Table 3
               Materials Alternatives and Circulation Control Activities
                   Means and Standard Deviations by Geographic Type
Materials                  City        Metro         Suburb         All            F or Chi2

  Volumes of             51269.25     14751.00      35971.57      40262.43           1.693
    Paperbacks          (45079.97)    (17152.73)    (15714.37)   (36246.97)
    Acquired Annually       12             4             7           23

  Rental Books Uses      10 of 15       8 of 9         2 of 7     20 of 31           6.316**
    (binary)               66.7%         88.9%          28.6%       64.5%

  Percent of Branches       21.17        26.36          40.26       26.99            0.910
    with Microform         (32.56)      (29.44)        (28.98)      (30.86)
    Readers

  Percent of Branches      91.49         69.21          85.73       83.46            3.647**
    with Photoduplication (9.04)        (28.52)        (21.18)      (21.18)
    services


Circulation Control
  Manual System Used      2 of 15       1 of 9         0 of 7       3 of 31          0912
    (binary)               13.3%         11.1%          0.0%         9.7%

  Microfilm System Used 8 of 15         5 of 9         6 of 7      19 of 31          2.285
    but not the computer 53.3%           55.5%          85.7%        61.3%
    (binary)

  Computer Based System 5 of 15         3 of 9         1 of 7       9 of 31          0.954
    Used in Part or All  33.3%           33.3%          14.3%        29.0%
    (binary)

Anti—theft Systems
  Guards and Parcel      12 of 15       5 of 9         0 of 7      17 of 31         12.336***
    Chenks                 80.0%         55.6%           0.0%        54.8%
    (binary)

  Electronic Security    10 of 15       5 of 9         2 of 7      17 of 31          2.799
    Checks (binary)        66.5%         55.6%          28.6%        54.8%

  Either guards or     15 of 15         7 of 9         2 of 7      24 of 31         13.930***
    electronic security 100.0%           77.8%          28.6%        77.4%
    (binary)


source: author's survey of library systems.
For binary variables, the number using the technique of those responding is indicated
with the percentage given underneath. The chi—square statistic is reported to test
for significant variation across the geographic types.

For continuous variables, the mean is reported with standard deviation in parenthesis.
If not all libraries responded, the number responding is indicated below the standard
deviation. An F—statistic from an analysis of variation is reported to test for differ-
ences in means across the geographic types.
Statistical significance is indicated:      .01 level; ** .05 level; * .10 level.
                                                                   21



multiple copies, 20 percent mysteries, 10 percent science fiction, and

so on. In the later case, the rental firm will track the best seller

lists and monitor new titles and ship rental volumes according to the

profile of the branch. The .rental volumes will be shipped directly to

the branch already jacketed, processed, labelled and ready for use. The

branch library returns rental books it no longer wants, even those in the

current shipment if they are not suitable. The cost for a 480 volume

rental collection with 120 new volumes replaced each month is about $200

per month (in l978)) Lower cost plans including used books are

available. A certain fraction of the used books may be retained by the

library, and others may be purchased at low cost. The books returned

to the rental company may be rented to Other libraries as used books or

may be sold in second hand book markets.

      The Fairfax County Public Library uses a book buyback service of

the Ingram Book Company in Nashville. Ingram agrees to buyback books

within a specified period of time. The main      difference   between the

rental and buyback services seems   to   be that lost books are absorbed by

the rental firms while their cost is born by the library with the buyback

service.

      The rental—buyback services allow a library to acquire multiple

copies of popular books while incurring relatively low processing—cata-.

loging costs and with a regular procedure for weeding out unneeded books.

In this way the handling of books acquired for popular use can be kept

separate from more permanent acquisitions. The expense of processing

and cataloging materials with short usefulness are reduced by using the

preprocessed books of the rental firm.
                                                                        22



       Libraries   can also make    microform materials available   to users.

hi1e microform materials are more difficult to use because they require

a device to project the film,       the   cost per page of materials is much

lower than with print. Therefore, the same funds devoted to microform

will buy more pages than if devoted to books. Microforms also require

less storage space.       The use of microform materials in public libraries

is limited, however, to large facilities. All the systems have micro-

form readers in the system. Among 30 public systems reporting this

information, however, only Houston has microfilm readers in all its

branches, and only Fairfax, Montgomery, and. Prince George Counties have

microform readers in over half of their branches. Microforms must be

used in the library, are inconvenient, are more difficult to read than

print and so their use seems to be limited to materials that are not

widely used. Thus, it is not surprising that microforins are in use in

less than a third of the branches of public libraries.

       Many   public   libraries offer photoduplication services to patrons.

Seven of 30 systems reporting this information have photoduplication

available in every branch, as indicated in Table 3. All but three have

photoduplication in over half of the branches. The New York Public

Library does not have the service in a few older branches that have

direct   current wiring (duplication machines require alternating current).
While changes in the copyright law may discourage the use of photodupli—
cation to some extent,        such services seem t,o have found wide acceptance

in   the public libraries. Because the use of the machines         is   paid for by
patrons——coin operated machines        are   common——the equipment may generate
some revenue for the library. Photoduplication may reduce the theft and
vandalism     of materials.
                                                                 23




Circulation Control

      Libraries try to keep track of their books instead of simply

giving them away. Circulation control systems note materials that are

charged out of the library, check those that return, and send notices to

borrowers with materials overdue. Some circulation control systems may

be able to inform a patron when an item is already borrowed, and establish

a queue of future borrowers for material currently on loan. The system

may also identify inaerials that are lost. Some circulatton control

systems generate summary   information   on the circulation of materials:

for example, the number of materials circulated by type of material.

      The conventional circulation control system was a manual system.

The borrower fills out a card, the card is filed and recalled when the

material is returned. Three of the 31 library systems surveyed continue

to use the manual system of circulation control. The specific systems are

indicated in Table 2. Summaries by geographic type are given in Table 3.

Beginning sometime in the early 1950'ssome libraries began substituting

microfilm records for the manual card system. A picture is taken of the

borrower's card and a book card together with a unique transaction number.

Photography is faster than writing, and the microfilm systems apparently

speeds up check out and possibly reduces the clerical staff needed for

circulation control. When the book is returned, the card with the trans—

action number at charge—out is matched to the charge—out transaction

numbers. Cardsorters or computers may be used for this matching. Those

books for which no charge—in number is matched to the charge—out are

overdue. The microfilm record is searched for the overdue transaction

numbers. Overdue notices are produced manually from the information

available on the microfilm. Nineteen of the 31 library systems report
                                                                  24



using the   microfilm circulation control system.

        Nine of the 31 systems use more             intensive circulation

control systems. At charge out a computer readable book card and

borrower card are read by machine, creating a computer manipulable record

of the charge out. At charge in, the book information is again entered

in   computer readable form. The computer can match charge ins with charge
outs,   identify overdues, and print overdue notices using information in

a computer file on borrowers. In this respect the computer based circu-

lation control can duplicate the microfilm systems output with substanti-

ally less labor effort.

        The capability of the computer based systems exceeds that of the

manul and microfilm systems, however. First, the computer can check the

borrower's card against a list of borrowers with overdue materials. Such

a credit check can be used to deny library privileges to persons who

seldom return materials. Second, the computer can check the book against

a list of requests. A renewal, for example, can be made with the assurance

that no one else is waiting for the item. Requests anywhere in the system

can be honored by materials available anywhere else in the system. The

sophisticated handling of requests is given as an important advantage of

computer based circulation control. Third, a computer may be the base

for a self—charge system with consequent reduction in clerical staff.

        Computer based circulation control can produce very sophisticated

information about circulation as a by—product. The books can be

characterized in substantial detail by subject, level, language, and

age, for example. The monitoring of requests might also be detailed by

subject, level, and language. Such information might be used to evaluate

acquisitions policies, for example, the acquisition of multiple copies,

the use of rental materials, the length of the loan period, the type I
                                                                    25



and type II errors in book selection. While     I   doubt that any library

currently uses its circulation control system in this way, it may be

that as such systems develop their value as management tools will in-

crease.

        The quality of the circulation control systems might be evaluated

by considering the shrinkage rate for library materials. Shrinkage can

occur   through the non—return of charged out materials and through the
theft of materials without being charged out. Twenty library systems
were willing to speculate about the proportion of charged        out materials

that   were not returned. The non—return rate varied from less than a
tenth of one   percent   to eight percent, with a mean of 2.4 percent. The
theft of materials without charge out can be detected by inventorying
the   stock. Inventories are expensive, however, and thus are rarely

undertaken. Of 15 libraries that had undertaken an inventory, the mean

latest year of an inventory was 1968, ten years before the interview.

While full inventories are undertaken too infrequently to give a con-

sistent guide to theft, sample inventories might      be   undertaken more

often in order to evaluate the circulation control and anti—theft systems.


Anti—theft Systems

        An effective circulation control system can discourage the charging

out of materials by patrons who do not intend to return them. Such

patrons may be led to steal the materials they want unless measures are

taken to discourage theft. The conventional method of theft control is

guards checking   parcels at the exits of the   libraries. Seventeen     of the
31 large library systems reported guards checking parcels somewhere in
their systems. Most have such checks only in a few locations. The use
of guards and parcel checks is concentrated among central city and
                                                                          26




metropolitan systems and     is   not found in any   of   the suburban systems

surveyed.

        In the last few years electronic systems have become available to

discourage the theft of materials. A magnetic             strip   is placed in each

book or other material. If the material is taken through. the exit check,

a tattle—tale sounds off. Some systems are designed to have the material

passed around the check at exit. Others are demagnetized at check—out

and remagnetized on return. The electronic theft systems are relatively

inexpensive. The tattle—tale leases for less than a thousand dollars

a year. The magnetic strips can be inserted in the books f or 25 to 30

cents by book jobbers; in—house processing costs may be less. The strips

cost less than 10 cents per item. The theft detection strips need not

be put in the full collection. Insertion in new materials will capture

the most valuable materials. Reference and especially valuable materials

might   be   retrofitted. Electronic security devices are in use in 17 of the

31 library systems, including 10 that have guards and parcel checks

somewhere in the system. Seven use the electronic system but do not use

the guards. Seven have guards but no electronic system, and seven have

no anti—theft system. The low cost of the electronic systems should

make    an   anti—theft system appropriate for libraries that previously had

no anti—theft system. And the electronic systems should replace the

guards and parcel checks in most situations, except where guards are

required for personal security reasons whether they search parcels or not.

The effectiveness of anti—theft efforts might be judged by taking sample

 inventories to measure the shrinkage rate. One librarian commented that

 employee theft may be significant. Neither the guard nor electronic

 systems seem likely to affect employee theft.
                                                                    27




Reference Activities

        While   reference services are the purview of the public service
division of     most libraries, several technical arrangements are available

to support reference activities. A variety of large bibliographic

reference files have been entered into computer storage. The computer

can be used to search for key words to select items for a bibliography.

Chemical Abstracts, for example, can be searched in this way. A variety

of vendors provide this service via telephone lines and computer termi-

nals including    Lockheed, Bibliographic Retrieval Services, and Systems
Dynamics Corporation.      The user need pay only for the connect time (a
monthly   minimum may be   required), say   $25 per hour, and two to five cents

per citation printed out. The service is most useful to research

scholars in science and medicine. Ten of the 31 library systems offer

access to such computer bibliographic search services. (See Table 4.)

Most of the participating public libraries are central city systems.

        Some public libraries have developed their own computer based

information     retrieval systems. The New York   Public Library has an index

of community service information, a file of agencies indexed by the

problems and persons they are prepared to help. The Public Library of
Nashville indexes the local newspapers because a high proportion of
their   reference inquiries concern the local newspapers. Six of the 31
library   systems maintain some form of local index on a    computer. (See Table 4.)
        Reference   services may require information not available in the

local library. Twenty—six of the 31 systems have teletypes for use in

requesting materials via interlibrary loan. Eleven have wide area

telephone service for use in inter—library loan. Only four libraries,
                                                                          28
                                           Table 4

                          Technically Based Reference Activities
                                  Use by geographic type
                                  -




                         City         Metropolitan   Suburban       All        Chi—square

Reference Service

Computer Base           7 of 15          2 of 9       1 of 7       10 of 31       2.875
  Bibliographic          46.7%            22.2%        14.3%        32.3%
  Ref erence
  (binary)

Computer Based          4 of 15          2 of 9       0 of 7        6 of 31       2.241
  Index——locally         26.7%            22.2%         0.0%        19.4%
  operated
  (binary)

Wide—area Telephone     3 of 15          4 of 9       4 of 7       11 of 31       3.321
  Service (binary)       20.0%            44.4%        57.1%        35.5%

Teletype for inter— 13 of 15             6 of 9       7 of 7       26 of 31       3.402
  library loan        86.7%               66.7%       100.0%        83.9%
  (binary)


Electronic Accounting

Payroll (binary)        15 of 15         9 of 9       7 of 7       31 of 31
                         100.0%          100.0%       100.0%        100.0%

Personnel Records        7 of 15         6 of 9       6 of 7       19 of 31       3.222
  (binary)                46.7%           66.7%        85.7%         61.3%

Budget System            9 of 15         6 of 9       5 of 7       20 of 31       0.298
  (binary)                60.0%           66.7%        71.4%         64.5%



source: author's survey.

The number using the technique relative to those responding is indicated with the

percentage given beneath. The chi—square statistic is reported to test for significant

variation across the geographic types.
                                                                  29



Denver,   Cleveland, Indianapolis, and Atlanta, indicate having neither

teletype nor wide area telephone service for use in seeking materials

or information via interlibrary loan.


Electronic Accounting FunctiOns

       Data processing is used in the pUblic libraries for routine

accounting functions. Payrolls may be prepared, personnell records may

be maintained, and budget records may be processed by computers. These

activities may be moved to computers on a city—wide basis. That is, the

city or county government may introduce computer based payrolls for all

employees, including those in the library. Thus the decision to adopt

computer based accounting systems may be made outside the library. The

use of these activities is considered here so that the possible inter-

action between library specific data processing activities and city—wide

data processing activities can be considered. Autonomous library

systems, however, may act alone in adopting electronic accounting

functions.     The payrolls of all the public library systems surveyed

are prepared electronically, as indicated in Table 4. Personnell and

budget records are handled electronically in over 60 percent of the

library systems.


                 Rates of Diffusion of Innovations

       The above descriptions of technical services indicates that sub—

stantial   technological change   is occurring in the public libraries.

Innovations have appeared in a wide variety of areas of library activities;

some   are related to the use of computers while others are not. It may
be   appropriate to examine the pace of technological change. How rapidly
do innovations spread from the time a first library begins a new practice
                                                                  30



until   all   similar libraries are using the practice? Are   there   easily

rècOgnizablè characteristics of early adopters that might indicate the

motivation for technological change? Answers to these questions may

suggest policies that might promote useful technological change.


DiffusiOti Paths

        When a library evaluates a new practice, it must decide on the

basis of limited evidence whether the benefits of the new practice will

justify the costs. Until the library has experience with the practice

itself, it will not know for certain its benefits and costs. A library

that picks up every possible new practice will incur substantial costs

in discovering practices that are worthwhile because many practices will

fail. A library that always delays the adoption of innovations will

incur the costs of maintaining expensive antiquated systems when cost

saving, output enhancing new practices are available. The optimal inno-

vation strategy involves some balance between picking up untried

practices quickly when they work, and avoiding costly failures. Because

the adoption decision must    be   made on limited evidence, this balance may

not   be easily struck.                               -




        From an Industry point of view, some libraries must be willing to

experiment with new practices. Once a few libraries have found success

with a new practice, other libraries can act more confidently in mimicking

the new practice. The pattern of the diffusion of innovations from early

to later adopters generally traces a sigmoidal curve.14 That is, cumu-

lative percentage of libraries that have adopted will grow slowly at
                                                             31



first during a trial period. If the innovation is successful, the pace

of diffusion will accelerate. Once most have adopted the pace will

decelerate again.

      The patterns of diffusion of twenty innovations across the 31

large public library systems surveyed are described in Table 5. The

year of first use indicated by any of the surveyed systems is reported

in the first column. The proportion of systems currently using the

practice is reported in the second column. Only three of the 20 Inno-

vations began before 1950, thus only recent innovations are being con-

sidered. Only three of the innovations are currently used in all the

surveyed library systems, suggesting that on average over thirty years

are required from first use by a system until a practice becomes universal.

This conclusion may be unwarranted, however, for several reasons.

      The diffusion rates are explored further by noting the year when

half of the systems were using the technique, reported in the third

column of Table 5).5 The number of years from first use to 50 percent

use is reported in Column 4 of Table 5, with linear extrapolations in

parentheses for practices that have not yet reached 50 percent use. (The

linear extrapolations will overstate the time to 50 percent adoption if

the diffusion path is sigmoidal.) Of the twenty innovations, nine took

more than 15 years to reach 50 percent adoption. But of these nine, four
                                              Table5                         32

                                  STJIIMARY OF DIFFUSION PATTERNS

                                           Year of    Percent   Year when Years from   Number of
                                          First Use of systems 50 percent introduc—    Libraries
                                        in surveyed currently were using tion to       Using but
                                         libraries    using    innovations   50% (b)   no year give
                                                                                          (c)
Acquisitions
  Greenaway Plan                            1954        806a        1963       9           5

  Approval Plan                             1972        16.1                 (16)          0
  Computer Based Ordering                   1965        38.7                 (17)          0

Cataloging
  LC—MARC Based Catalog                     1969        38.7         ——      (12)          0
  Cataloging Network                        1973        51.6        1978          5        0

Materials
  Paperbacks                                1958        96.8        1970      12           4

  Rental Books                              1957        645a        1974      17           3

  Microform Readers                         1939       100.0        1949      10          13

  Photoduplication                          1954       100.0        1964      10           5


Circulation Control
  Microfilm                                 1948        613a        1964      16           2

  Computer based                            1972        29.0         ——      (10)          0

A±tti—Theft Systems
  Guards and Parcel Checks                  1892        548a        1978      86           4
 'Electronic Security Devices               1969        548a        1978          9        1

Reference Service
  Computer based information retrieval.     1967        32•3a                (17)          1
  computer based local index                1969        19.4                 (23)          0
  WATS line                                 1968        35.5         ——       (14)         0

  Teletype                                  1960        83.9        1969          9        3


Electronic Accounting Functions
  Payroll                                   1960       100.0        1968          8        3
  Personnell                                1960        61.3        1977      17           1

  Brudget                                   1966        64.5        1975          9        1


Source: author's survey
  a. The technique may have been abandoned by some library systems.
  b. Linear explorations are given in parenthesis for innovations that have not reached
        50 percent diffusion.
  c. A count of the respondents using the technique, but who could not indicate when first
        use occurred. These are assumed to be among the first 50 percent adopting.
                                                                   33



have been abandoned by some library systems. Thus it seems the average

time to full diffusion f or innovations that will be universally adopted

is somewhat less than thirty years (assuming symmetry between the first

50 percent and the second 50 percent of adoption). Overall the pace of

diffusion of innovations in libraries is faster than in urban fire depart-

ments and   compares favorably with the pace elsewhere in the economy.16
        The process of the diffusion of innovations may   be   slowed by the

complex   interaction   among innovations. In particular, we observe new

innovations becoming available to replace older innovations before the

older innovations are fully diffused. Thus, a late corner may leapfrog

certain technologies and move directly to the most recent technology.

For example, a library currently using a manual cataloging system could

now move directly to using a catalog contractor to prepare computer

based   catalogs. Such a library may never make use of intermediate com-
puter based bibliographic files such as those in Milwaukee and Dallas.
Moreover,   such a library might never make use of the cataloging networks,

such as OCLC. For another example, a library using a manual circulation

control system might move directly to a computer based circulation control

system without ever using the microfilm systems. Security is a third area

where the electronic systems are being adopted by libraries that never

used guards and parcel checks.

        Technologies     may have finite lives defined by

the introduction of subsequent techniques. Innovations might therefore be

classified by the likelihood of their obsolescence. An Innovation that

seems likely to become obsolescent might be termed an intermediate

technology. An innovation that seems likely to persist for a long period
                                                                 34




of time might   be   called a climax technology. The extent of diffusion

of a particular innovation is likely to be influenced by the likelihood

that the technology will become obsolete. A climax technology is likely

to be diffused more widely than an intermediate technology. The fact

that only three of the twenty innovations studiedhave reached universal

application among surveyed libraries reflects the fact that many of the

innovations studied are intermediate technologies. Newer technologies

dominate the intermediate technologies for many libraries.

      The pattern of diffusion will also be influenced by the extent of

local development required to make a technique useful in an individual

library system. Modular innovations that can be introduced immediately

into a library with little modification of existing programs and proce-

dures will be expected to be adopted more quickly than innovations that

require the development of new procedures, and substantial adaptation to

local circumstances. A coin—operated photoduplication service can be

plugged in (where alternating current is available) and the service pro-

vided with very little local development expense and little impact on

other library operations. The use of a cataloging network like OCLC can

be introduced with little modification in cataloging practices. The

local card catalog remains intact, and control of the cataloging function

is retained in house. In contrast, the use of an approval plan relocates

the responsibility for selection and may change the activities of most

of the professional library staff. Use of a catalog jobber to produce a

computer output microfiche catalog replaces the card catalog, potentially

a significant part of the cataloging staff (at least compared to manual

cataloging). Much of the control of the catalog passes to the jobber.

This may explain why the use of the catalog network has diffused much
                                                                    35



more rapidly than the use of the LC—MARC computer generated catalog even

though the LC—MARC catalog may be a climax technology.

         The pace of diffusiOn may also reflect differences in the services

public libraries seek to provide. A system with no central library,

concentrating its resources on the current demands of readers may be more

interested in approval plans to get books quickly, paperback books to

make more current materials available, and jobber cataloging to reduce

catalog lags. Such a library may never adopt computer based information

retrieval. A system with more commitment to research support services

with    a large central library may adopt microform readers, and a WATS
line more quickly. They may be more reluctant to give up the decentral-
ized management of     selection, cataloging, and circulation control that

computer based systems threaten.

         Overall   the patterns of diffusion reported in Table   5 reflect

characteristics      of the innovations—how quickly will they obsolesce and
how   easily are they adapted to a local library——and    characteristics of

the   libraries——how well does the innovation meet the particular objectives
of the library? Given these factors,       the pace of innovation among the

large public libraries seems reasonably swift.


Early Adoption

        The process of innovation may be explored by looking for patterns

among   early   adopters of innovations. One issue is whether the same

libraries   tend to be early adopters of a variety of innovations, or

whether most libraries participate in early adoption of some innovations.

A second issue is whether libraries that are among early adopters of
particular innovations are different in obvious ways from later adopters.
                                                                       36




       These issues are explored by classifying each library as either

an early or late adopter. For innovations that have not reached 50 per-

cent diffusion, all current users are treated as early adopters. For

innovations that have exceeded 50 perèent diffusion, all systems who

adopted through the year when 50 percent diffusion was reached are

treated as early adopters. The number of libraries treated as early

adopters is indicated in the first column of Table 6. In some cases a

substantial number     of   libraries adopted the innovation in the year the

50 percentile of diffusion is reached, thus       the   number of early adopters

exceeds 50 percent in several cases.

       The interdependence of early adoption is examined        to   determine

whether   early   adoption of one innovation is related to early adoption of

others. Contingency tables are constructed for each pair of innovations.

An   individual   library can be classified in four ways: adopted both

innovations early; adopted neither innovation early; adopted innovation A

early and B late; adopted B early and A late. The contingency' tables

for each pair if innovations are summarized in Table ô.The first number

is the number adopting both innovations early; the second is the number

of libraries adopting either or both innovations early. Random distribu-

tion of the 31 libraries over the four cells of the contingency table

should put about 8 libraries in each cell when 15 or 16 are treated as

early adopters. In this case the first number in Table 6 should be near

8 and the second number should be near 24. If the adoption of one inno-

vation is a necessary first step to adoption of another, or if circum-

stances that lead to the adoption of one also lead to the adoption of

another, then early adopters of one innovation should be early adopters

of the' other. The first number indicated in Table 6 should be large and

the second number should be relatively small. Very few such circumstances
                                                                 Table   6
                                                     Early   Adoption Comparisons
                             Number in
                           Early Adopter   Greenaway Approval     LC—MARC        Paper                       Microfilm      Circ.       Circulation
                               Group                       Ordering      Network                       Reñtáls     Photodup Micro         Computer


Approval Plan                     5           4/15

Computer Ordering                12           5/23     3/14
LC—MARC based catalog            12           5/23     3/14     6/18

Cataloging Network              16            7/25     1/20     6/22     4/24

Paperbacks                       22          11/27     4/23     9/24     8/26       10/28
Rental Books                    17           11/22     4/18     6/23     5/24        9124:    13/26
Microform Readers               17           11/22     4/18     6/23     5/24       11/22     12/21    12/22

Photoduplication                 17          9/24      2/20     6/23     8/21       11/22      9/30* 10/24     12/22
Microfilm Circulation            16          10/21     4/17     8/20     5/23        9/23     11/27     9/24    7/26    8/25

Computer Circulation              9          4/21      2/12     5/16      3/18       8/17*     5/26     4/22    5/21    6/20    5/20
Guards                           17          10/23     2/20     5/24     5/24       12/21*     9/30*    8/26   11/23   11/23   11/22      5/21
Electronic Theft                17            7/26     2/20     7/22     5/24       11/22     12/27     9/25    9/27    8/26    9/24      7/19
Information Retrieval           10            7/19     2/13     5/17     4/18        6/20      6/26     7/20    5/22    8/19    9/17*     4/15
Local Computer Index             6            3/19     0/11     3/15     3/15        4/18      1/27*    4/19    2/21    5/18    5/17      2/13
WATS line                        11          5/22      3/13     3/20     6/17        5/22      6/27     7/21    6/22    7/21    3/24      3/17

Teletype                        15           9/22      2/18     6/21     7/20        9/22     10/27     6/26    9/23   10/22    7/24      5/19

Payroll                         17           9/24      2/20     6/23     6/23        9/24     11/28     7/27    9/25   11/23   8/25       3/23
Personnel                       15          10/21      3/17     7/20     6/21        8/23     12/25     8/24   10/22    7/25    8/23      4/20

Budget                          17          11/22      3/19     8/21     6/23        8/25     14/25     9/25    9/25    9/25   10/23      5/21
Number    in Early   Adopter                  16         5       12          12       16        22       17      17      17      16         9
  Group
Note:  The first number is the number of library systems that were among the first 50 percent of libraries to adopt both
innovations. The second number indicated the number of libraries that were among the first half adopters for either
innovation.     The total number of systems examined is 31.            Statistical significance of a chi—square test of a contingency
                                                                             *    indicates   lack of independence at the 10 percent level.
table indicates whether the early adoptions are independent.
                                                  Table 6——continued




                     Number in     Guards        Info.      WATS              Payroll
                   Early Adopter         Electr. Retr. Local          Thletype          Personnel
                       Group              check        index




Electronic Theft         17        10/24
Information Retrieval    10         6/21   5/22
Local Computer Index      6         4/19   3/20    4/12
WATS1ine                 11         5/23   5/23    2/19   2/15

Teletype                 15        10/22   7/25    6/19   2/19 6/20

Payroll                  17        12/22   9/25    6/21   3/20 6/22   10/22
Personnel                15         8/24 '7/25     3/22   3/18 5/21    8/22      6/26

Budget                   17        10/24   8/26    4/23   2/21 6/22    8/24      9/25   12/20*
Number in Early                      17     17      10      6    11     15        17      15
  Adopter Group
                                                                     39



are found   in Table 6. Another possibility is that adoption of one inno-

vation precludes the adoption of another. In this case, the first

number should be small and the second large. This case is not found in

the Table either. Therefore, the adoption of each innovation studied

seems relatively independent of the adoption of the other innovations.

A formal statistical test of this independence is performed by calculating

a chi—square statistic for each contingency table. While the chi—square

statistics are not reported, those cells of Table 6 with statistically

significant chi—square statistics are indicated by asterisks. Of 190

contingency tables calculated, only seven have chi—square statistics

suggesting interdependence at the 10 percent level. Of these only the

interaction of automated budgeting and personnel records seems consistent

with some strong technical link. It does not seem to be the case that

libraries that have adopted some computer based innovations have tended

to be early to adopt others. Nor have early adoption of computer based

accounting systems——payroll and personnell——been associated with early

adoption of library specific computer systems.

        No small group of library systems seem likely to stand out as

especiaily innovative, rather most libraries seem to participate in the

early use of some innovations. This pattern may be desirable. The

early use of innovations may involve investment in development that can

be avoided by latecotners. Early users may also incur more risk of

failure than latecoiners. Therefore, it may be appropriate that most

library systems participate in testing innovations. The innovations are

also   quite varied such that different circumstances may apply      in the

adoption    of each. Therefore, it   is   not surprising that no single group
of   the 31 library   systems surveyed stands out   as   trend setters in   all

areas   of library innovation.
                                                            - 40


     The specificcharacteristics of library systems who are early

adopters is explored for each innovation by means of discritninant ana—

lysis. The explanatory variables are the same as those used in an

analysis of library inputs and fall into three groups.17 First, the

cost of labor to the library, indicated by the compensation of a recruit

librarian, may influence the decision to innovate. If some innovations

are viewed as labor saving, libraries with higher labor costs would be

expected to adopt them before libraries with lower labor costs.

      Second, the fiscal circumstances of local government may influence

the innovation decision. This effect may work in two directions, how-

ever. On the one hand, the development of an innovation may require

slack resources. Some of the innovations require large setup costs in

order to lower continuing costs. Library systems in local areas with

hither expenditures per capita and larger levels of intergovernmental

revenues per capita would be expected to adopt such innovations first.

On the other hand, high levels of local government expenditures may

reflect high competing demands from other agencies and so may indicate

less available to finance change in the library. Therefore, the

direction of association between local governments' own expenditures

per capita and intergovernmental revenues per capita and the early

adoption of innovations is ambiguous. A more detailed characterization

of the local fiscal scene is very difficult. The flexibility of

operations may differ for libraries that operate somewhat autonomously

from local governments than for those that are departments. A department

may have less flexibility to incur the fixed costs of computer systems

in order to save operating costs, for example.

      Third, the demographic characteristics of the areaserved may
                                                              - 41



influence the decision to innovate. Large systems may be better able to

incur the costs of developing new practices. Some new techniques may

involve economies of scale so that only larger systems can use them.

On the other hand, very large systems may be more bureaucratic, and

managers may find innovation more difficult. The population of the area

measures the size of the system.

        Areas with more educated adults use the public library more inten-

sively and so certain innovations may be more useful in such libraries.

Adults in central cities tend to have lower education levels than those

in the suburbs, yet the central city systems tend to have larger central

libraries and more specialized library services than the suburbs. Inno-

vations such as microfilm readers that meet specialized needs would seem

more likely tobe adopted in central city systems before being adopted

by suburbs.

        Finally, the recent growth in population in the area serviced may

 influence the innovation decision. Rapid growth may pressure a library

 system such that new techniques are sought. A library system in a

 growing area may be less tied to traditional practices. Innovation may

be easier with growth.

        Standardized discriminant coefficients for each of twenty discritni—

 ant analyses are reported in Table 7. Each is reported such that a posi-

 tive sign on the coefficient indicates that that variable is associated

 with   a higher probability of being an early adopter. The rank order of
 the coefficients in each analysis indicates the relative importance of
 each variable in discriminating early from late adopters. The chi—square
 statistic for each analysis allows a probability statement about the
 ability to discriminate.
                                                                           Table 7


                                                 Standardized Diacriminant Coefficionta for Early Adopters

                    Greenaway   Approval         EDP          MARC           Network       Paper          Rental      Microfilm      Photo—        Circulation
                      Plan        Plan         Ordered     Cataloging      Cataloging      Books          Books                      Duplication    Microfilm

Number in early       16            5           12              12             16           22               17           17             17                16
user group

Labor Cost           —0.193      —0.006         0.813        0.145           0.338        +0.393         —0.674        —0.237          0.349              0.539
                       (5)          (7)          (2)           (5)            (4)           (2)              (2)         (5)            (3)                (4)


Own Net              —0.490        0.291        0.080        0.105           0.256        —0.254         —0.113         0.360          0.209          —0.459
Expenditures           (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)            (6)           (4)              (6)         (3)            (4)                (5)



Intergovernmental    0.739       —0.231         0.495       —0.660           —0.520        0.338         —0.164         0.009         —0.396              0.066
Expenditures           (1)          (5)          (3)           (3)             (2)          ()               (5)         (7)            (2)                (7)


Department           —0.558       —0.533        0.084         0.057          0.121         0.186          0.253         0.542         —0.001          —0.395
(binary)               (2)          (2)          (4)           (7)             (1)          (5)              (4)         (2)            (7)                (6)


Population           —0.116        0.130       —1.393        0.964           —0.309       —0.085         —0.031        0.295           0.096          —0.631
l90                    (7)          (6)          (1)           (2)             (5)          (7)              (7)         (4)            (5)                (3)


Percent of Adults     0.131        0.585       —0.007         0.992          —0.606        0.760          0.566        0.142           0.067         —1.158
High School            (6)          (1)          (7)           (1)             (1)          (1)              (3)         (6)            (6)               (1)
                                                                                              -
Graduates

Percent growth       —0.313        0.494        0.074       —0.154           —0.397        0.139        —0.985        —0.797         —0.825           0.722
1960—1970              (4)          (3)          (6)           (4)             (3)          (6)              (1)         (1)            (1)               (2)


Chi—square            4.740        7.799        7.333         6.064          17.632**     6.398         13.226*        4.096         10.290           4.669

Percent Correctly     64.52        77.42        70.97         70.91          83.81         77.42        87.10          74.19          77.42           61.29
Classified

Note: First number is the standardized diacriininant coefficient where a positive sign indicates a greater probability of
                                                                                                                          being an early adopter if the
variable is larger) other things equal. The second number, in parentheses, is the rank order of the standardized diacriminant  coefficients in absolute
value. Statistical significance is indicated: ** .05 level; *** .01 level.
                                                                    Table 7 ——   Continued


                                                              EDP             EDP            VATS     Teletype   Payroll   Personnel   Budget
                      Computer     Guard     Electronic
                                                                             Index           Line                  EDP        EUP        EDP
                    Circulation                Check      Information

                                                                                  6           11         15        17        15          17
                        9           17          17           10
Number In early
user group
                                                                             —0.118          —0.446    0.326     —0.083      1.137      0.778
                      0.343       0.101        0.599       —0.222
Labor   Cost                                                                                            (3)        (5)        (1)        (2)
                                                (1)           (6)                 (5)          (4)
                        (4)         (6)


                                                            —0.562               0.012       0.537     0.195     —0.054     —0.176     —0.451
Own Net               0.623       —0.060      —0.482
                                                                                  (7)          (1)      (6)        (6)        (6)        (4)
                        (3)         (5)         (2)           (1)
Expenditures

                                                                             —0.549          —0.077    0.394      0.603     0.254       0.572
                      —0.932       0.010       0.120        —0.333
Intergovernmental                                                                              (7)      (1)        (1)        (5)        (3)
                        (1)         (7)         (7)           (4)                 (2)
Expenditures

                                                                                 0.099       0.510    —0.079      0.302      0.057      0.063
                      —0.625       0.050      —0.300        —0.207
Department                                                                        (6)          (2)      (7)        (3)        (7)        (6)
                        (2)         (6)         (3)           (7)
(binary)


                                                                             —0.385          -0.482    0.364      0.580     —1.128     —1.161
                      —0.252       0.102       0.232         0.542
Population                                                                        (3)          (3)      (2)        (2)        (2)        (1)
                        (5)         (3)         (5)           (2)


                                                                             —1.027          0.229     0.242     —0.103     —0.300     —0.026
                       0.026      —0.819      —0.196        —0.254
Percent of Adults                                                                                                  (4)        (4)        (7)
                                                (6)           (5)                 (1)          (6)      (5)
High School             (7)         (1)
Graduates
                                                                                 0.230       —0.301   —0.296      0.013      0.334      0.075
                      —0.052      —0.163      —0.249        —0.466
Percent growth                                                                                                     (7)        (3)        (5)
                                                              (3)                 (4)          (5)      (4)
                        (6)         (2)         (4)


                                                                                 10.499       4.700    8.242      5.589     11.080     15.474**
                       7.575      16.644**     3.215         3.291
Chi—square
                                                                                  74.19       74.19    70.97      64.52      80.65      80.65
                       70.97       83.87       61.29         64.52
Percent Correctly
Classified
                                                               44




      Overall, the discriminant exercise is not very successful as re-

presented in Table 7. Only four of the twenty discriminant functions

are statistically significant at the 5 percent level with the chi—square

test: Network Cataloging, Guards, Rental Books, and Automated Budgeting.

That is, given the values of the seven variables used in the exercise, one

can make a statistically meaningful estimate of which libraries would

adopt a particular innovation early for only four innovations. A second

thod for observing the ability to discriminate early from late adopters

on the basis of library characteristics is to calculate what proportion

of the libraries are correctly classified as early or late by the dis—

criininant function. The value of each variable is multiplied by the dis—

criminant coefficient and the products are summed for each library,

establishing a discriminant score. If the score is greater than some

critical value, the library is predicted to be an early adopter. The pro-

portion correctly classified is reported at the bottom of each column in

Table 7.   Sirrce the classification is based on the same libraries from

which the discriminant functions were estimated, the classification exer-

cise is not statistically meaningful, yet the values make clear the nature

of the discriminant functions. Coin flipping would tend to classify 50

percent of the libraries correctly, so a powerful discrixninant function

should correctly classify a much higher proportion of the libraries.

Over eighty percent of the libraries are correctly classified for only

five innovations: the same four indicated by the chi—square statistic

and automated personnel records.

      The role of individual variables in discriminating early from late

adopters——other things equal——is summarized in Table 8. The variables

in the first and second largest coefficients when ranked in absolute value
                                                                                  45

                                        Table 8
                         Summary of Discriminant Functions
                        First or Second Bank Coefficients


                              Negative                         Positive
Labor Costs                 Rental Books*                     Paperback Books
                                                              Electronic Security
                                                              Automated Personnel*
                                                              Automated Budget*
                                                              Automated Ordering
Own Net Expenditures         Electronic Security              WATS line
per capita                   Information Retrieval


Intergovernmental           Network Cataloging*               Greenaway Plan
Expenditures per            Photoduplication                  Teletype
capita                      Computer Circulation              Automated Payroll
                            Computer Index


Department                   Greenaway Plan                   Microfilm
(binary)                     Approval Plan                    WATS line
                             Computer Circulation

Population                  Automated Ordering                 LC—MARC based cataloging
1970                        Automated Personnel*               Information Retrieval
                            Automated Budget*                  Teletype
                                                              Automated Payroll
Percent of Adults            Network Cataloging                Approval Plan
High    School              Microfilm Circulation              LC—MARC   based cataloging
Graduates                   Guards*                            Paperback Books
                                                               Computer Index

Percent Growth               Rental Books*                     Microfilm Circulation
in Population                Microfilm
1960—1970                    Photoduplication
                             Guards *



Note:     The classifications   reported   here summarize the discriminant

functions reported in Table 7. *These innovations were over 80 percent

correctly classified by the discriminant functions.
                                                                46




are reported for each innovation. No single observed factor is pushing

early adoption of innovations. Each variable is positively and negatively

associated with early adoption of different innovations. High labor

costs seems associated with early use of the automation of several

accounting   and record keeping functions, but has played no strong role with
automation   of cataloging or circulation innovations. Fiscal stringency,

representedby lower per capita expenditures from own sources and from

intergovernmental sources on local government functions other than libra-

ries, is associated with early adoption of some innovations, including

network cataloging and computer based circulation. Yet the fiscal

variables appear important for only a few of the innovations.

      Libraries that are departments of city governments seem somewhat

less likely to adopt approval plans and computer based circulation

control systems early, suggesting that the flexibility of more autonomous

library organization may be important for early adoption of these inno-

vations. Yet this association is found to be important for only a few

innovations.

      The characteristics of the area served by the library also seem

important for early adoption of some innovations. Larger libary systems

seem more likely to have adopted LC—MARC computer generated catalogs

and automated payrolls early. Yet smaller library systems seem to have

been more likely to adopt automated ordering, personnel records, and

budgets early. Areas with more adults who are high school graduates

seem less likely to have adopted network cataloging and more likely to

have adopted LC—MARC computer based cataloging and approval plans. Areas

that grew more rapidly in the 1960's seem more likely to have adopted

microfilm circulation control systems early, but less likely to have been
                                                              47




early users of rental books, microfilm readers, photoduplication, and

guards. In part these differences may reflect differences among city,

metropolitan and suburban systems.

      Overall, it is difficult to generalize about the features of

library systems that are early adopters of innovations. Each innovation

has its ovm characteristics and consequently different factors seem

important for the early adoption of different innovations. The hypothesis

about the role of high labor costs, fiscal stringency, and the size and

growth of the area served each find modest confirmation in the evidence

but none are important for more than a few innovations. The process of

early adoption of innovations is complex.


Interaction Between Inputs and Innovations

      The effort to explain early use of innovations relative to the ex-

ternal characteristics of library systems subsumes the fact that other

input choices the library makes may be important in the decision to adopt

an innovation. For example, a library acquiring more materials and more

titles may have greater need for new cataloging aids. Therefore, it is

appropriate to compare the inputs of libraries that have adopted an inno-

vation with those that have not. The difficulty with such a comparison

is that the choice of inputs and innovations may be simultaneous. n

innovation may allow a library to acquire more titles than it previously

did, just as the acquisition of a large number of titles may influence

the decision to innovate, say, in cataloging. A high cost library may

innovate and the innovations may lower costs. Both effects will shape a

 comparison or costs between innovators and noninnovators. Thus the com-

parison of input levels between library systems using an innovation and
                                                             48




those not using an innovation is for descriptive purposes rather than

an exercise to explore causes of innovation.

      The mean value of the input is reported separately for the library

systems that have innovated and for those that have not. An F—statistic

indicates whether the difference between the two means is statistically

significant. One input variable is binary, indicating whether the chief

librarian had been promoted from within the library. A chi—square test

indicates whether there is a statistically significant association between

adoption and promotion from within. The statistics are reported in Table

9. Five innovations that might be expected to have important associations

with other library inputs are examined.

      Do the major technical service innovations lower library expendi-

tures? Library expenditures per capita are higher in libraries that have

LC—MARC cataloging than in those that do not; similarly for those with

computer based circulation control. The higher expenditure levels, how—

ever, may indicate that the innovating library systems offer higher levels

of service or face higher labor costs. Perhaps the higher costs have led

to innovations as cost saving measures. One cannot infer that the inno-

vations have raised costs.

      In a very few instances there are associations between the main

library activities and the innovations. Libraries with computer based

ordering systems have fewer locations per square mile and have more

volumes in stock per capita than those that have not adopted that inno-

vation. Libraries with computer based circulation control buy more

titles. There is no difference in branch hours per week or in public

service staff per capita among libraries with these innovations than

those without. Libraries using cataloging networks have a larger propor—

tion of their public service staffs in the main library. Perhaps the
                                       Table 9
                        Library Inputs and Innovation Interactions
                   Average of Sample with/without innovation; F—Statistic

                                                           LC—MARC                        Computer
                                                           Computer                        Based
                                 Computer
                                 Based       Approval      Generated       Cataloging     Circulation
                                 Ordering    Plan          Catalog         Network         Control
                    with/with—   12/19       5/26          12/19           18/13          9/22
   bna:em8
Library Expenditure              7.02/6.07   6.64/6.40     8.05/5.41       6.73/6.63      8.44/5.62
per capita                         0.468       0.017         4.031*          0.254          3.996*

Locations                        0.08/0.23   0.07/0.19     0.19/0.16       0.19/0.16      0.14/0.1.9
per square mile                    3.208*      1.269         0.110           0.098          0.184

Acquisitions per capita    166.82/132.35 132.99/148.14 149.04/143.57         151.17/138.11 l47.9t4 76
thousand population annual      2.235      0.230       0.053                 0.309        0.016

Titles Cataloged                               11.99/19.97   22.33/16.38   22.48/13.42    26.30/15.56
                              13.84/21.73
                                  1.932         1.094        1.067           2.675          3.239*
Annually in Thousands

Volumes in Stock                               2.28/2.00     2.02/05       2.18/1.85       2.30/1.93
                                 2.34/1.85
                                   2.895*       0.490        0.013           1.249          1.329
per capita

                                                             47.41/48.61   47.87/48.52    46.11/48.98
Hours per week in                48.24/48.08 47.54/48.26
                                              0.018          0.086           0.026          0.437
Branches                           0.001

Public Service Staff                           0.35/0.31     0.34/0.31     0.33/0.30       0.35/0.31
                                 0.33/0.31
                                                0.443        0.593           0.519          0.682
per thousand population            0.251

Percent of public                40.72/36.69    38.99/38.16 33.87/40.87     41.11/34.6     40.64/37.30
                                                0.023       2.970*           2.657          0.562
service staff professional         0.953

Percent of Public Service        31.46/35.09    22.41/35.88 27.09/37.43     40.46/24.71    41.34/30.34
                                   0.282        2.426       2.384            6.684**        2.450
Staff in Main Library
                                     Table   9    ——   Continued                             Computer
                             Computer        Approval         LC-MARC        Cataloging       Based
                             Based             Plan           Computer        Network       Circulation
Number of SyBtems with/with— Ordering                         Catalog                        Control
out Innovation                 12/19             5/26           12/19          18/13          9/22

Year Chief Librarian           5.67/8.95         6.60/7.88     7.42/7.84       7.50/7.92      6.89/8.00
has been chief                   3.164*          0.252         0.048            0.049          0.287

Chief Promoted from within     42.1/50.0         42. 3/60.0    42.1/50.0       38.9/53.8      33.3/50.0
the Library (binary)             0.004           0.056         0.004            0.212          0.201
(chi—square test)

Cataloging Lag in Days
                               49.5453.O6        334855.68     5847.59         6.38.58 8j/44.68
Acquisition Lag in Weeks       15.1/9.18         12.5/11.27    16.44/8.82      10.93/12.18     9.63/12.28
                                 1.668           0.037         2.763            0.072          0.286
Total Technical Service
                               46.17/45.60       34.1/48.17    45.39/46.08     54.35/34.68     58.5/40.39
                                 0.003           1.111         0.004            4.256**
Percent of Technical Service   25.13/22.91       17.99/24.96 19.34/26.38   25.47/21.62    24.25/23.61
Staff Professional               0.266           1.601       2.845           0.841        0.020
                                                                                      928.04/600.76
Technical Service Labor     749.070/665.52       493.06/740.12 686.28/706.27  847.90/504.15
Cost in thousands of dollars     0.217           1.131         0.012         4.292**      3/217*

Technical Service Labor Cost   55.28/34.68   42.09/43.09 42.30/43.28          44.93/40.30    44.09/42.42
per Title                        6.292**     0.007       0.011                 0.269          0.029
                                                                                51




networks are more valuable for main library sources.

        One   might expect   that the electronic innovations examined here,

especially approval plans, ordering systems, the LC—MARC cataloging and

the computer based circulation control would enable a library system to

be more centrally managed. Thus technical librarianship skills might be

applied in central decisions, while individual library units could be

operated successfully with less professional skill. One might also ex-

pect smaller and less professional technical service staffs. Pew

such effects are apparent from comparing input levels between innovators

and   non—innovators.    Those libraries with LC—MARC computer generated

catalogs have a smaller fraction of public service workers professionally

trained. One would expect, however, that the strongest effect on the

public service division would be for ordering, selection, and circulation

control rather that in the catalog preparation, a function mainly of

technical services. Therefore, there is little evidence here that

libraries that have adopted the innovations use less labor than other

libraries. It is quite possible that the libraries that have innovated

have been the largest, most labor intensive libraries and have reduced

labor inputs in technical services from former        levels   or from levels

that would otherwise be necessary to provide similar levels of service.

A much more detailed study of specific library operations would be

necessary to estimate what labor requirements might be in the absence

of    innovation in   the libraries that have   innovated.
        The technical    service staffs of the libraries are compared. The

technical service staffs include selection and ordering if personnel

are   assigned   specifically to these functions. They include cataloging

and processing. Some technical service operations are organized in ways
                                                                  52



that makes separating the subfunctions difficult; therefore, the total

technical service labor force and labor costs are compared. Libraries

using the cataloging networks and    computer   based circulation systems

are found to have larger technical service labor forces. One       might
expect that some of the innovations would lead to less professional

staff in technical services. In particular the use of LC—MARC computer

generated cataloging might allow a library to substitute less skilled

labor for more skilled labor. The technical service staffs of the LC—

MARC computer using libraries average 19 percent professional while the

technical service staffs of the other libraries average 26 percent pro—

fessional. This difference is only very slightly statistically signifi—

cant (at the 15% level) ,not a strong effect.

        The labor cost of technical services can be estimated by multi-

plying the number of professional workers by the salary of professional

workers with five years experience (a benchmark value) and adding in

fringe benefits. A similar calculation is made for clerical workers

and   a sum taken.   While there are apparently large differences in the

labor costs of technical services, only those for the cataloging networks

and for computer based circulation are statistically significant, with

the innovators having larger expenditures. This evidence is consistent

with certain innovationa being adopted by high cost libraries. A

technical service labor cost per title is derived by dividing the total

labor cost estimate by the number of titles cataloged. The labor cost

per title is significantly higher among libraries with ordering systems.

Again,, the evidence suggests that high cost libraries have innovated, but

the evidence is not so strong that this association holds for all inno-

vations.
                                                                    53



        These cost and staffing comparisons would be more meaningful if

information about staffing for particular functions were available from

a larger group of libraries. The use of an approval plan and an automated

ordering system may have larger impacts on selecting and ordering staffs

and no impact on cataloging and processing operations. The use of com-

puter assisted cataloging may influence cataloging and processing operations

but not ordering and selection. The use of computer based circulation

may influence public service operations, but not cataloging, processing

or ordering. The processing of overdue notices may be performed in

different divisions in different libraries; the costs of this function

might be compared for the computer based circulation control innovators

and non—innovators. Moreover, one would like to know expenditure on data

processing and contractual services in order to compare total costs.

These more detailed cost comparisons are beyond the scope of the present

study.

         One might   expect   that the approval plan, ordering systems, and

cataloging systems would reduce both acquisiton lags and cataloging lags.

The comparison of mean acquisiton and cataloging lags of innovators with

non—innovators shows no significant differences. Again, however, the

libraries with the longest lags may have innovated to reduce the lags;

the present evidence does not reveal the changes in lags, if any,

following innovation.

         There may be an association between the characteristics of the

chief    executive   of the library system and the adoption of innovations.

A new chief executive, for example, may have more authority to adopt

innovations. Such seems to be the case for ordering systems, but not

for the other innovations. A chief promoted from within the library
                                                             54




system may feel acclimated to traditional practices in the system, while

an outsider may be more interested in bringing in new techniques. Chief

executives of public libraries are sometimes recruited from academic or

special libraries. A national search may yield persons of varied experi-

ences in libraries. No significant difference between inside and outside

chiefs is found. Note however that most appointments of chief executives

follow a search both within and without the system, thus promotion from

within need not imply a ratification of the status quo in library

operation. Moreover, librarians sometimes move among systems as assistant

chief executives so that promotion from within need not imply that the

new chief executive has no mangerial experience in other library systems.


Sunnary On Innovations in Public Libraries

      A wide array of innovations are sweeping the public library

industry. Most parts of the operation of a public library system may be

changed by innovation, including material selection, ordering, cataloging,

and circulation control. These innovations seem to be diffused rapidly

across the large public library systems surveyed. While the study has

not attempted to document the cost saving potential of these innovations,

substantial benefits are presumed to exist.

      The pattern of diffusion is influenced by the fact that many inno-

vations may become obsolete before they are completely diffused. Only

a few innovations may be climax technologies that will be completely

diffused, before becoming obsolete. Computer based circulation control,

LC—MARC based computer generated catalogs, and electronic anti—theft'

devices may be such technologies.

      No single group of libraries (among the large systems surveyed)

stands out as pace setters. Each system has been among relatively early




                                                                             'C
                                                                    55




adopters of some innovations and no system has been among early

adopters of all innovations. Moreover, no particular characteristics of

libraries seem especially significant in the decision to adopt innovations.

Labor costs, fiscal circumstances, and system characteristics may         each
play some role, but the relative importance of each will change from

innovation to innovation.

      Two   factors    deserve mention as sources of technological change in

public libraries. First, the development of the Machine Readable Cata-

loging by the Library of Congress has allowed private firms        to   distribute

LC cataloging information at very low cost in microform. Other firms are

able to use the LC—MARC tapes to prepare local catalogs. The cataloging

information has public goods qualities: the cost of making the information

available to additional users is very low relative to the cost of

generating the information in the first place. Thus, the advance of

cataloging services at the Library of Congress (with Ford Foundation

support) has been of substantial benefit to public libraries.

      Second, the chief executives of public libraries are professionals.

They typically attend professional meetings annually or more frequently.

They contribute to and read many      periodicals   on library methods. They

participate in national markets and usually land their positions after

national    searches   by library boards. The professional characteristics

 of library managers probably enhances the pace and      diffuse   character of

 innovation among      libraries.
                              FOOTNOTES

     'Joseph Newhouse and A. J. Alexander, An Economic Analysis of

Public Library Services, Heath Lexington, Massachusetts, 1972.

      2From June 7, 1970 to September, 1971 25 non—fiction titles

appeared on the New York Times best seller lists, with a mean length

of stay of 19.84 weeks. During the same period 25 fiction titles

appeared with a mean stay of 24.04 weeks.

      3Charles A. Goodrum, The Library of Congress, Praeger, New York,

1974, Chapter 3.

      4Brett Butler, Brian Avery, and William Scholz, "The Conversion of

Manual   Catalogs   to Collection Data Bases," American Library Association

Library Technology Reports 14 12, March/April 1978, p. 109.

      5Municipal Library Department, City of Dallas, "Long—Range Plan f or

Public Library Service," Dallas Public Library, Dallas, Texas, 1977, p. 103.

      6Brett Butler, Brian Avery, and William Scholz, "The Conversion of

Manual Catalogs," op cit., p. 172.

      7Brett Butler, Brian Avery, and William Scholz, "The Conversion of

Manual Catalogs," op cit., p. 172.

         8Brett Butler, Brian Avery, and William Scholz, "The Conversion of

Manual Catalogs," op cit., p. 150.

         9The speed of availability of Library of Congress cataloging has

improved dramatically with the MARC tape system. For pre—MARC experience

see: S. Elspeth Pope, The Time—lag in Cataloging (Metuchen, New Jersey:

The Scarecrow Press, 1973), p. 128.

         10Library of Congress Information Bulletin, June 17, 1977.
            W. Lancaster, The Measurement and Evaluation of Library

Services, Information Resources Press,Washington, D.C., 1977, pp. 19—72,

reviews the literature on the evaluation of catalogs.

      12Brett Butler, Brian Avery, andWilliam Scholz, "The Conversion

of Manual Catalogs," op cit., p. 172.

      13josten's Library Service Division, "Book Lease Plans," Josten's

Burnsville, Minnesota, 1978.

      14See Edwin S. Mansfield, IndUstrialResearch and Technological

Change (New York: Norton, 1968), pp. 133—154 and Malcolm Getz, The

Economics of the Urban Fire Department (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins

University Press, 1979), Chapter 6 for a more complete discussion of the

theoretical underpinnings of the shape of the adoption path.

      Each library system was asked when it began using a particular

technique. In this way, the year when any particular fraction had

adopted could be identified. Unfortunately, not all     libraries   that had

a practice in use could indicate when the practice had begun. The number

of library systems using a technique but not reporting a year of adoption

is reported in the last column of Table 5. In determining the year when

50 percent adoption is reached, these libraries are assumed to be among

the first half adopters. Given the gaps in information, it is not

possible to report a specific sigmoidal curve of the diffusion paths.
      16
           Getz, Urban Fire Departments, op cit., Chapter 6.
