NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN THE FED CONTROL REAL INTEREST RATES?

Robert J.

Working

Shiller

Paper No. 3148

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
May 1979

The author is indebted to Leslie Appleton for research
assistance. Data was kindly supplied by Eugene Fama. The
research reported here was supported by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and by the National Science
Foundation under grant No. SOC77—26798, and is part of the
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the supporting agencies or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 348
May 1979

Can the Fed Control Real Interest Rates?

SUMMARY

Three hypotheses concerning the controllability of rationally

expected real interest rates are examined here. These hypotheses, which
are suggested by recent literature, assert in different senses that the
stochastic properties of expected real interest rates are independent

of the Fed policy rule. We discuss the meaning and implications of the
hypotheses, and how they might be tested. Evaluation of the hypotheses
is attempted by examination of the Fed's "quasi—controlled experiments,"
historical changes in policy regimes, Granger—Sims causality tests,

Barro unanticipated money regressions, and other methods. Questions as
to the relevance of any such methods are discussed.

Robert J. Shiller
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk CR
Philadelphia PA 19104
(215) 243—8483

—1—

I. Introduction

One contribution that the recent literature on "rational expectations" in

macroeconomic models

has to make to the older literature on the neutrality

of money is to suggest a definition of the real interest rate in a stochastic
environment and to suggest senses in which it may or may not be controllable by

the monetary authority (or "Fed"). The new definition takes the "rationally
expected real rate of interest" as the nominal or "money" interest rate (as
quoted in financial markets or perhaps as an after tax interest rate) minus

the optimally forecasted inflation rate. The senses in which it may or may
not be controlled are described in terms of the nature of influence of the
chosen parameters of the Fed policy rule on the stochastic properties (and
relation to other variables) of the real rate so defined.
There are at least three distinct hypotheses concerning the Fed's
influence over rationally expected real interest rates that seem to be

suggested in recent discussions of monetary policy. We will give a brief
statement of them here subject to clarification below. We will disregard
at this point whether we wish to use an "after tax real rate". It is
assumed throughout that Fed policy takes the form only of open market

operations and that the interest rate is a short—term one. In order of
decreasing stringency and testability, these nested hypotheses are:

Hvppthesisl

The form the Fed policy rule takes, whether deterministic

or random, has no effect on the behavior of rationally expected real interest

rates. That is, the Fed has no ability to shock rationally expected real interest
rates at all in the short—run or long—run. This hypothesis has apparently never
been asserted outright in the published literature but does seem implicit in many

discussions. The hypothesis seems to be suggested by those who would try to
explain interest rates in terms of inflationary expectations without apparent

—2—

regard to the form monetary policy has taken. Fama, in his well known article
on interest rates as predictors of inflation [1975j seems to suggest this
hypothesis when he extends his hypothesis that one month real rates are constant
to periods when the Fed apparently caused a "credit crunch", but he also at
another point appears to explicitly deny that the Fed has no influence at all
over real interest rates.

yppthesis 2

The Fed can shock rationally expected real interest rates,

but only by taking policy actions other than the actions the public supposes

they are taking. That is, if Fed policy on a particular day is known by the
public on that day, it will have no effect on real rates.

Hypothesis 2 has some important implications. First, it implies that
the Fed's ability to affect real interest rates relies essentially on secrecy.
If the Fed opened up all of its internal discussion to public scrutiny without
time lag, it would then lose any ability to affect real interest rates.
Secondly, the hypotheses implies that even if the Fed is allowed to maintain
secrecy, then still the systematic (i.e., floflrandom) part of its policy rule is

without effect on real interest rates. That is, if the Fed attempts consistently to pursue any "sensible1' or "purposeful" policy then its policy behavior

will bear some consistent relation to business conditions, and will become

predictable by economic agents outside the Fed. This assumes that the Fed
has no secrets about business conditions, i.e., does not have any "information
advantage" over the public.

Hypothesis 2 would appear to be suggested by many models which
incorporate the Lucas—Sargent--Wallace aggregate supply relation (see, for

example, Lucas [1973]), or variations on it and is specifically an
implication of the macroeconomic model of Sargent and Wallace [1975].

—3—

Hypothesis 3

Any policy action by the Fed which is known by the

public sufficiently far in advance will have no effect on rationally expected

real interest rates. That is, we could in principle identify a "policy
effectiveness interval" which might be as short as a few days or as long as

many years. Any aspect of the Fed policy rule which relates only to
information known earlier by this time interval will have no effect on the
behavior of real interest rates.
The implications of hypothesis 3 depend on the length of the policy

effectiveness interval. If the interval is years long, then the Fed may
have substantial scope for systematic countercyclical monetary policy. Since
the business "cycle" is not rigidly periodic It cannot be forecasted years
in advance, and so even if the Fed policy rule follows a consistent or
systematic relation to business conditions the public still will not have
enough advance notice of the policy to react in such a way that real rates

become uncontrollable. On the other hand, if the interval is very short then
there may not be an important difference between hypothesis 3 and hypothesis

2. We will speak of this hypothesis as implying generally a policy effectiveness interval of, say, at least a number of months, but less than a number
of years.

Hypothesis 3 seems to be suggested in many discussions. It is specifically
a consequence of a model by Phelps and Taylor [19771 and would appear to

be implied (though not explicitly in his model) by Fischer [19771. These
models connected the policy effectiveness interval with the length of time
prices are rigid (Phelps and Taylor) or the length of time labor contracts run
(Fischer).

All

F

of our hypotheses are meant to characterize economies in

"expectations equilibria", and in the literature that suggested them,

—4—

"rational expectations equilibria". By an expectations equilibrium we mean
merely a situation in which economic agents have unchanging subjective

probability distributions for all stochastic variables in the economy. If
this equilibrium is rational, these subjective distributions are correct.
In such an equilibrium, then, economic agents have a, correct understanding,

to the extent that it will ever be understandable, of the Fed policy rule.

What economic agents do not understand is represented as a stochastic term

with known properties. Our hypotheses 2 and 3 concern comparative expectations
equilibria, i.e., what changes in the behavior of economic variables will
occur when the parameters of the policy rule are changed after the public

fully appreciates the systematic nature of the change. In understanding
hypotheses 2 or 3, it is particularly important to bear this in mind. If
the Fed changes its policy rule (e.g., changes the way the money growth rate
responds to unemployment) then there will no doubt be a transition period
The length of

before a new rational expectations equilibrium is reached.

this transition period is not to be confused with the policy effectiveness
interval.

These hypotheses would seem in principle to be subject to some form of

empirical verification. However, the concepts of a "rationally expected real
interest rate" and of a "Federal Reserve Policy RuletP and changes thereof are

sufficiently slippery, as we shall discuss in Section II of this paper, that

it is difficult to bring empirical evidence to bear on y

of

these hypotheses.

It is perhaps for this reason that the literature relating to these hypotheses

is almost exclusively theoretical. Empirical literature on the real interest
rate (e.g., the Fama [1975] article mentioned above), while perhaps relevant to
our evaluation of these hypotheses, does not explicitly consider them.
At the same time, there are some who have asserted, based on their

—5—

observations of real world phonomena, that certain of these hypotheses are

highly "implausible". It is apparently a useful exercise, therefore, to discuss
how empirical evidence (qualitative as well as quantitative) might be brought
to bear on them, if at all.

Our purpose In this paper is a) to discuss the definitions of "rationally
expected real interest rates", and "Fed policy rule" and the meaning of the
three hypotheses described above, b) to discuss the kind of subjective beliefs
that must be added before these hypotheses have any testable implications,

and c) to look at the data and empirical literature in monetary economics
to see if there are any clues as to the plausibility of the hypotheses when
they are given "reasonable" interpretations.

Some will perhaps argue that the abstract models that yielded these
hypotheses are not to be taken literally, that they are intended as abstract
possibilities that suggest a change in our methods of monetary policy evaluation.

Nonetheless, people have applied them to discussions of historicalexperience and
will no doubt be inclined to do so in the future. We think, then, that it is
not premature to discuss whether these hypotheses might be considered useful

in understanding historical experience. Needless to say, our examination of
these hypotheses should not be interpreted as an evaluation of the contribution
to the history of economic thought of the abstract models that gave rise to them.

ii..

Definition and Measurement of Real Interest Rates and Fed Policy Rule

Ii. 1 The Real Rate of Interest
A number of different definitions have been applied to the term "real

interest rate". For simplicity, we will at this point disregard tax

—6—

considerations in defining them.
First, the rn—period real interest rate at time t has been defined as the

money or "nominal" interest rate (the usual rate quoted at time t in financial
markets) minus the actual inflation rate from time t to time t+m.

Since

the inflation rate is not known with certainty, the real interest rate by this
definition is not known at time t, and hence we will refer to this as the ex

post real interest rate. By this definition the real interest rate is readily
measured ex post, at least insofar as inflation can be measured.
Second, the rn—period real interest rate at time t has been defined as the
nominal. interest rate minus the average inflation rate forecast by professional

forecasters as quoted in the news media. Readers of business periodicals are
regularly supplied with inflation forecasts by the major consulting firms

which specialize in macroeconomic forecasting. It has been argued that,
realistically, no one in the public has any significant information advantage
over these professional forecasters and that it would seem rational to base

decision making on these forecasts. These consensus forecasts, while not
market determined, are the result of intense discussion in a sort of intellectual

"marketplace", especially in more recent years. We will call this the
consensus real interest rate. The consensus real interest rate is readily
measured with a slight lag, which is a publication lag. Since inflation
forecasts generally move slowly, this lag is generally not important, but is
potentially important in some hypothetical circumstances.
Third, the rn—period real interest rate at time t has been defined as the
rate quoted at time t on an rn—period index bond. An rn—period index bond is
a bond whose coupons or principal due at maturity at time t+rn are guaranteed

in real terms, i.e., they are escalated by a price index. We will call this
the market real interest rate. The market real interest rate is readily

—7—

measurable at time t, since it is a rate quoted on financial markets.
Unfortunately, a market for such index bonds does not yet exist in the United
States.

We will digress for a moment to consider whether the Fed might control

the real interest rate by any of these definitions. The ex post real rate is
obviously not fully controllable, since inflation cannot be fully forecasted.
Clearly, however, the Fed can always control the consensus real interest rate
as it desires (so long, at least, as this is consistent with a positive nominal
rate) if it is willing to accept the economic consequences of the control.
It can choose a real interest rate, add to that the latest consensus inflation

forecast, and then "peg" the nominal rate at their sum. If we abstract from
current institutional details, the owner of the "printing press" could announce
that it stands ready to borrow and lend unlimited amounts at this nominal
rate, and then no one would borrow from another person at a higher rate nor

lend to another at a lower rate. If the Fed can print nominal bonds as well
as money in unlimited amounts, there is no limit to its ability to do this
(nor to repay the principal on the nominal bonds when they come due).

However, one might question whether it is really of interest that the Fed
can do this.

If the Fed, in its control of consensus real interest rates,

were to cause rapid economic changes then the publication lag might make the

concensus forecast unimportant to economic decisions. Markets
might not all clear, so that the inflation rate based on quoted prices might

become less relevant to economic decision making. A hyperinflation might
ensue if they tried to peg them too low or if they consistently followed
certain policy rules which would ultimately cause money to be abandoned as

the medium of exchange. A deflation might ensue if they tried to peg them
too high which would cause nominal rates to hit zero, ending their latitude

—8—

f or control.

It would seem highly plausible a priori that at any moment of time
there is non—zero range over which the Fed can influence consensus real

interest rates. Efforts to peg such real interest rates do not create

unlimited riskless profit opportunities. In contrast, suppose (to take a
simple extreme example) the Fed tried to establish different borrowing and
lending (nominal) rates, and offered to lend, say, at 3.00% and borrow at an

an epsilon higher rate. It would thereby create an unlimited riskiess profit
opportunity. Individuals would borrow from the Fed and use the proceeds to
lend to the Fed and would reap a profit with certainty. It is realistic
to suppose that if the Fed really announced this, however small the epsilon,

it would quickly find infinite supply of both lenders and borrowers. If
the Fed announced, on the other hand, a reduction of the consensus real
interest rate from 2%, say, to 1%, it seems hard to imagine that anything
really dramatic would happen and historical experience appears to confirm

this. The question, then, is how far and for how long it can reduce or
raise the consensus real interest rate.
The Fed would seem to have the same sort of potential control over market

real interest rates with one modification. It could announce a market real
interest rate and offer to buy unlimited quantities of index bonds at this rate,

but it cannot sell unlimited quantities of index bonds. While it can promise
to deliver unlimited quantities of money in the future, it cannot promise to

deliver unlimited quantities of real goods in the future. There are limits to

the Fed's ability to command real resources through inflationary finance. Hence
it would seem that the Fed could depress market real interest as it pleases, but

there are limits to its ability to elevate them. A hyperinflation is of course
a possible consequence of depressing the market real interest rates too far or
for too long.

—9—

The rn—period rationally expected real interest rate at time t, which is

defined as the rn—period nominal rate quoted at time t minus the optimal forecast

of the inflation between time t and time t+m, is not so readily observed either
ex ante or ex

The rationally expected real rate of interest is not

necessarily equal to the consensus real rate of interest or market real rate of

interest. In fact, the rationally expected real rate of interest is undefined
unless economic variables are stochastic processes whose random properties are

given. Such a definition thus makes sense only when the Fed behavior itself can
be described as a stochastic process or policy rule related to other economic

variables. The question then is, can the Fed, in deciding on its
policy rule, choose a rational expectations equilibrium which is characterized
by a desired behavior of the rationally expected real interest rate?
Such a definition of the real rate of interest is inherently academic, and

at the same time a rather elusive concept. It is academic because in a world
which is enormously complex and constantly changing, there is no way to define an
optimal forecast without some assertion of faith in a model of some sort.

Economic agents clearly have diverse models and forecasts. We can estimate
empirical forecasting equations, but these will differ depending on the
structure we assume, the explanatory variables we includes and the sample period

we choose. The concept is also elusive when applied to the present issue for
a couple of reasons. First, monetary authorities do not think of themselves as
outcomes of stochastic processes and tend to think of themselves as exercising

free will. If they must be described in terms of a reaction function, it would
be logical to ask whether they can even choose parameters of this function.
Second, it is no longer possible to speak of the Fed as defining its policy rule
as a function of an observed real interest rate or observed expected rate of

—10—

inflation, since these depend on the policy rule. That is, the Fed cannot announce
that it will buy and sell bonds at 2% plus the optimally forecasted rate of
inflation, since it does not know what this will be once it makes the announce-

ment. A rational expectations theorist might be able, given a complete model
of the economy, to find an "inflationary expectation" as a function of observable
variables predetermined at time t such that if the Fed pegs nominal rates at
the desired real rate plus this inflationary

expectation, then this inflationary

expectation will be an optimal forecast of the resulting inflation. But it is
not obvious that we know the model such that rational expectations theorists

might be enabled to do this. It is also conceivable that no such rational
expectations equilibrium at the desired real rate of interest exists, or that,
even if it might exist, there may be no path of economic variables that makes a
transition from the present equilibrium to the alternative equilibrium. it may
be, for example, that an announced policy of pegging the real yield of an index
bond may not cause the economy to converge on a rational expectations equilibrium
at all, because the price level may explode to infinity.
In this sense, then, models in which indefinitely fixing market real yields
at some announced function of state variables will result in unstable price
behavior might be described as models in which the rationally expected real
rate is absolutely uncontrollable.

Given the difficulties with the concept of a rationally expected real rate
of interest, a practical control theorist might conclude that there is rio point

even In considering the concept. One might wish to define the structure of the
economy in terms of observable variables. However, it may be the case that,
as rational expectations theorists have argued, the true structure of the economy
is not comprehensible unless such variables are included in our model.

—11—

II. 2

Tax Law and the Definitions of the Real Interest Rate
For an individual or corporation in marginal income or corporate profits

tax bracket -r the after tax ex post real rate of interest is found by

subtracting the inflation rate from (1 — -r) times the nominal rate. This

is the rate of increase in real after—tax buying power. Definitions of
consensus real rates and rationally expected real rates may also be put on
after—tax basis by replacing the nominal rate in the definition by (1 — T)

times the nominal rate. Now, we have not a single after tax real interest
rate but an array of such rates, one for each tax bracket.
It has been suggested that our hypotheses should refer not to the simple
real interest rate but to the after tax real rate for some "representative"

tax bracket, or for the corporate tax rate paid by large corporations. There
is a sort of intuitive plausibility to this suggestion. Consider two
individuals in the same tax bracket who wish to make a three—month loan

between them. No net taxes are paid by the two of them considered together
since the borrower deducts interest paid equal to the amount declared as
income by the lender. In effect, the government refunds -r times the interest

rate from the lender to the borrower. In the face of inflation, if the
individuals wish to keep the amount of real resources transferred in the
terms of the loan the same as without inflation, they need only mark up
their nominal rate by the inflation rate times i/(l—-r).

If our tax system were neutral to inflation in other ways, and if all
individuals paid the same marginal tax rate, then it would seem quite plausible

that our hypotheses should refer to the after tax real rate. The problem is
that our tax system is not neutral in other ways to inflation. If the
borrower in our example above wishes to use the funds to purchase physical
assets for speculative purposes, then he will not be happy with an arrangement

—12—

which keeps his real after tax interest paid constant in the face of inflation,

since he will be taxed on the inflation of the price of his investment. Indeed,
with such short—term speculation for which gains are taxed as ordinary
income, his profits after tax will remain constant in the face of inflation

only if the simple (not after tax) real rate is kept constant. The lender
may then also be indifferent between making the loan and investing in the

physical asset himself. On the other hand, if the borrower wishes to spend
the money on a vacation, (and the lender views the opportunity cost of the
loan as a vacation foregone) then he may be happy with the constant after tax
real rate, precisely since he is not taxed on the "psychic" income from an
investment in a vacation and hence inflation does not affect him in the same

way. It is clear, then, that inflation affects taxes of individuals in
different circumstances in different ways, and so it is not likely that
hypotheses of the form one through three above could be given a simple rationale
in terms of any particular definition of the real interest rate.
One possible conclusion of our consideration of tax effects is that our
empirical work really should concentrate on the period before World War II

when income taxes were relatively negligible. Post—war monetary policy is
not really "pure" monetary policy since it affects real taxes. If we are
interested in the ability of "pure" monetary policy to affect real interest
rates, then we had best confine our attention to the period when such policy

was practiced. Our approach here is instead to consider both periods In terms
of the simple real interest rate even though for the post—war period the
hypotheses may be of less interest.

111.3

The Federal Reserve Policy Rule and Hypothesis Testing

We will suppose first that all relevant possible Federal Reserve Policy
Rules can be summarized and indexed in terms of a parameter vector

in the

—13—

form:

=0

f(r, Mt, '

(1)

where rt is the interest rate, Mt is the log of high—powered money,

is a

vector of state variables or information at time t which characterizes the economy
before the Fed acts at time t and is known to the public as well as the Fed,
and

is an innovation in Fed policy which is unforecastable by the public,

i.e., is independent of the state vector I. We have written the function
in implicit form to allow for both interest rate rules, money stock rules
or combination rules.
The Fed confronts a public demand for high powered money function which
we will write as:

0

g(r, Mt. 1t I, -y,

where y is a vector of parameters and

(2)

is a vector of innovations in public

behavior. Public behavior depends on

through their reaction to the Fed

policy rule. Equation (2) is a reduced form equation for the rest of the
macroeconomic model, taking either r or m as exogenous.
Equations (1) and (2) represent a two equation model in two unknowns

M. The solution to the model, or reduced form is:

r =

h1

= h2

(

f,
'

'
I' ' '
'

(4)

r and

—14—

Another reduced form equation from the macroeconomic model gives the price level:

=

h( , It'

'

(5)

and from this equation we can derive the expected rate of inflation E(Pt÷1_Pt)
and hence the rationally expected real interest rate:

r - Et(Pt+1_Pt)

Hypotheses 2 and 3

h4(13, I

(6)

concern the way this reduced form equation derived

from the structural equations of our model depends on 3.
One fundamental problem we face in explaining such models econometrically

is finding identifying restrictions. One must know certain exogenous variables
which we know shock equation (2) without shocking equation (1), and which may be
used as instruments to estimate (1) consistently, and exogenous variables which we
know shock equation (1) without shocking equation (2), and which may be used to

estimate equation (2) consistently. The problem is that is is difficult to
find

variable which we can be confident shocks one equation without shocking

the other. When expectations are involved in the behavior which underlies (1)

and (2), then anyth4g which is publicly known might in principle affect both
equations.

There is a literature on estimation of the demand for money and a smaller
literature on the estimation of Fed reaction functions, which might be used to

try to examine some of the hypotheses. However, we do not believe that estimates
are trustworthy for this purpose. One reason is that this literature generally
does not handle the simultaneous equations estimation problem well. When

—15—

instrumental variables are used there is generally no discussion, let alone
a convincing one, to justify the assumption that the exclusion restrictions and

exogeneity assumptions are justified. This defect is compounded by the fact that
with slow moving variables and short samples the small sample properties of the
K—class estimators may differ widely from those predicted by the usual
asymptotic sampling theory.

For the purpose of formulating policy, we need to know the model. For
the purpose of evaluating the hypotheses noted in the introduction, however,

it may not be necessary to estimate the model. If may instead by necessary,

though, to find some change in .

The first hypothesis noted in the introduction asserts that the
structure of the economy is such that rt —

E(P+i

either the Federal Reserve parameter vector

we can find

—

is

independent of

If

or the random vector .

or a change in , then the real rate should be uncorrelated with

it.

=

The second hypothesis implies that

predictable, then r —
the parameter

Et(P+i)

+

E(P)

0, i.e., the Fed is completely

is independent of 3.

Changes in

of the policy rule should not affect the random properties of

the real rate. If

is random, then this hypothesis has no unambiguous

interpretation with a model of this generality. The division of Fed policy
into "predictable" or "unpredictable" components might be achieved, for
example, by positing a money stock rule of the form

Mt =

+

(7)

and then we might interpret the hypothesis to mean that the behavior of real

—15a—

interest rates is independent of .

The third hypothesis, like the second, cannot be defined unambiguously
until we decide how to divide Fed behavior into components which were and

were not predictable in advance by the policy effectiveness interval. If we
write:

3t—k' )

+

g(i,

(7')

so that 3'tk' 3) is the component of Fed policy known in advance by the
policy effectiveness interval k, then the hypotheses might be interpreted to

imply that the interest rate is independent of .

Unfortunately,

although in casual discussions it is often assumed that the

hypotheses are well defined, alternative interpretations are possible which
would be represented by different versions of 7 or 7' and in turn different

approaches to testing them. For example, we might break down money into
multiplicative predictable and unpredictable components, we might allow f3 in

7' to be multiplied by a function of I, or we might break down an interest
rate rule into predictable and unpredictable components.

—16—

The only way that we can discuss direct verification of the second or third
hypothesis cited in the introduction to this paper is to identify periods
over which the Fed policy rule had stable repetitive nature and also identify
when the transitions between these periods occured (i.e., where

changed).

Our guide in identifying changes in the policy rule will be to look only for

changes that were announced by the Fed and well understood by the public. It
is inherently a highly subjective business to try to identify periods in
which the Fed policy rule might be described as repetitive and when it changed.
To evaluate hypothesis two or three based on statistical analysis, however,
we have no alternative but to try to do so.

II. 4 Measures of Real Interest Rates
As noted above, it is impossible to measure the rationally expected real
interest rate without a statement of faith in a model and if there are unknown
parameters in the model an identification of a sample period of some length when

the model held. If we take the above model, then, before looking at the data,
we begin with prior distributions for the parameters
parameters of the distributions of

and y, and for the

and 5. We might then in principle update

the priors with the data over a period when the policy rule was stable to get
a joint posterior distribution of

and y and other parameters. This distribution

might then be used to produce a predictive distribution for the ex post real

rate conditional on historical data: f(r —

P÷ijI), and we might define the

rationally expected real rate as the expected value of r —

from this

predictive distribution.

The above approach suffers from the problem that it is difficult to describe

our uncertalnty regarding the nature and structure of the model. We thus seek
a more parsimonious way to proceed.
An alternative is to seek a simple empirical forecasting relation by

—17—

finding the optimal linear forecast of r —

APt+l

based on some small subset I

of I which seems particularly likely to be important in determining the predictive

distribution f(r APt+iI). For example, we might regress r —

t+l

on its

own lagged value to produce an autoregressive forecasting relation. We will call
the fitted values of such a regression based on the subset of information and
regression coefficients the optimal linear forecast, and denote it by

L(r —

LP+1II

). Now one property of such optimal linear forecasts is that

—
) =
); that is, the optimal linear forecast
t
t
of the ex pst real rate is the same as the optimal linear forecast of the true

L(r —

AP+i.lI

L(E(r

AP+1jI)1

(unobserved) rationally expected real interest rate (see Shiller [19781).
It is a property of optimal linear forecasts that the variance of the
forecast is less than or equal to the variance of the variable forecasted (i.e.,

< 1). If we know the optimal linear forecast variance, we can put bounds
on the variance of the true rationally expected real interest rate, i.e., its
variance must lie between the variance of the optimal linear forecast and the
variance of the ex pp.t real rate.

The essential point for our purposes is the following: if we can establish
that the Fed can control the optimal linear forecast of the ex post real rate in

the sense of one of our hypotheses, e.g., that it can, by changing , and. without

relying on unforeseen shocks ,

affect

the random properties of the optimal linear

Forecast, then ft can affect the random properties of the true unobserved rationally

expected real interest rate. Since the projection of the optimal linear forecast
is the same as the projection of the true rationally expected real interest

on I
ot

rate on I

,

one cannot change the one without changing the other and hence one

ot

concludes that one must have changed at least the relationship of the rationally
expected real interest rate with I

0

—18—

III. Empirical Verification Hypotheses

III. 1 General Approach
In this section we will explore interpretations and tests of the three
hypotheses described in section I along lines suggested in section II above.
In section iii 2 below we consider whether the hypotheses are plausible in
view of the observed behavior of nominal rates coupled with the fact that the
precise timing and magnitude of Fed actions are probably exogenous and unfore—

castable. We also consider here the fact that the Fed apparently can (and has)
pegged nominal rates, which means that there was a sharp reduction to zero in
exogenous shocks to monetary policy at this time.

In section III 3 below we consider whether the history of the Federal Reserve
System can be broken down into sub—periods in which the policy rule showed a

distinctly different stochastic behavior. The sub—periods must be long enough
that it makes sense to try to identify the policy rule from the data. We argue
that there is some reason to divide the monetary history of the twentieth century

into three long periods: the period from 1900 to 1913, before the Fed was
founded, the period 1914 to 1950 of early monetary policy (which was unfortunately
disrupted by two world wars and a major depression) and the period 1951 to the
present when modern monetary policy was practiced.

In 5ection III 4 below, we consider Granger—Sjrn causality tests between
real interest rates and money growth rates, and Barro unanticipated money
tests as ways of

evaluating

these hypotheses.

III. 2 Behavior of Nominal Interest Rates
Members of the Federal Reserve Board —— and of the Trading Desk at New York ——

have the distinct impression that they can, whenever they wish, influence nominal

-19—

interest rates in a downward direction by increasing high powered money and in

an upward direction by decreasing high powered money. This impression is very
strong because they have seen it happen with great reliability. Moreover, since
they were involved in the decision relating to the conduct of monetary policy,
they have a clear idea whether their policy might be considered caused by economic
circumstances and to what extent their policy might be viewed as a controlled

experiment. Certainly the precise timing of their policy is determined by their
own

choices

and if interest rates immediately respond reliably when they do

intervene, it is hard to question that they can control nominal interest rates
in this manner.

If we accept, then, that when the Fed decides to intervene in the open market
by increasing high powered money the nominal interest rate declines, it would
appear that the Fed must have some influence over real interest rates, and

hypothesis 1 must be wrong. We usually think that increasing high powered money
is if anything a signal of higher inflation. It would seem implausible, then,
that these lower interest rates are due to lower inflationary expectations. If
is conceivable that exogenous increases in the money stock might be a sign of
lower inflation over a certain time horizon if the parameters of our model were

just right. But it seems inconceivable that such an explanation would reliably
hold true for bonds of all maturities for the history of all monetary authorities
for hundreds of years.

Even though

the

Fed knows it can impact the real interest rate at any moment

in a desired direction, it does not follow that it can exert any systematic control

over real interest rates, i.e., hypothesis 2 or 3 may still be valid. To
see how this might be the case, we may hypothesize a demand for high
powered money function of a form which is somewhat less general than expression

—20—

(2) above:

M = Mt.l
where

M* =

+ P(M*t —

o < p < 1

Mt_i) +

—
—
+ miY —
m2r m3(E(P+1

P))

(8)

+ m4Z

(9)

and all coefficients m1, m2, m3 and m4 are greater than zero. fl is an unforecastable
error. Here we have assumed a simple stock adjustment model although more general
adjustment models would not affect the basic conclusions. The desired log money
stock M*t is a function of the log price level, P, a measure of aggregate

economic activity Y, the nominal short interest rate r. the expected inflation
rate and other exogenous real variables Z. Substituting (9) into (8) and using

r = Pt

+ Et(Pt+i —

Mt =

(l_..1)I1tl

we get:

PP + 1Jm1Y — i.lm7P — P(m2+m3)E(P÷1

—

+ Tlm3Z +

(10)

Taking expectations conditional on information at time t and solving for EtPt we
get:

EtPt =

where

(l_X)EtJ

(11)

+ XEtP+i

J AMt/P + M1 — miY + m2p— m3Z —
A

-

(m2+m3)

I

(l+m2+m3)

0< A <1

If we then solve this rational expectations equation and assume stable price
behavior, i.e., a price level which does not diverge to infinity unless the
money stock is increased to infinity as suggested in the rational expectations

—21—

literature, or in this specific context by Sargent and Wallace [l975j we find:

EP =

(12)

and

r Pt + Et(Pt+i

—

+

(13)

(l_X)joX1Et(Jt÷i+l)

The model thus implies that the price level, as well as the nominal interest
rate, embodies optimal forecasts of

=

0,

1, ...

We can thus see how it is

that the Fed may have the impression that it influences the real rate and •could

do so systematically when in fact it cannot. Suppose we hypothesize a money
stock rule of the form (7) above. Although the Fed may not be aware of it, the
public has divided its behavior into two components: a predictable and unpre-

dictable component. The public has already formed anticipations of all future
movements in the money stock based on information about Fed policy that has

unfolded to that point in time. If the public anticipates a policy of greater
increases in the money supply then nominal interest rates will by (13) rise as
soon as the public begins to collect information which enables it to anticipate

this. If the Fed delays expanding the money stock longer than the public expected,
then interest rates may rise further still, due to the effect on real interest
rates of this ttsurprisell until the date when the Fed does intervene when interest

rates may drop back to the level given by (13). If, on the other hand, the Fed
Increases the money growth rates sooner than the public expected, then
interest rates may fall, when they do this, and may rise back to the level given by
(:13)

when the Fed Is on
Whenever

not have

been

target again.

the I'ed has the sense that its actions are volitional, i.e., could
predicted by the market, it

relation between

observes

the customary negative

real rates and high powered money. The Fed knows these shocks

—22—

are exogenous and thus knows it has influence over real rates. On the other
hand, the Fed rarely observes the effect of its changes in its policy rule,
and if it does not look deep into history, has no information on its systematic
ability to control real interest rates.
This analysis does not necessarily suggest a scenario in which, as described
for example by Friedman Ll9681, increases in high powered money cause a decline

in interest rates for a certain interval of time (the "liquidity effect" period)
followed by a rise in interest rates above its former level due to engendered

inflationary expectations. Friedman's scenario might come about if unforeseen
shocks constituted evidence that further money growth rates would be higher, in
which case inflationary expectations would be immediately adjusted upward, and
if temporary effects on real interest rates were sufficient to offset the rise
in inflationary expectations.

The crucial behavioral relation that gives the result that the Fed has no
systematic influence over real interest rates is embodied in expression (12)
coupled with hypothesis 2 which implies this the real variables in

are not

subject to systematic Fed control. Expression 12 then says that the price
level incorporates all information currently available about future money

supplies. Without this relation, the Fed must be able to control real rates
or the price level must be explosive, even with stable monetary policy.
Suppose, to illustrate, the Fed announces that the money stock today will be
decreased by three percent below what the public had expected, but that all

future money growth rates will be unchanged. By (12), and hypothesis 2, and
assuming for simplicity that p =

=
m3

=
m4

0, the price level must drop

immediately, and by (13) the nominal rate will be unchanged. It seems unlikely
that the price level would drop immediately by 3%, however. If the price
level is sluggish, can we retain hypothesis 2? To retain it would mean that

—23—

the real money stock falls and hence, by the money demand equation (9), that

the nominal rates r must increase. If the real rate is constant, this must
t

imply that expected inflation will increase. If this expected inflation is
rational, then it must be the case that actual inflation increases, at least

on average. Thus, the price level tends to increase in the following period,

rather than decrease, which throws the system further out of equilibrium. By
the same reasoning the price level is expected to increase even faster the
following period, and, by induction, must explode to infinity even with a
stable money supply.

If we assume only hypothesis 3, then (12) still must hold but now we have
lost the proposition that the future real rate and future real income terms
in

i =

0,

..

.' are

independent of the entire systematic component of

monetary policy. Since our hypothesis then does not constrain these y and
p terms in J, it says nothing about how the price level responds to current
information about Fed policy, and so (12) has itself no content in this

regard. Hypothesis 3 does imply that real variables are independent of
information about monetary policy known earlier by the policy effectiveness

interval. The price level, today, optimally incorporates all information
about future monetary policy that was known then.
While this behavioral assumption in (12) may be plausible for prices of
speculative commodities, this seems improbable for the aggregate price level

judging from the way many prices are actually set. It is not just that prices
are "sticky" or "sluggish" but that they are not set in anticipation of future

monetary policy. It might not be too unreasonable to suppose that the prices
of

speculative

commbdities take into account a very simple, repetitive seasonal

pattern In money growth rates. It is also conceivable that if the money
stock has a simple predictable pattern over the business cycle then the prices

—24--

of certain speculative commodities might in effect incorporate this information.

But will wages be set in this way? Will the price of haircuts? It seems
likely that at least some modification of equation (12) is called for to allow
for other factors which help determine the aggregate price level, and this will
then invalidate hypothes.s 2 and 3.

One reason that (12) and our hypotheses seem implausible is that the public

is certainly not consciously aware of it. News reports routinely ascribe
movements in the stock market indices to new information, but changes in
aggregate price indices, while a subject of great public interest, seem never

to be ascribed to new information about future monetary policy. Hypothesis 2

requires that if the Fed announces a changeinits long run target, the
announcement itself (if credible, and not already discounted by the public)
should have an immediate effect on the price level and on the nominal interest

rate. Judging casually from the lack of public awareness of such an effect,
we think that the effect is certainly not likely to be a very striking one.
Further evidence on the plausibility of (12) and (13) can be obtained by
considering the effects of the Fed's announcing that interest rates will be

pegged at a certain level. Before we consider this, we will point out that this
has actually happened.

At the end of April 1942 the Federal Open Market Committee directed the
twelve Federal Reserve Banks to purchase all Treasury bills offered at a discount
rate of 3/8 of one per cent and in August directed the Federal Reserve Banks to
give the seller an option to repurchase bills of the same maturity at the same

rate. An ascending rate structure on government bonds was also pegged, peaking
at 2.5% for the longest bonds. A demand for short—term bills persisted for a
while with this structure, but as confidence grew that the Fed would continue

to peg long rates at this level, evaporated. In July 1947, the Fed thus ended

—25—

the peg on treasury bills. In December 1947 the Fed also lowered its buying
price to near par on long—term bonds which, with the fixed rate structure, had come
to sell above par, but felt obligated not to let bond prices fall below par,

until after the Accord in March 1951. Some variation in long—term interest
rates was allowed; in.particular, the Fed allowed prices of long—term bonds to
rise above the pegged price, which happened briefly in early 1946.
Price controls were also first imposed in April of 1942, with the General
Maximum Price Regulation and were finally lifted with the expiration of the

Price Control Act on July 1, 1946. Price controls were not reimposed until the
Korean war, when in January 1951 an official freeze on most prices and wages was

announced. In the intervening period the only important efforts to control the
aggregate price level were voluntary: the Economic Stabilization Agency
efforts just before the price freeze with the Korean war, and the voluntary

credit restraint program. We thus have a period of 4—1/2 years in which
prices were free and long—term interest rates pegged and a one—year period

in which prices were free and short—term interest rates were pegged. This
time interval, moreover, came immediately after a four year period which,
although under price controls, was characterized by a development of "pent—
up inflation" in the sense that the money supply increased dramatically under
the pegged interest rate.

What does the model predict about the effects of an announcement by the Fed

that interest rates are to be pegged at a certain level? Here we are confronted
with a basic problem of the transition from one rational expectations
equilibrium to another for which rational expectations models are no guide.
Sargent and Wallace [19751 highlighted this problem when they pointed out that,
in their model, for which i

= 1,

the interest rate is related only to future

changes in money, hence the money stock and price level are not determined by

—26--

the fixing of the interest rate. Although in our model p

1 so that a lagged

money stock enters, it is unclear what relevance the money stock before the
interest rate peg was announced has to the ultimate rational expectations

equilibrium. The price level after a rational expectations equilibrium is
reached is still not determined by the model.

If a rational expectations equilibrium is attained under hypothesis 2 then

we do know that expression (13) must hold with r at the pegged rate, and this
means that expected future changes in the money stock must move in such a way

as to cause inflationary expectations to move opposite the real rate. If, let
us suppose, the real rate and exogenous factors are nearly constant, then the
appropriate monetary policy is essentially to keep all changes in N at the

appropriate level, equal to the pegged rate minus the real rate. The Fed, to
keep interest rates low, essentially must merely keep money growth rates low.
Fed policy must be to set an example with small money growth rates, rather than,
as was actually the case, to conduct massive open market purchases when rates

started to rise. The Fed does not try to offset movements in interest rates
in the usual way; rather, it sets a monetary policy which implies deflation
(and hence deflationary expectations) whenever the real rate is shocked up, so

that the public prevents the nominal rate from ever moving. Clearly, the Fed
was not doing the right thing to cause the economy to converge on a rational

expectations equilibrium with stable prices at the pegged rate, asthey
essentially said (though not in these words) in their arguments with the Treasury.
We may say that the economy was not in a rational expectations equilibrium of

the kind with stable prices, as described by (12) or (13). But it was not in

an unstable rational expectations equilibrium either. When price controls were
lifted in July 1946 we saw, not a one—shot big increase in the price level but
(after a relatively modest immediate jump in prices) a serially correlated smooth

—27—

increase in pr1ces.' This means that very negative real interest rates,
apparently caused by monetary phenomena, could be forecasted during this

transition period. This situation persisted for a while and then the economy
settled in, not to a hyperinflation, but an ordinary recession.

111.2 Founding of the Federal Reserve System
In the original Federal Reserve Act of 1913 the first purpose of the
Federal Reserve System defined in the opening paragraph is "to provide an elastic

currency", and (section 14) "to accommodate commerce and business". From the
discussion of the time there is at least one unambiguous implication of this

purpose: namely, to provide a larger supply of currency toward the end of the
year when the demand for currency was higher due in part to the crop harvest
8/
and to Christmas shopping.—Under the national banking system, this higher
demand for currency was not accommodated, and the result was pronounced seasonality

of nominal interest rates. This seasonality in nominal interest rates apparently
vanished after the establishment of the Federal Reserve System, and was
apparently replaced by a seasonality in currency in circulation as documented

by Macaulay l938]. Carter Glass [19251 listed the elimination of the seasonal
as one of the major achievements of his Federal Reserve Act.
The pronounced decline in seasonality in nominal interest rates after the founding
of the Federal. Reserve at the end of 1913 can be seen clearly in Figure 1. An
additive seasonal factor (plotted with the same scale as the nominal interest

rate above) computed with the Census X—ll program is shown. This seasonal
is computed using a 3x3 moving average, on seasonals computed as the difference

of the corrected series from a 13 month average. This implies a triangular

moving average extending over nearly 6 years. Thus, the fact that the seasonal
does not disappear immediately in 1914 is mainly due to an artifact of the
Census X—ii. program. The seasonal does show a marked decline about as soon

as it could.

The question that apparently never occurred to anyone then was whether
the Fed had, by adopting the announced policy of eliminating seasonals,

eliminated a seasonal pattern in real interest rates. A stable seasonal in
cx post rates implies a seasonal in cx ante rates since seasonals are forecastable.
All our hypotheses may be taken to imply that the elimination of the seasonal
in nominal rates should have changed the seasonal in inflation rates so that
the seasonal pattern in real interest rates should remain unchanged.
When we look at the seasonal pattern of the cx post real interest rates
(Figure 2), we see an apparent disruption-' in the seasonal pattern of real
interest rates after the founding of the Federal Reserve, but a reassertion of

the seasonal pattern roughly as strongly as before. One is tempted to interpret
this disrupted period as a transitional period when the economy converged on a

new rational expectations equilibrium in accordance with hypothesis 2. There is
potentially an element of truth to this story; however, we note that the seasonal
pattern in inflation rates had substantially greater amplitude than that in
nominal interest rates, and so it is better to say that the seasonal pattern in
inflation rates swamped out rather than offset the declining seasonal in nominal

rates. All that we can learn with any confidence from this data is that we_can't
say with any confidence whether a policy of eliminating seasonals in nominal rates

reduced the seasonal in real rates. The seasonal in inflation rates is so much
bigger, and rather unstable itself, that we can't find any evidence here contrary

to the hypotheses. Carter Glass was too quick to congratulate himself on the
real consequences of his Federal Reserve Act.

III. 3

A Policy Rule Change Marked by the Accord

it is commonly asserted that the Accord of March 1951 marked an abrupt change

in Fed policy. This was the date that the Fed was freed from the obligation to

—29—

peg interest rates and a time of new—found concern with monetary aggregates and

counter—cyclical monetary policy. One can see from Figure 3 that the rate of
growth of the money supply (Ml) before the Accord was less strongly seasonal and

more marked by erratic longer—term movements. After the Accord (actually, after
the war) the growth of the money stock was much more dominated by a very strong
seasonal.

The strong seasonal in the money
stock, incidentally, first appears around 1942 when interest rates were pegged
and, of course, what seasonality in nominal interest rates still remained was

then totally eliminated. It appears that the Fed revised its seasonal adjustment
factors at this time and then, following the Accord, became concerned that the

seasonally adjusted money stock should grow smoothly. In so doing, the Fed
perpetuated the seasonal movements in the money stock that were appropriate to a

short—term interest rate with no seasonal for the period 1942—50. Subsequent
estimates of seasonal factors would tend to remain unchanged as long as the Fed

perpetuates this seasonal. Apparently, the seasonal pattern in money demand
became more pronounced after the war, and so a seasonal pattern in nominal rates
has reappeared, as documented by Diller [1971] and Sargent L1971J
It appears, then, that there was a substantial change in the Fed policy rule

after World War II. If we can assume that the stochastic structure of the rest
of the economy did not also show an equally substantial change following the

war, then wecan look at the behavior of the real interest rate and perhaps
find some disconfirrnation of our hypotheses if the behavior of real rates
changes.

A plot of the ex post real short term interest rate (the 4—6 month commercial
paper rate minus the succeeding 5 month change in the wholesale price
index) appears in figure 4 and the interest rates and inflation rates in

—30—

figure 5. Indeed, there is a striking change at the time of the Accord. The
last big movement downward in the real interest rate was due to the surge in
inflation at the end of 1950 which provoked the Accord, as well as the price

controls of the Korean War. After that, there is never again such a big
movement in ex post real interest rates.
These ex post movements in the real interest rate before the Accord are
not an indication of movements in rationally expected real interest rates unless

they are forecastable. The apparent serial correlation in figure 4 suggests
that they are, and this is confirmed by the simple autoregressions in Table I.
The F tests indicate significant coefficients except for the period immediately

after the founding of the Fed. The standard deviation of the fitted value (the
lower figure in the right—most column) which is a measure of the standard
deviation of the true rationally expected real interest rate is m ch higher
before 1951 than after.

To the extent that we are willing to assume that the structure of the rest
of the economy was the same before and after the Accord, these results clearly

provide further disconfirmation of hypothesis 1. It is true that the period
before 1951 was characterized by bigger wars than the period after. The
depression also came before (although it is less clear that this represents a

change in the structure of the economy). Nonetheless, the change in the
stochastic behavior of real rates with the Accord is so striking that one is
tempted to conclude that the change in monetary policy had something to do with
it.

Whether or not the change also disconfirms hypothesis 2 is not something

we can say with any assurance. Indeed, given that the monetary policy is not
deterministic, and cannot be described in terms of just a money stock rule or
just an interest rate rule, then we have not given the hypothesis a precise

-3L.-

enough definition to evaluate it formally.

One might attribute the greater movements in the real rate before the
Accord merely to greater unforecastable monetary shocks before the Accord.
By the same token the relatively low

variance of real rates before the

founding of the Fed might be ascribed to a more predictable monetary rule

under the National Banking System. This argument would not apply to the pegged
rate period, between 1942—51, when monetary policy was quite forecastable.
it is not obvious whether or not Fed policy was more or less predictable

in the 20s, say, as compared with the 60s. One must remember that big movements
in the money stock are no indication of unpredictability since presumably they
were triggered primarily by economic conditions in a way that may well have

been understood by businessmen at the time. Monetary policy actions
need not be known in advance for there to be predictability in this
sense, as long as these are revealed by public information before they
take place.

We do know that a change in the policy rule occurred after the Accord. It
would not be unreasonable to attribute the change in the behavior of real
interest rates to the observed change in the systematic policy rule, and thus

consider this change as evidence against hypothesis 2. Unfortunately, we
cannot feel very comfortable in our assurance that this is so. We are left,
then, with only a suggestion that hypothesis 2 might be misguided. Barring
a controlled experiment contrasting alternative deterministic, announced policy
rules, we are unlikely ever to find better information concerning the direct
empirical implications of hypothesis 2.
Before we conclude, however, we note that a recent literature on nominal
interest rates for the period 1953—1971 alone might seem to lead us to a

different evaluation of the hypotheses. This literature, which was initiated
by Fama [19751, has confined attention to this period because it is claimed

—32—

to represent the only available time period in which the data on inflation rates

are good and in which prices are uncontrolled. He said to study real rates
before 1953 is "meaningless" because the Bureau of Labor Statistics used poorer
sampling techniques before 1953 in computing the consumer price index, (which Fama
used)

in that it sampled more items on a three month basis than is the

case today. If one looks at figure 4, one notes that this period (marked off
between parallel lines) shows remarkable stability of the real rate of interest)'
This was also a period when the Fed apparently thought it was conducting
countercyclical monetary policy, and is usually described as having caused at

least one "credit crunch". Fama's evidence appears then to be evidence which
makes us less sure of our dismissal of hypothesis 1, that the Fed cannot
influence real rates at all.

In his paper, Fama showed two remarkable results about short—term interest
rates and prices for this sample period, both of which are consistent with his
joint hypothesis that ex ante real rates of interest are constant and expectations

are rational. First, while both short—term interest rates and inflation rates

show significant autocorrelation, ex post real rates do not. This result can
be seen again by looking at Fama's monthly data on one—month treasury bill rates

and one—month inflation rates (figure 6). The inflation rate appears
approximately as white noise superimposed on the interest rate series, except
for the period 1960—66 when the short rate shows a trend not matched by a trend

in inflatlon rates. The serial correlation we observed in Table I came about,
apparently, from post—1971 data and perhaps also from our use of five—month

inflation data, which Is smoother than one—month data. Second, Fama showed
that if inflation rates are regressed on interest rates the coefficient of the
interest rate is nearly one (.97, t =

10.0, with his data) and then when the

lagged price level is added as a second explanatory variable the coefficient of

—33—

the interest rate remains near one (.87, t =
rate has a small coefficient (.11, t =

7.2)

while the lagged inflation

1.6) which is insignificant" It seems

at first remarkable that the lagged inflation rate should be of so little
benefit in forecasting inflation, but when one looks at the data one sees why

this is the case. There is a great deal of month—to—month noise in the consumer
price index, so that the lagged inflation rate is a poor indicator of current

inflation. What is more remarkable is that the coefficient of the interest rate
should come out so close to one, which is its theoretical value if the ex ante
real interest rate is constant and inflation anticipations are true mathematical
expectations.

It should be pointed out that under Fama's hypothesis residuals are serially
uncorrelated, and if we wished to estimate the coefficient of the interest rate
then ordinary least squares is appropriate and the standard errors not compromised

by possible serial correlation. If our theory is that the after—tax real rate
is constant, then this coefficient is an estimate of 1 — T,

where T is the

marginal tax bracket of the "representative investor". If we assume normal
residuals, then ordinary least squares is clearly the appropriate procedure
under Fama's hypothesis to estimate the coefficient in the regression.
Fama's regression of inflation on interest rates alone provided an estimate of
1 — T so close to one as to imply that the "representative tax bracket" is

zero. Feldstein and Summers 978 concluded that the after tax real interest
rate relevant to the typical investment decision should be computed with, in
effect, (1 — T) roughly in the vicinity of .8 to 1.0, depending on depreciation
and equity yields.
the

regression

Fama's estimate of .87 with the inflation variable in

Is dominated by the previous estimate, since by Fama's theory

the inflation rate is an extraneous variable in the regression.

[f we are instead interested, however, in an alternative hypothasis which

-34-

makes inflation rates unrelated to interest rates and serially
correlated, then the ordinary t—test on the coefficient is not valid.
The t—test is a likelihood ratio test in which the universise does not

include the possibility of serially correlated residuals. Thus, we do
not know from Fama's highly significant coefficient on the interest rate
whether or not the observed relation between interest and inflation might
easily have come about by a "trend" or "long cycle" or other low frequency
component in the interest rate which by sheer chance happened to be correlated

with a similar component in the inflation series. Fama's good Durbin—Watson
statistic is no assurance, as Cranger and Newbold [19771 have pointed out, that

this is not a problem. One can get some impression of the likelihood of such
an alternative explanation of the correlation between interest and inflation

by looking at Figure 6. Clearly, the short—run movements in the price level
are not explained by the interest rates. This impression is confirmed by
running Fama's regression with the dependent variable lagged or led, to throw

it out of alignment with his interest rate data. The fit of his equation is
hardly changed. The R2 rises from .29 in Fama's regression to .30 with a led
inflation rate as the dependent variable and falls to .27 with a lagged inflation

rate as the dependent variab1e-n any event, the alignment is not really
correct with Fama's regression either. Fama's interest rate data are based on
midpoints of bid—asked spreads for the last day of the preceding morth. The
Bureau of Labor Statistics L197l1 reports that it collects food prices on three

consecutive days early in the month. Thus food prices, which in 1971 had a
total weight of .224 in the consumer price index, are nearly 30 days out of

aiignment)J' Rents and items for which prices are obtained by mail on the
other hand are reported as of the 15th of the month, and the pricing of other

items priced monthly extends over the entire calendar month. Many items are

—35—

still priced only every three months. We thus could not hope with such data
to find a short—run (or high frequency) relationship, and it is hardly
appropriate to dismiss results based on earlier data for this reason.
The explanatory power in the interest rate series does not come about from

a simple trend either. If one runs Fama's regression with a linear time trend
term added, this variable does not come in as significant. The explanatory power
instead comes primarily from a couple of humps in the interest and inflation

series. The first hump begins at the bottom of the recession which occurred
in 1954 and ends at the bottom of the recession which occurred in 1958. The
other hump starts after the credit crunch of 1966 and ends in the recession of

1971. Some explanatory power also appears to reside in the downturn of interest

rates in the recession of 53—54, at the very beginning of the sample. In
contrast, the period between 1958 and 1966 shows an upward trend in interest

rates with no matching uptrend in inflation rates. Carison [19771 showed that
Fama's regression fits very poorly over this sample period, and the hypothesis
that the coefficient is one can be rejected.

The remarkable thing about Fama's paper cannot be seen in the paper itself but
in the fact that his critics did not find any regression results over the entire

sample which strongly contradicted his. One would think that someone through
data dredging could come up with another variable which dominated the interest

rate as a predictor of inflation, but that appears not to be the case. Nelson
and Schwert L1977i and Hess and Bicksler f1975j used the highly regarded Box —

Jenkins forecasting techniques to produce a forecast of future inflation based
on lagged inflation rates. When Nelson and Schwert added this forecast to
Fama's regression of inflation on interest rates ovei the entire sample period

(1953 to 1971) the R2 was increased only to .31 from .29. The coefficient of
the interest rate fel.l from .97 in Fama's regression to .65, and the Box—Jenkins

—36—

forecast had a coefficient of only .38. The coefficient of the Box—Jenkins
forecast was significant (with a t statistic of 2.4, in contrast to the t of
1.6 for the lagged inflation rate alone) and so Nelson and Schwert concluded that
they had rejected Fama's hypothesis, but they were also forced to conclude that
the interest rate carried additional information not in the Box—Jenkins forecast.
Other critics were able to find other forecasting variables which pushed up the

R2 a little more. Carison [1977] added the employment/population ratio to
Fama's regression and this variable was highly significant and boosted the R2

to .36. Still, the coefficient of the interest rate was .64. Joines [1977]
added the three lagged values of the whosesale price index to Fama's regression,
which were also highly significant, boosting the R2 another increment up to
.37, but still the coefficient of the interest rate remained at .77.
We thus concur with Fama that his results and the results of his critics
do suggest that most of the variation in nominal short rates in his sample

period can be attributed to inflationary expectations. Fama's results must
give pause to those who believe that inflationary expectations are highly
sluggish or follow a trend and that medium—run movements in short—term interest
rates are movements in ex ante real rates.
It is possible to get an estimate of the variance of the ex ante real
interest rate from Fama's regression of inflation on interest if one is willing
to assume that the real rate of interest is uncorrelated with the predicted

inflation rate. It is easy to see this as an application of the well—known
theorem which states that, in a simple regression, if there is a measurement
error in the independent variable, the probability limit of the estimated
coefficient is biased downward by a factor which is the ratio of the variance
of the true independent variable to the variance of the measured independent

variable. Here, we take the variation in the real interest rate as the

—37—

"measurement error". If we ascribe all of the deviation of the estimated
coefficient of the interest rate from one to this source, then this implies that
with an estimated coefficient of .98, the variance of the real rate is only
about 2% of the variance of the observed interest rate, which implies that

the standard deviation of the real rate is about 20 basis points. Nelson and
Schwert used this kind of argument to arrive at an estimate of the variance
of the real rate of interest, but they based their estimate on a different

regression: of the change in the rate of inflation on the difference between
the interest rate and the lagged inflation rate which produced a smaller

coefficient (equal to .89). Under Fama's hypothesis, the coefficient should

again be one. If we take the real rate of interest again as the "measurement
error" of a true independent variable which is the inflation forecast minus the
lagged actual inflation rate and if we assume that the measurement error is
uncorrelated with the true independent variable, then by the same reasoning we
come up with an estimate of the variance of the real rate of interest which is
1 — .89 =

.11 times the variance of the interest rate minus the lagged inflation

rate, which then implies a standard deviation for the real rate of 80 basis points.
These estimates of the variance are suggestive, although they must have

substantial sampling error (not discussed by Nelson and Schwert). They do
suggest smaller movements in real interest rates than many people expected to see.

ill. 4 Time Series Analysis of Real Rate and Money Stock Data
From the sound of the hypotheses, it would appear that a Granger or Sims
test of causality (see Sims [19781) from money to real interest rates and a
test of the efFects of anticipated versus unanticipated money on real rates
along lines suggested by Barro [1978], would be relevant to their evaluation.

—38--

Granger and Sims tests of causality from the change in the log of the
money stock to ex post real interest rates as shown in Figure 4 appear in

Table 2. Seasonality was handled in two ways. In some regressions, a
seasonal dummy was added to the regression. For other regressions the data
was first Fourier transformed, both real and imaginary parts were then set
to zero in a band of width ir/12 around the seasonal frequency and the series

were then inverse Fourier tranformed to produce a deseasonalized series.
Data for the Sims tests was also quasi—first differenced with filter (l—.75L)2
The results of these causality tests are that, for the post—war period,

money unambiguously causes real rates. Clearly the stochastic structure of
the series has changed since the Accord, since no causality is found for the
pre—Accord period.

Barro tests reported in Table 3 use data series DM (change in the log
money stock), DMR (Barro's estimate of the public's forecast error at time
t for the change in the log money stock at time t), and G/y (real government

expenditure over real GNP) from Barro [1978], Tables I and II. The dependent
variable is the one—year (annual average) Treasury bill rate or the rate on
the Treasury bill whose maturity is closest to one year minus the lead one—

year inflation rate DP from Barro [1978] Table 2. Neither the DM nor the DNR
terms are significant in these regressions, which seems odd, since the Granger

and Sims tests found, with different data, that money causes real rates. The
F statistic is, however, nearly significant at the 10% level in the last

regression. The most intesting observation that arises here is that in the
regression in which DM is excluded, all variables have the sign we would

expect. All DMR terms have negative coefficients and G/y has a positive
coefficient.

—39—

What do these results mean? One interpretation along lines suggested
by the literature on rational expectations and the natural rate of unemployment
hypotheses follows from the assumption of a structural relation implying
that real interest rates respond linearly to the change in the log money
stock and expectations of future changes in log money stocks:

Pt

+

+ !:

E3E

(m.+.)

(14)

where p is the rationally expected real interest rate, m is the log money
stock,

is a stochastic process representing the real forces that causes

movements in the real rate even when the money stock is predictably growing
along a constant growth path,

and ni..

are coefficients, andE

.

denotes

expectation conditional on information available at time t—i.

+ Pt equals the rationally expected real

The ex post real rate r —
interest rate plus an error term:

r —

t+l + Pt =

+ +1' where the

error term is uncorrelated with all data known at time t and hence is itself
serially uncorrelated but may be correlated with information acquired between
t and t+l.

In terms of this formulation, hypothesis 1 may be interpreted to mean that
and in..

are

all zero, so that

shall assume for the moment that

=

and

r —

t+l + Pt =

+ fl. We

is constant. Then, Fama's tests are

appropriate and Barro's tests should find all DM and DNR terms insignificant
(as we in fact found) although a DMRt+l term may be significant insofar as
it affects

Granger or Sims tests should show that money does not cause

real rates, since, as Fama noted, ex post real rates will be unforecastable
white noise.

Hypothesis 2 may be interpreted as a restriction on the coefficients of

—40—

(14), namely:

+

Pt =

a(Am E_(Am_))
—

so that only surprises in monetary policy Am —

EAm

(14')

affect real rates.

The lagged terms are included to allow for persistence in the effects of

these surprises. Now, Fama's tests are no longer appropriate even if

is

constant. The Barro type tests should show all DM terms insiginificant,

but the DMR terms, which are supposed to represent Am —

E(Am),

might now

be significant. Since p is a simple moving average process whose innovation

m — Em

is uncorrelated with past data a Sims or Granger test using the

true p would show that money does not cause p, that is,

t—2'

contain all information available for forecasting p and hence further information
in terms of lagged m is of no value.

Hypothesis 3 might be interpreted as a less stringent restriction on
(14):

a

n

.—Et—i
(Am t—i ))
pt = t
t—i
0,i.(Am
+ ai1(Am_ - E_1_i(Am_j))
+

a

(14")

n

+...+

.(Amt—i
1=0 s,1

-E t—i—s (Amt—i
.))

where s is the policy effectiveness interval. The restriction imposed by this
hypothesis is that long term forecast errors (i.e., for a forecast horizon

greater than s) have in themselves no effect on p. This hypothesis now
implies nothing for any of the tests we have examined. One might have thought

—41—

that it would perhaps imply that, with a Granger causality test, money terms
lagged more than s periods would have no effect, but this is not the case.
The only test that seems immediately suggested by it would an be extension
of the Barro test found by estimating a battery of zero—period, one—period,
two—period, etc. forecasting equations, and then taking their residuals as

estimates of the terms Am — E (Am ),
t
t
t

Am

t

— E

t—l (Am t) '

etc.

One could then

estimate (14") using for p the ex post real interest rate. Hypothesis 3
would then imply that coefficients of Am —

E.(Am),

j

>s

should be zero,

which is in principle testable.
While the above analysis seems to suggest that Granger, Sims or Barro
tests, or extensions therof, might well be used to examine the hypotheses, it

is useful to bear in mind the stringent assumptions that must be made. These
assumptions have for the most part already been pointed out in different
contexts by, for example, Sargent [1976] and Sims [1977], so we will cite them
only briefly here.

We have assumed first that

is constant. In fact, it is plausible

that real factors have had an impact on real interest rates and that the
forecast of

may be related to lagged money. For example, wartime increases

in government expenditure may themselves influence

and are also correlated

with the wartime increases in money. This may mean that Barro, Granger or
Sims tests would find that money has an effect on real rates even if hypothesis
1 or 2

true. Barro's contemporaneous G/y term may well fail to correct

for such effects. On the other hand, even if all the hypotheses are false it
is possible, as Sims [1977] has pointed out in a more general context, that
if the Fed has been trying to stabilize real interest rates, i.e., offset
causality tests might lead one to conclude that money has no effect on real

interest rates. These problems seriously limit the usefulness of the above

—42--

tests

for the purpose of examining our hypotheses..

Another problem with the Cranger or Sims tests in this context is that
our hypotheses relate to unobservable rationally expected real rates and we

use in the tests the ex post real rates. With either Granger or Sims tests
the real rate must appear on the right—hand side of the equation, so we have
an errors in variables problem (which is not completely solved by using some

other estimate of the rationally expected real rates). Then, even if hypothesis
2 is true, m may appear to cause real rates, since lagged m may provide

information about Am. —

not obtainable from the lagged real rate

This problem would not arise if we were willing to assume in hypothesis
2 that there is no persistence in the effects of monetary surprises on real

interest rates, i.e., a = 0, i > 1.
variation in

Then (so long as problems of time

do not arise) we could test the hypothesis by checking whether

ex post real rates can be forecasted. In effect, we could eliminate the
lagged real rate terms from the Granger test by theoretical considerations.
Similarly, if the summations in (14") are known to contain only the first
term (i.e., a,• =

0, i >1, all j) then hypothesis 3 could be tested merely by

regressing ex post real rates on information known s periods earlier, which

should not contribute to a forecast of real rates. However, those who have
suggested our hypotheses have made it clear that they are not willing to rule
out persistence, so these tests cannot be used.
Another problem with the Barro tests is that it is perhaps not possible
to identify the contemporaneous forecase errors, since these rely necessarily
on an arbitrary characterization of the forecasting relation and information

set of the public. His forecasting equation depends on one contemporaneous
variable (a government expenditure term) which appears no more likely to be

—43—

known at any point of time than is the money stock itself. This term is
essential to the model, since without it his forecasting relation would be
autoregressive, in which case the DM terms would be linear combinations of
lagged DMR terms and hence not distinguishable in the regression.
Finally, whatever we learn about (14) under one policy rule, we do not
necessarily know that (14) is a structural relation which is invariant under

alternative policy rules,as Sargent [l976 has emphasized.

IV. Conclusion
We will conclude here by listing the salient facts that seem relevant

to each of the three hypotheses. Since the hypotheses are nested, evidence
against any hypothesis also serves as evidence against the hypotheses preceding
it.

Hypothesis 1

The Federal Open Market Committee knows it can influence

nominal rates because it has conducted what Friedman and Schwartz E1963]
called tiquasi_controlled experiments", i.e., it has moved the money stock
in ways and at times that could not be ascribed to reverse causality from economic

variables to the money stock. It seems highly improbable that the outcome could
be explained in terms of the reaction of inflationary expectations to the

shock. We thus feel we can safely say that hypothesis one is wrong.
Fama's evidence serves principally to cast substantial doubt on the
conventional argument that medium—run movements in nominal rates must be due
primarily to movements in ex ante real rates since inflationary expectations

are very sluggish. The correspondence of movements in post—Accord nominal rates
and the optimally forecasted inflation rates is fairly impressive. One must
bear in mind that really short—run movements in nominal rates did not occur
enough in the sample period for us to say anything about these movements in

—44—

nominal interest rates. Fama probably exaggerates the problems with earlier
data and our results with these incline us to the conclusion that the relative
constancy of real rates in his sample is due to Fed behavior, not the inability

of the Fed to shock them. An interesting unanswered question is: why did
the Fed behave so as to keep the pre—tax real rate constant? Was this behavior
due to their concern with some other variable which responds reliably to this
rate?

Hypothesis 2

Direct evidence against this weaker hypothesis

can be found only if we can find policy rule changes which affect the predictable

component of monetary policy. Barro claims to have decomposed changes in the
money stock into predicted versus unpredicted components for the post—war
period, but his claim is not terribly convincing and in any event he assumed

a constant policy rule. Granger or Sims causality tests are suitable as tests
of this hypothesis only under some artificial assumptions.
One policy change that appears to relate to the way the Fed reacts to

public information is marked by the Accord in 1951. This change was a once—
and—f or—all change ascribable largely to factors whose origin lay in politics

and theoretical economics, and in this sense it too was exogenous. There is
a dramatic change in the behavior of real interest rates that seems, looking

at the data, to coincide with the Accord. Unfortunately, we do not know for
sure that this change is due to a change in the systematic policy rule or just

a change in the magnitude of the random components. It is also possible,
moreover, that other changing variables were responsible for the change in the

real rate's behavior. We also saw, for example, a dramatic rise in income tax
rates dating from World War II, and although this change does not coincide with
the change in real rate behavior, one could not rule out that the two are

related. Paradoxically, pre—tax real interest rates were more stable after

—45--.

the tax rates were increased, when the theoretical case for constant pre—tax
real rates was apparently weakened.

Hypothesis 3

Direct evidence against this yet weaker hypothesis

can be found only if we can find changes in the monetary policy rule which
relate to information which was known in advance for a length of time exceeding

the policy effectiveness interval. We considered one such shock to policy
which relates to information forecastable into the indefinite future: i.e.,

the seasonal. The Fed announced a policy at the time it was founded of reducing
the seasonal in nominal rates. The Fed succeeded in reducing this seasonal,
but there is no evidence that it affected the seasonal in real rates.
The most important potential source of evidence against this hypothesis,

as well as hypothesis 2, comes not from the macroeconomic data but from

other considerations. If we combine hypothesis 3 with a demand for money
equation and a stability condition, then we are led to the conclusion that
the price level bears a certain realtionship to information about monetary

policy known in advance by more than the policy effectiveness interval. While
it is plausible that in some comparative steady states characterized by, say,

different money growth rates, this might work out to be true, it does not
seem likely that new information about discrete future Fed policy actions
would become optimally incorporated in the price level over any policy

effectiveness interval. Most prices do not seem to be set that way.
We conclude that none of the hypotheses is likely to be so strictly
correct as to rule out completely a predictable effect of systematic monetary

policy on expected real interest rates. This does not by itself establish that
there is a role for monetary policy in improving economic welfare. This
conclusion, moreover, rests on our impression as to how prices are set and
not on any formal statistical evidence, which cannot be effectively brought

—46—

to bear either for or against our conclusion. We hope, however, to have
clarified why the complete non—controllability of expected real interest
rates should not be, as many seem to have concluded recently, a cornerstone
for macroeconomic modelling.

FOOTNOTES

1/ This literature is surveyed by Poole [1976] and Shiller [1978].
2/ Data before 1951 is not usable, Fama [19751 said, because "in effect a rich
and obstinate investor (i.e., the Fed) saw to it that treasury bill rates did
not adjust to predictable changes in inflation rates".

3/ In the Phelps—Taylor model l977 prices are assumed fixed by firms one
period in advance, and the money supply fixed by the Fed based on information

not known one period in advance. If Fed policy were known one period in
advance, then taking expectations of their expression (8) based on information
known at time t—1 and using their expression (6), one finds that the money
stock drops out of the real part of their model altogether.

4/ The economy may never reach a new rational expectations equilibrium, or
may never be in one. Those are important theoretical possibilities that
lessen the appeal of models which assume expectations equilibria (see Shiller

l978).
5/ Slight variations in the definition arise due to different ways of handling
compounding. For example, we might define the real interest rate as one plus
the nominal rate divided by one plus the rate of inflation. We disregard the
differences among these definitions in what follows.

6/ If monetary shocks show persistence, i.e., serially uncorrelated movements

in create serially correlated movements in the real rate, as represented, £ or
example, in expression 14' below, then the real rate will not return to "target"
immediately.

7/ See Figure 5 below.
8/ In its first annual report to Congress {l9ls], the Federal Reserve Board seems
to say, in clear language, that it will mitigate seasonal fluctuations in interest
rates:

F-2

"It should not, however, be assumed that because a bank is a
Reserve Bank its resources should be kept idle for use only in
times of difficulty, or, if used at all in ordinary times, used
reluctantly and sparingly.... Time and experience will show
what the seasonal variation in the credit demands and facilities
in each of the Reserve Banks of the several districts will
be and when and to what extent a Reserve Bank may, without
violating its special function as a guardian of banking
reserves, engage in banking and credit operations.... There
will be times when the great weight of their influence and
resources should be exerted to secure a freer extension of
credit and an easing of rates in order that the borrowing
community shall be able to obtain accommodations at the lowest
rates warranted by existing conditions and be adequately
protected against exorbitant rates of interest. There will
just as certainly, however, be times when prudence and a proper
regard for the common good will require that an opposite course
be pursued and accommodations curtailed.
[The Board said it
gave]" certain assurance that whatever funds might be necessary
for the gradual and orderly marketing of the cotton crop would
be available at moderate rates."

9/ The disruption is not due to the spectacular deflation of 1920, since the
Census X—ll program automatically excludes such outliers. The Census X—ll is
still capable of producing spurious seasonals. Sargent L1971] demonstrated
the existence of a pre—1913 seasonal (as well as a post World War II seasonal)
in short—term interest rates with spectral analysis.

10/ The seasonal pattern in real interest rates may be spurious. Since nominal
rates showed less pronounced seasonality than inflation rates, there was an
incentive in the fall, when agricultural prices were low, for farmers to hold

their crops off the market and borrow at the nominal rate. Their efforts to do
so was apparently hampered by credit rationing by the banks. It is possible
that there was no seasonal in real rates actually available to farmers.
One effect of Fed policy not shown in the data may be the reduction of

credit rationing in the fall. Hypothesis 2 would then suggest that the seasonal
pattern in inflation should disappear, making for a spurious apparent reduction

in real rate seasonality, which we do not observe. Instead, this interpretation
suggests the Fed may have introduced a seasonal in real rates that did not exist
before.

F—3

11/ This figure shows the inflation as measured by the wholesale, rather
than consumer price index. However, the plots using the consumer price
index, for the period for which it is available, look similar.
That Fama's hypothesis did not hold before is certainly well known.
The famous "Gibson Paradox", noted as early as 1844, was a positive correlation
between interest rates and price levels, not rates of change of prices.
While the correlation is most pronounced for long—term interest rates, it
was also present with short—term rates for British data in the century before

World War II, and over this period there was really no correlation between
short rates and inflation rates (Shiller and Siegel 119771).

A plot of an ex post real British consol rate (subject to an arbitrary
assumption about inflation rates past 1977 which makes the more recent real
rates unreliable) from 1729 to the present appears in Shiller and Siegel
I 1977j. This real long—term interest rate is very volatile and at times

negative. It was found that nominal long—term rates over this period moved
in such a way as to exacerbate, rather than mitigate, the effects of inflation
on long—term real rates, i.e., nominal long rates were negatively correlated
with the appropriately defined long—term inflation rate.

12/ Fama used the rate of change of the purchasing power of money as his
dependent variable, i.e., his dependent variable is

rather

than

—

=

—

When we used his data, we multiplied & by

—1200 and called this the inflation rate. We have reversed the sign of his
coefficient to accord with our definition.

13/ The residuals do, however, fail the David—Hartley—Pearson studentized
range test of normality at the 5% level. The studentized range in the residuals
regression of inflation on a constant and the interest rate for the full
sample period is 6.42, and the Durbin—Watson statistic is 1.77.

F—4

14/ Feldstein and Summers' arguments applied to long—term interest rates,
which might be connected, via term structure phenomena, to short rates.

15/ These statistics refer to a regression of the inflation rate on a constant
and the interest rate over the longest possible sample with the data series
shown in figure 6.

16/ Fama's inflation rate is computed as

=

—

so the food

price component of the change applies to the period from the beginning of the

preceding month to the beginning of the current month. The interest rate
series gives the treasury bill rate at the end of the preceding month, which
matures over the current month.
The monthly change in the food price index is more volatile than other
components and had a correlation of .71 with the monthly change in the consumer

price index over Fama's sample period. Thus, the led inflation rate may be
the more appropriate dependent variable.

2

.493

.324
(2.38)

.375
(.369)

(—.926)

.100
(.135)

(.884)

(.081)

(4.04)

(3.55)

3.62

.236

4.33

.481

(.184)

(.107)

(1.07)

—.185

.493
(2.49)

l.4S

.620

—2.66

(—.942)

(2.02)

(2.35)

(1.08)

.394
(2.91)

(—.950)

—.116

(—.137)

—.186

(—2.59)

.383

—.482

DEP

4.79

DEP1

COEFFICIENT OF
SEASONAL

AUTOREGRESSIONS

1.73

CONST

RATE

I

next

10.4
(.002)

.360
(—1.01)

3.59
2.69

16.9
7.71
.131

5.85
.172
(—.327)

15.33
6.45
.859

21.6
7.36

2.08
12.87
4.31

4.56
2.59
3.47

a(RESID)
G(FITTED)

3.54

Sig(F)

F

.151
(—.679)

(—.416)

.104

.244
(—1.48)

t

tt

(REsID)//_2)

Dependent variable Is the ex post real rate (i.e., the 4—6 month prime commerical paper rate minus the
succeeding actual 5 month inflation rate computed from the wholesale price index) as shown in figure 4.
Data is semi—annual, for June and December. Seasonal dummy is zero in June, 1 in December. Numbers in
is t—statistIc of dependent variable lagged one more time in a
parentheses are t—statistlcs,
different regression (presented here instead of a Durbin—Watson statistic). c(RESID) is standird error of
of regression, o(FITTED) is estimated standard deviation of fitted values, equal to

1952—Il to 1977—IT

1915—IT to 1950—IT

1901—IT to 1929—It

1915—Il to 1929—TI

1901—Il to 1913—I

Time Period

EX POST REAL

TABLE

TABLE II
GRANGER - SIMS CAUSALITY TESTS

SAMPLE

TYPE

SEASONAL

F STATISTIC

DEGREES OF

1928—IT
to 1977—Il

Granger

No

3.09*

5, 87

1928—TI
to 1977—Il

Granger

Yes

1.40

5, 86

1929—Il
to 1975—Il

Sims

No

1.71

4, 80

1928—Il
to 1950—Il

Granger

No

1.55

5, 33

1928—Il
to 1950—Il

Granger

Yes

1.14

5, 32

1929—Il
to 1948—TI

Sims

No

0.58

4, 26

5.22**

5, 33

3.05*

5, 32

18.9**

4, 28

1955—Il
to 1977—IT

Granger

No

1955—Il
to 1977—Il

Granger

Yes

1957—IT
to 1977—IT

Sims

No

NOTES: Tests indicate whether the change in the log of the money supply
(from time series illustrated in figure 3) causes real rates (from
series shown in figure 4). Data is seasonally adjusted unless
seasonal dummy appears. For Sims tests, data is quasi first differenced
with filter (1—.75L)2. Ex post real rate based on nominal rate in a
given quarter is considered contemporaneous with the change in the log
of the money stock from the preceding quarter to the given quarter.
Cranger tests involve regressing real rate on five lagged values of
the real rate and money variable, a constant, a linear time trend
and, if noted, a seasonal dummy. F statistic is test of hypothesis
that all lagged money coefficients are zero. Sims tests involve
regressing the money variable on 4 lead, a contemporaneous and 6
lagged real rate variables, as well as a constant and linear time
trend. F statistic is test of the hypothesis that all lead real rate
coefficients are zero. * significant at 5% level ** significant at
1% level.

O11W

111013

SflUTW

(uT1Tna

j

4c-[quou1

111013

iad

s

4UOU1

lPa

ai

(dcl)

ST

nuu

Zl

uaq

———

———

(iz—)

STIaS

ZO- LL8

81

9L1

14UOW
:saL0N

c6z—

TI (cz)
6Z

(891—)(ZY—) (tT—)(C6T—)

-------

--- z.gC- UIC- c6- 0Lz- 9L--- (cc'i-) (oo6-)(TLE-)(zz1-)(Lz9)

civ— 8Cc— ZC

———

iso

0L1—

———

E6z—
———

uci

Tiwa

———

ia

iwa

wa

wci

wçj

LNI3IddaOa

wa

———
---

(00E) (090)

uapudau

(8l)(CZL)(ZZ1)(TL6)(97i) (769)(8CT)
6c (ZT)(96Z)
l6L— Z9 6L— zc— zcc
ZZ— 0c8
t'C ccc

iatc

IPi

PU

OZ

c1ns1

1U04

TAI %T
UOTJIUTS
'[A[ %ç
UTJtU2TS
sspuid Ut
suua
O tSt3S ST
o suatztjoo
ssaqodXq
9L—zc6T
ST /O
s po1ad ldurng 9L61 u ç pu zc6i U i r 'u dMO T1 1o 1nTpudx UWUIAO
UT
T
')0S C8UOW
30 O[
uq p ST wa
'uoTnba UflS1OJ Q SO11 UT TPTS1
LI4O TIV
UTOTTOJ
103
lqT1 U0TT3UT
SO11
14 JO S1OU1AO) JO pio
A1SJ
P' '9L61 'uisA A1SJ
[L6l]

SU1T 001

STSTD,S

sT1s

OL—l6l
ZT—6 10)

OZ
801

961

161

CZ0

(ZBY)

wii

(oco—)(oi) (z61)

occ

69

(toz)(ziz)

'/

-----

(Lz)(oEz—)(zLY)(ozl--)(L—) (LVI)
icz
096- 69E cL- 96- c89

zi
Z91

----

£0z o11

9T

9C

cL Z

ci

l•l

901 8Z1

CUT

•a•s

:jo

aiavi

SNOISS2O dAL o'nivq

III

190S

1910

1920

Figure 1 4—6 month prime commercial paper rate (above) and additive Census X—ll seasonal
factors (below), monthly data
vertical lines correspond to January of the year
noted directly below it. Source of prime rate series:
l9OO-24, Banking and Monetary
of
Governors
of
the
Federal
Reserve
System 1943, Table 120; 1925—
Statistics, 1914—41, Board
Federal
Reserve System.
1929, Macro Data Library, Board of Governors of the

1900

I

2

3

4

S

6

7

8

9

¶900 TO 1930d MONTHLY DATA

190S

1910

191

1920

192S

Figure 2 Ex post real interest rate, the 4-6 month prime commercial paper rate minus the 5 month
inflation rate based on the BLS whosesale price index of all commodities (above) and additive Census
vertical lines correspond to January of the year noted
X—1l seasonal factors (below),
series:
Bureau of Labor Statistics, 1900—1913 Bulletin #l9
below
it.
Source
of
price
directly
Bulletin
Macro
Data Library, Board of Governors.
(1914), 1913—19,
#269, 1920—29,

1900

I

I

I

I

I

I ____i

I

2529333741

I

I

41

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

45 49 53 57 61

I

I

45 49 53 57 61

65

I

I

I

I

I

I

69 73 77

I

I

65 69 73 77

Figure 3 Money growth rates before seasonal adjustment, 6 month percentage change in Ml over succeeding
6 month period at annual rates, 1925—1977, semi—annually
(June and December). Marks on horizontal
axis correspond to June figure.
Source: 1925—40, Banking and Monetary Statistics 1914—41, Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1943, Table 9; 1941—70, Banking and Monetary Statistics
1941—70, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1976, page 5 and Table 1.1, 1971—7
Federal Reserve Bulletin, passim.

-20

—I0

U

10

20—

30

40

25 29 33 37

-50

—35

—20

-5

10

25

40

55

70

85

pt

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

lines.

real rate of interest, 1900—I to 1977—lI, June and December, equal to
Figure 4 Ex
the interest rate minus the inflation rate plotted in figure 5. Marks on the horizontal
axis correspond to the June figure.
Fama's sample period is enclosed between vertical

1900

1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

Figure

5

5 months (dptted line)
Annualized percent change in the whosesale price index over succeeding
June and December.
and four to six month prime commercial paper rate (solid line), 1900—I to 1977—lI,
Fama's sample period is enclosed by vertical
Marks on horizontal axis correspond to the June figure.
publication noted in Figure 2,
lines. Source: wholesale price index: Bureau of Labor Statistics,
Federal Reserve, publication noted in figure 1.
prime commercial paper rate:

—80

—65

-50

-35

-20

—5

10

25

40

55

1900 TO 1977 BIANNUAL DATA

1953

I
I

I

I

1957

I

I

I

I

1961

I

I

I

I

1966

I

I

I

I

1969

I

I

I

I

R

R

to —1200
At
Figure 6 Fama's data, February 1953 to July 1971. Solid line is inflation rate, equal
where
and
are defined in
and dotted line is one month treasury bill rate, equal to 1200
At
Fama (1975). Division marks on the horizontal axis correspond to the first month of the year
Data courtesy of E. Fama.
numbered directly below it. Source:

—8

—6

—4

—2

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

REFERENCES

l Barro, Robert, "Unanticipated Money, Output and the Price Level in
the United States", Journal of Political Economy 86: 549—80, August 1978.
[21

Bureau

of Labor Statistics, Handbook of Methods, U.S. Government Printing

Office, Washington, 1971.
[31

Carison, John A. "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation:

Comment" American Economic Review 67: 469—75, June 1977.
[41

Diller,

Stanley "The Seasonal Variation in Interest Rates" in Jack

Guttentag, Editor, Essays on Interest Rates,Volume II, National Bureau of Economic
Research, New York, 1971.

Fama, Eugene F. "Interest Rates and Inflation: The Message in the Entrails"
American

Economic Review

67: 487—96, June 1977.

[6! Fama, Eugene F. "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation"
American Economic Review 65: 269—82, June 1975.
[7! Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Summers "Inflation, Tax Rules and the Long—

Term Interest Rate" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1978, pp. 61—109.
181 First Annual Report of the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. Government
Printing Office, 1915.

[9] Fischer, Staniey, "Long—Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the
Optimal Money Supply Rule", Journal of Political Economy, 85: 191—205, February
1977.
I

ioj

Iriedman, Milton "Factors Affecting the Level of Interest Rates" in Saving

and Residential Financing, 1968 Conference Proceedings, United States Savings
and Loan League, Chicago, 1968.
[11] Friedman, Milton and Anna Jacobson Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United
States, Princeton University Press, 1963.

12! Glass, Carter, An Adventure in Constructive Finance, Doubleday, New York, 1927.

R— 2

I l3 Cranger, C.W.J. and Paul Newbold, "The Time Series Approach to Econometric

Model Building" in New Methods in Business Cycle Research: Proceedings from a
Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 1977.
[141

Hess,

P. J.

and

J.L. Bicksier, "Capital Asset Prices versus Time Series Models

as Predictors of Inflation: The Expected Real Rate of Interest and Market

Efficiency" Journal of Financial Economics 2: 341—60, December 1975.
1151

Joines,

Comment"

Douglas "Short—Term Interest Rates as Predictorsof Inflation:

American Economic Review 67: 476—7, June 1977.

Fie] Lucas,

Robert E., Some International Evidence on Output — Inflation

Trade—Offs", American Economic Review 63: 103—24, April 1973.
[171

Macaulay, Frederick

R.

The Movements of Interest Rates, Bond Yields and

Stock Prices in the United States Since 1856

National Bureau of Economic

Research, New York, 1938.

[181 Nelson, Charles R. and C. William Schwert "Short Term Interest Rates as
Predictors

of Inflation : On Testing the Hypothesis that the Real Rate of Interest

is Constant" American Economic Review 67: 478—86, June 1977.

[19] 7helps, Edmund S. and John B. Taylor, 'TStabilizing Powers of
Policy Under Rational

Monetary

Expectations", Journal of Political Economy, 85: 163—

89, February 1977.

[201 Poole, William "Rational Expectations in the Macro Model" Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity pp. 463—505, 2, 1976.
[211 Roll, Richard "Interest Rates on Monetary Assets and Commodity Price

Changes" Journal of Finance 27: 251—77, Nay 1972.
[221 Rutledge, John A Monetarist Model of

Lexington,

Inflationary Expectations Heath,

Mass., 1974.

[23] Sargent, Thomas "Expectations at the Short End of the Yield Curve: An
Application of Macaulay's Test" in Jack Guttentag, Editor, Essays on Interest

R-3

Rates, Volume II, National Bureau of Economic Research, New York, 1971.

[24] Sargent, Thomas J. "The Observational Equivalence of Natural and Unnatural
Rate Theories of Macroeconomics", Journal of Political Economy 84: 631—40,
June 1976.

[25j Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace "Rational Expectations, the Optimal
Monetary Instrument and the Optimal Money Supply Rule", Journal of Political

Economy 83: 241—54, April 1975.
[26] Shiller, Robert J. "Rational Expectations and the Dynamic Structure of
Macroeconomic Models" Journal of Monetary Economics 4: 1—44, January 1978.
[27] Shiller, Robert J. and Jeremy J. Siegel "The Gibson Paradox and Historical
Movements in Real Interest Rates" Journal of Political Economy 85: 891—907,
October 1977.
[28]

Sims, Christopher A., "Exogeneity and Causal Ordering in Macroeconomic

Models", in New Methods in Business Cycle Research, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, October 1977.

