NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INCIDENCE AND ALLOCATION EFFECTS OF
A~ TAX ON CORPORATE DISTRIBUTIONS
David F. Bradford

Working Paper No. 349

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
May 1979

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Business Taxation and Finance. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 349
May 1979

The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax
on Corporate Distributions
SUMMARY

To study the effects of "double taxation" of dividend income
(first at the level of the corporation, then at the shareholder level)
this paper analyzes a model with a tax on all corporate distributions
to equity owners and no other taxes.

Contrary to the common view, the

tax is shown to have no substitution effect and, in particular, no
effect on the corporate choice between debt and equity (via retained
earnings) finance.

The analysis opens to question certain arguments

commonly used to support integration of corporation and individual
income taxes via "dividend relief."

David F. Bradford
Woodrow Wilson School of Public
and International Affairs
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
(609) 452-4804

1.

Introduction
There has recently developed in the United States an increasing interest

in the "integration" of individual and corporation income tax systems.

As seen

in the policy discussions of this issue, the central problem with the existing
"classical" system (whereby a tax is levied on .corporation profits after payment
of interest, independently of distributions), is the double taxation of dividends.
Double taxation arises because the income generated by corporate investment financed by equity is taxed once at the level of the corporation, currently at a
marginal rate of 46 percent for corporations with significant amounts of income,
and then again, at rates ranging from zero to 70 percent on the income tax return
of the individual shareholder on the portion of the remainder that is distributed
in the form of dividends.

The resulting penalty on equity finance, it is argued,

distorts the financial and real decisions of corporation.

To correct this the

usual remedy, which has been extensively adopted in Europe, is to apply some form
of "partial integration," which means to apply a tax adjustment which is a
function of dividend distributions.

Most approaches involve either allowing the

corporation to deduct dividend distributions from the corporation income tax base
(much as interest payments are deducted) or allowing the shareholder a tax credit
which stands in relation to dividends as the corporation income tax stands to
corporation income net of tax.
Both of these methods have the effect of eliminating the corporation tax on
fully distributed earnings, but they are not otherwise equivalent to the "full"
integration of corporation and individual income accounts, which is commonly regarded as impractical administratively, even if desirable in principle.1!

The

difference between full and partial integration is in the treatment of retained
earnings, which are taxed at a flat rate independently of the circumstances of
the shareholders under partial integration and at the shareholder's marginal
income tax rate under full integration.

-2-

The present analysis suggests that the partial integration approach
may have gotten the matter just backwards.

The problem on this view is not

the extra tax imposed on distributions, but the divergence between shareholder
and corporation tax rates on retained earnings.

If the market rate of interest

is r, an individual who pays income tax at marginal rate m earns a rate of
return (l-m)r on his savings in ordinary assets.

A corporation, on the other

hand, is able to accumulate at rate (l-c)r on the same investment, where c
is the rate of corporation income tax.

The power of compound interest being

what it is, we would expect the choice of asset types to be dominated by the
difference in the rates of return, even if a price in the form of a tax on
distribution must be paid to obtain the favorable rate.
In this paper I consider the incidence and allocation effects of a tax on
distributions, as distinguished from a tax on the income of individuals of corporations.

To isolate the issue, indeed, I abstract from the taxation of

income, as well as from uncertainty, nonlinearity of tax rules and multipli·city of individual tax regimes.

This paper analyzes the behavior of a system

with a flat rate tax on corporate distributions to shareholders and no other
taxes.

It is thus concerned with a kind of polar case of the double taxation

of dividends.
In view of the abstraction from uncertainty, it might appear to be an open
and shut case that imposing a tax on distributions will lead to a flight to
the corner solution of all-bond finance.

Or at least, if this is not optimal,

it would appear obvious that good financial policy toward equity calls for retained earnings only, so that stockholders can take their returns in untaxed capital gains.
obtains.

The conclusion of the analysis

is

that neither of these results

While the issue of new equity may become unattractive (unless this

form of negative distribution is subsidized at the same rate that positive distri-

-3-

butions are taxed), all those financial plans involving non-negative distributions, over which indifference prevails in the absence of the tax, continue to be
indifferent.

The all-debt policy acquires no special place, nor are dividends

discouraged in favor of retained earnings.
The latter point is based upon a careful treatment of the determination of
the value of equity claims.
earnings leads to a

For if, as is often assumed, a dollar of retained

one dollar increase in the market value of equity, share-

holders could obtain their returns free of the tax on distributions.

The conclu-

sion of the present analysis, based on a rational expecations model of asset
pricing, is that an extra dollar of retained earnings (with corresponding reduction in borrowing) increases the value of equity by one minus the rate of distributions.

This is why shareholders are indifferent between dividends and re-

tained earnings.
Intuitive Explanation of the Results.

It may assist understanding of the results

to consider the analogy of the tax on distributions with a tax on all withdrawals
from savings accounts opened before some specified date in the past.

Were they

bought and sold as are bonds, the market value of such accounts would presumably
fall upon imposition of the tax, to one minus the tax rate times their face value
"replacement cost."

The tax once in place, there is no particular incentive for

existing account owners to accelerate the pace of withdrawals; a growing value
of balances in such accounts (due to accumulating interest), and, therefore,
a growing absolute divergence between market and replacement values, is fully
consistent with optimizing behavior.
In the analysis presented here, the corporate "vessel" is the analogue of
the savings account, and the tax on distributions the analogue of the tax on withdrawals.
tion.

The tax is the price that must be paid to get cash out of the corpora-

Like the hypothetical tax on bank accounts, it would be necessary for a

-4-

of a surprise, for it to find any base to subject to tax.

The usual analysis

of the corporation income tax, in effect, assumes it is being imposed before
the system "starts up."

The discussion below illustrates how profound a dif-

ference it may make to examine instead a tax on dividends imposed on a system
already in existence.
Implications.
quences.

Our conclusion about equity valuation has some significant conse-

One implication is that along an equilibrium path the total value of

the firm--the sum of market values of its debt and equity--will depend on the
financial policy of the firm, which is indeterminate, even though the firm's
real capital stock will be determinate.

The larger the fraction of equity

finance, the lower will be the market value of the firm (which will always be
less than or equal to its replacement cost if the firm is not permitted to be a
net creditory).
A second implication of the equity valuation result is that an unanticipated change in the rate of taxation of distributions affect the market value of
existing equity claims, and, hence, the wealth of their holders.

For a given

rate of interest and for given corporate indebtedness and capital stock, the
value of equity is simply proportional to one minus the rate of tax on distributions.
Not only does the tax have no effect on corporate financial policy, it also
leaves the investment criterion unchanged.

This is not quite the same as leav-

ing investment unchanged since wealth effects of the tax may influence the path
of the economy.

This point is borne out in the model developed here, in which

the potential forms in which wealth can be held are corporate debt and equity,
and government debt.

-5-

The inclusion of government debt in the model is not fortuitous.

Since

corporate financial policy is indeterminate, so also is the flow of government
receipts from the distribution tax.
used to retire government debt.

In the model the proceeds of the tax are

The equilibrium conditions of the model include

a term reflecting the present value of receipts from the distribution tax, comparable and opposite in sign to the quantity of government debt.
In the model presented one can readily analyze the incidence of a change
in the tax parameter without an offsetting change in either other taxes or government exhaustive expenditure.

An increase in the tax rate causes a loss in

value of existing equity and, therefore, influences the future course of the
economy in ways that are in principle determinate.

Of particular interest is

an increase in tax rate accompanied by a one-time government expenditure, financed by an increase in government debt sufficient to offset the tax increase.
The incidence of this combination is confined wholly to the wealth loss of
holders of equity at the time.

There is no deadweight efficiency loss, and no

burden to be the subject to subsequent concern.
This explains the remark above to the effect that the partial approach
to integration may be correcting the wrong problem.

While the present analysis

is far too simple to support policy conclusion, it does suggest that insofar
as partial integration amounts to eliminating a tax on distributions, it may
result primarily in windfall wealth redistributions, reversing the, by now,
irrelevant wealth changes that occurred when the tax was introduced, while
leaving the features of the tax system giving rise to ineffiiency.
Connection with the Existing Literature.

The approach taken here bears some

similarity to that taken in recent papers by Joseph Stiglitz (1973) and Mervyn
King (1974) which show that the relationship between income tax

r~les

and

-6-

optimal corporation financial and investment policies is more complex than
had been previously

understood.~/

By analyzing the corporation's choices as

part of a multi-period optimization problem, these authors are able to treat
consistently the interactions between individual and corporation income tax
systems.

Both papers conclude that the optimal financial structure may be

indeterminate, given certain relationships among the relative rates of taxation of corporate income, corporate distributions, interest payments and capital gains, the history of the corporation (in Stiglitz's analysis), and expected future values of the tax parameters (in King's analysis).

For these cases

and for a wide further class as well, the corporation's real investment decisions are unaffected by the taxes.
The present paper differs from these predecessors in its explicit attention to general equilibrium, including equilibrium in the asset market, in
an infinite-horizon world with rational expectations. Stiglitz devotes little
attention to the question of asset valuation.

As far as the question of finan-

cial structure is concerned, his analysis best described as a theory of the small,
closely held corporation.

His results turn on the tax-technical matter of

whether a corporate distribution is classified as a "return of capital" (and
hence free of individual income tax--the tax on distributions).

The corporations

accounting for the vast bulk of corporate assets in the United States rarely
approach the condition of having distributions which qualify as return of capital.

As a consequence, the necessary conditions for optimality of financial

policy (Stiglitz 1973, p. 13) are fulfilled empirically by the large public
corporations, essentially permanent, horizon-less institutions, constituting
the major share of the corporate sector.

A different theory is needed to explain

their behavior, and it can probably neglect the special treatment of return of
capital, as is done here (and in King).l/

-7-

Whereas, Stiglitz in his paper looks at the corporation as the vehicle
of an individual investor, King views the problem of corporate decisionmaking
as that of maximizing the present market value of equity.

His paper can be

regarded as a theory of the market value of a firm setting financial and investment policies optimally with respect to present and expected tax parameters.
Presumably

because his analysis is in a partial equilibrium setting, King does

not concern himself with the wealth changes implied by changing .tax parameters
which are given special attention here.

However, the neutrality results des-

cribed here can be derived as a special case of King's model, and it might be
interesting to impose his richer structure of tax institutions on the general
equilibrium model examined

here.~f

For present purposes, however, the single

tax on distributions is sufficient.
Outline of the Paper.

Section 2 below contains the formal description of the

model economy, including the equilibrium concept employed.
a solution of the model.

Section 3 derives

Section 4 contains a discussion of the results sum-

marized above, while Section 5 contains concluding remarks.

2.

Formal Model of Rational Expectations Equilibrium with a Tax on Distributions.
The model underlying the analysis is in the Samuelson (1959) consumption loan

tradition.if

Individuals live for two periods in an infinite time horizon world.

In the first life-period each individual works (offerinf> one unit of labor inelastically), consumes, and saves for retirement.

"Retirement" describes the

second life-period, when each individual dissaves and consumes, leaving nothing
to his heirs.

-8-

All production takes place in the single corporation which behaves as a
price taker.

Production conditions are described by a neoclassical production

function of capital and labor employed, with constant returns to scale.

The

capital available to the corporation in any period is inherited from the previous
period and is thus fixed in amount before the time of actual production.

The

output of a period may either be consumed or frozen into infinitely durable
capital.

Investment is regarded as reversible (defrosting is possible).

Savings may be held in three forms, bonds issued by the corporation shares
of its common stock, or bonds issued by the government.

A given generation of

individuals acquires these financial assets at the end of its first life-period,
after production for that period has been completed, and after the investment
plans of the corporation have been realized.
The holders of its common stock "own" the corporation.

The owners at the

beginning of a period control that period's production and the real investment
which determines the amount of capital which will be available for use in production at the beginning of the next period.

The owners of the firm at the

beginning of a period specify as well the financial policy for that period, which
means they set the amount of funds to be distributed to themselves as dividends
and the amount of corporate borrowing.
Although the model does not contain stochastic elements it is necessary for
the agents in the model world to make decisions based on expectations about the
future.

The concept of equilibrium employed requires that, execpt for such

rude shocks as a change in the tax parameter, agents' expectations be fulfilled.
This is made more precise below.

-9-

Principal Variables
L

total number of labor units available for application
during the period (equals the number of individuals born
in the period, exogenously given).

K

stock of corporate capital at the beginning of the period
(used for production during the period).

D

total distribution made by the corporation during the period.

V

"ex dividend" value of corporate equity, that is, the value
at the end of a period, after production is complete and
distribution and investment decisions have been made.

B

total corporate indebtedness at the beginning of the period,
which must be repaid during the period.

g
B

total stock of government indebtedness at the beginning of the
period, which must be repaid during the period.

F(K,L)

the production function, characterized by constant returns
to scale.

Lower case versions of the variables defined above represent individual, rather
than aggregate levels.

w

wage, expressed in terms of output (output is taken as numeraire
throughout) .

-10-

r

the interest rate; a bond payable next period sells for
l/(l+r) in the current period.

t

rate of tax on corporate distributions to stockholders.

For any variable, X, let X+, X++, etc., represent its value in succeeding
periods; X

its value in the preceding period.

e

Let X+

denote the value of

X expected to obtain in the next period, (X:): the expected value of next
period's expected value, and so on.

The Formal Structure of the Model
The formal structure of the model is as follows:
Agents.

There are three classes of agents.

The "young" consists of L

identical individuals, each of whom supplies one unit of labor inelastically
1
and chooses first life-period consumption, c , corporate bond holding, b+

government bond holding, b~, and fraction, s, of the ownership in the corporation,
. .
.
to maXlmlze
a utl'1'lty f unctlon,
u (1
c ,c 2) .

The "old" consists of L

identical individuals.

The representative mem-

ber of this group runs the corporation he bought in his youth, choosing the
D

quantity of labor, L , supply of bonds, B+, and capital stock to be carried
into the next period, K+.

These imply a level of corporate distributions, D.

All of these are chosen to maximize second life-period consumption, c

The "government" is usually simply a cash flow manager.

2

It redeems ex-

g
piring bonds for B with the proceeds of sale of new bonds, B~/(l+r), plus
receipts from the tax on corporate distributions, tD.

-11-

Markets.

There are five markets, for labor, corporate bonds, government bonds,

equity and goods.

In each period the prices of labor and bonds (government

and corporate bonds are assumed perfect substitutes) and the relationship between
corporate financial and investment decisions and equity value adjust to clear
the markets.

The equilibrium quantities in any period will depend on the capital

stock, outstanding debt obligations and the size of the new generation, all of
which are either exogenous or determined in the preceding period.
market clearing

In turn the

condition determines the values of capital stock and bond obli-

gations carried into the next period.
State Variables.

The conditions inherited from the past, affecting the current

path of the economy, are the capital stock, the corporate debt obligation, and
the government debt obligation.

In addition, the labor supply, exogenously deter-

mined, influences the equilibrium.

The state of the economy, predetermined in

any period is thus described by a vector, (K,B,Bg,L).
Endogenous Variables.

The value of the ownership claim on the corporation is

going to depend upon the capital stock and the debt obligation being carried
forward into the next period.

These are two of the three variables which must

be determined by the corporation's owners, and we may characterize them as
determining the "quality" of the equity claim which the owners propose to sell.
Quality is thus described by the pair, (K+,B+).
In addition to the two conventional prices, the wage, w, and the interest
rate, r, there is a "valuation function," relating the quality of equity, as
set by the corporation's owners, to its price.
of a 100 percent interest in the corporation.

V(K+,B+) represents the value

-12-

Expectations about future prices and equity valuation are also determined
endogenously.

All individuals are assumed to have identical point expecta-

e e e
tions, represented by a vector, (w+,r+,v+).
Temporary Equilibrium.

A temporary equilibrium, conditional on the state of the

economy and expectations, is a balancing combination of prices and a valuation
function, together with a specification of the quality of equity and amount of
government indebtedness, such that all markets clear.

Thus, a temporary equili-

brium may be described by a vector, (w,r,v,K+,B+,B~,L), such that the capital
stock and bond obligations, K+,B+,B~ are compatible with all markets clearing
at prices (w,r), and equity valuation function, V, with employment level L.
Evolution.

The evolution of the economy is determined in part by the exogenous

change in population, from L to L+, assumed describable by a first order difference

relationship.~/

Because of this assumption it will be taken for granted

below that knowing the relationship between a current endogenous variable and L+
is equivalent to knowing that between it and L.

The remaining state variables

are determined by the temporary equilibrium market clearing conditions.
eral, these will not uniquely determine the quantities involved.

In gen-

In particular,

for the system under study, the level of corporate indebtedness carried forward
will generally be arbitary, since corporate

fi~~ncial

policy will be a matter of

indifference.
Rational Expectations.

It will be assumed that expectations are "rational" in

the sense introduced to the economics literature by Muth (1961).

In the present,

non-stochastic model, I take the notion of rationality of expectations to encompass two properties.

The first is that rational expectations are correct in that

in an economy evolving according to a sequence of temporary equilibria, each depende~t

upon that period's expectations, each period's expectations will be ful-

-13-

filled in the following period.

The second property embodies the idea that if

two economies are identical in structure and have reached the same state (where
the calendar date is not considered part of the state description), their agents
should have the same expectations.

This property is intended to represent

the notion that phenomena such as the tulip bulb mania are pathological.

We

want expectations to be linked to the underlying economic reality and hence wish
to rule out those that are self-fulfilling if prices continue to appreciate,
regardless of underlying economic reality.

Expectations satisfying the second

property can be described as stationary functions of state variables.II

Note

that there is no guarantee that rational expectations exist for an economic system, nor that if they exist they are unique.

3.

A Solution to the Model
In this section we describe the behavior of the model economy in an equili-

brium with rational expecations.

This means writing down expressions for the

endogenous variables, including expectations, in terms of the state variables,
satisfying the definitions of equilibrium with rational expectations: given
expectations, markets clear and expectations are correct.
Throught the following discussion of equilibrium it is assumed that the tax
parameter, t, is constant.

One-time policy changes are assumed to be unexpected.

Furthermore, non-negativity constraints are

ignored.~1

The natural way to proceed would be to solve for the temporary equilibrium
as a function of the agents' expectations and then to seek a form of expectations
that is self-fulfilling.

Given the large set of possible expectations (recall

that the valuation of equity is represented by a function) this is rather complicated.

Instead, we shall take the approach of first developing a reasonable

-14conjecture about the temporary equilibrium under rational expectations, then
describing the associated scheme of expectations, and finally showing that
the optimizing behavior of agents holding those expectations will produce
the originally conjectured temporary equilibrium.
Therefore, we follow a somewhat artificial sequence, in which the first
step is to write down equations which are asserted to determine the endogenous
variables other than expectations.

We then write down the equations asserted to

determine the expectations from the state variables, and show that when the
system evolves according to the rules described in the previous section these
expectations are correct.

Only then do we go through the steps to show that

if the agents have these expectations, their optimizing behavior will indeed
lead to a temporary equilibrium with the originally asserted relationship between state variables and current prices and quantities.

Endogenous Variables in Temporary Equilibrium
The strict logic of the argument does not call for any discussion of equilibrium until step three.

However, the asserted relationships between current

prices and quantities and state variables in temporary equilibrium with rational
expectations will be recognizably conditions of competitive market clearing, and
will be more readily understood if discussed in these terms.
Equations (1) and (2) below, with their associated definitions, (3) and (4),
describe wage and interest rate determination by labor and goods market clearing.
The function K* defined in (3) and evaluated at (r,L+) gives the capital stock
which equates the rate of interest to the marginal product of capital at full employment in the next period.

This is the amount of capital which will be carried

forward into the next temporary equilibrium.

Problem (4) is a lifetime utility

maximization problem of a representative individual with lifetime consumption
preferences described by u when the rate of return on savings is r and with

-15wealth equal to w, the wage reward for one unit of labor.

Equation (1)

is the condition of equality of wage and marginal product of labor at full
employment.

Expression (2) specifies that total savings of the young

generation equals the capital stock carried forward plus the government debt less a term reflecting the potential government receipts from the
tax on distributions.

(1)

w

(2)

(w-c (r,w))L

g
K*(r,L+) + B - t(F(K,L) - wL - B + K)

1

Here F. denotes the derivative of F with respect to its ilth argument;
1

K*(r,L+) is defined by:

1

and c (r,w) solves the problem:

(4)

1 2
Max u(c ,c )
c l ,c 2
subject to c

l

2
+ l:r

=

w.

In the model world the amount the representative young person will offer for
a share in the firm will depend on the expected sum of corporate distribution
and resale proceeds in the next period.

It is natural to conjecture that

equilibrium valuation of equity will be related to the potential net-of-tax
withdrawals from the firm.

Since all withdrawals are taxed, the expected net

withdrawal obtained if no debt is issued in the next period (in effect "closing
the account") would be the obvious basis for evaluation.

This is given by:

-16-

Since there is no uncertainty, this sum will be discounted at the rate interest,
r, giving us:

(5)

Recall that our objective is to specify the endogenous variables as functions of
state variables.

Noting that r has been described as a function of state

variables by (1)-(4) we must only anticipate the rational expectations of wages
to write V in the required form.

The expected wage level will presumably clear

the labor market when the endogenously determined capital stock is available.
Hence, we conjecture, by analogy with (1):

(6)

so that the equity valuation function is itself expressed as a function of state
variables by:

(7)

which says that the value of equity is equal to the discounted value of the
after-tax proceeds of distributing in the next period all of the anticipated
resources of the corporation, after paying off the debt.
These equations determine the two prices and the equity valuation function.
The capital stock carried into the next period will be given by K*(r,L+).
remains to determine B+ and B~.

It

The stock of debt the young will want to hold,

with present value (B++ B~)/(l + r), will depend on their evaluation of equity.

-17-

The aggregate portfolio value of the young is determined by their consumption
decision.

Therefore, we have:

(8)

It turns out that any combination of B+ and B~ satisfying (8) is compatible with
equilibrium.
and B~.

Associated with a larger value of B+ will be lower values of V

Note that condition (8), together with (7) implies:

tB+ + B~

(9)

= constant,

where the constant depends upon r, wand L+.

Rational Expectations
Expression (6) relates the expected wage to the labor force in the next
period and the capital stock that would be optimally employed with the labor if
capital services were directly marketed and had a price equal to r, the rate of
interest.

The value of r is determined from state variables by (1)-(4).

The

remaining expectations of interest rate and equity valuation function are, like
(6), obtained by adding the expectation superscript to the appropriate temporary
equilibrium condition and making use of the functional relationship between
state variables and current prices and quantities as already described.
The value of r: is obtained by combining (1)-(4), (6), (9) and (10):

(10)

Similarly, the expected valuation function is given by:

-18-

(11)

where

(12)

The Correctness of Expectations.

Given our approach to developing the expecta-

tions formulae, it will be no surprise that they will be correct if the next
period's equilibrium is described by relationships (1)-(4), (7) and (8),
suitably updated.
w+

e
= w+.

For example, since K+

= K*(r,L+),

Similar reasoning implies that r+

=

e

condition (6) implies that
e
=
V
+
+

r+ and V

The Temporary Equilibrium is the Right One
It remains to show that if the agents form their expectations in the way
described, then equations (1)-(4), (7) and (8) indeed characterize a temporary
equilibrium.

For this we need to derive the demands and supplies of the agents

on the various markets and test for market clearing.
The budget constraints of the young and old generations together with the
behavioral rule ascribed to the government imply that the excess demands on these
five markets are dependent in the usual Walrasian fashion:
markets implies clearing of the fifth.

This may be most easily seen if we for

a moment regard the old generation as two sets of agents:
corporation managers.

clearing of four

stockholders and

The budget balance requirement for the young implies that

the sum of the values of their excess demands for the five "commodities" (labor,
corporate bonds, government bonds, equity and goods) must be zero.

The sum of

g
the values of excess demands of stockholders will be B + B + (1 - t)D, as the
old generation cashes in its old bonds (which are not commodities marketed in

-19-

the current period) and collects the after-tax proceeds from the corporate
distribution.

The sum of values of the excess demands of the corporation will

be -B-D, as it pays off the inherited debt obligation and makes its distribution.
For the government, which supplies new debt to cover the difference between
old debt and tax receipts, the sum of excess demands is -B

g

+ tD.

verified that the four classes of excess demands aggregate to zero.

It may be
Hence,

if market excess demands of four of the five commodities are zero the fifth
market excess demand must be zero as well.
Excess Demands of the Young.

Consider first the young generation.

They antici-

pate solving the problem of optimally managing the corporation as owners of its
equity, with quality given by (K+,B+).

That is, they anticipate solving:

(13)

where D+ is the distribution they make to themselves from the corporation:
B

(14)

weLD _ B + K - K
+ ---++--++
+
+
++
e
1 + r+

Substitute (11), (12) and (14) into the maximand, thereby, eliminating the
decision variables B++ and D+, and calculate first order conditions for a
solution with respect to the remaining two.

The anticipated labor demand

satisfies:

(15)

Using (6) and the assertion (3) that K+ = K*(r,L+) (used in implicitly detere
mining w+ according to rational expectations), we conclude that:

-20(16)

The first order condition for optimality with respect to K++ in (13) is:

(17)

Euler's Theorem applied to the constant returns to scale production function
implies that, given the asserted relationships between state variables and
current endogenous variables, the solution of (13) can be expressed as:

(18)

e

In (18) the determination of L+ and w+ as a function of current state variables
is implicitly taken for granted.
Now imagine that a Walrasian auctioneer has called off wages, interest rate
and valuation function and the existing owners of the corporation have set
K+ and B+.

The representative young person now solves the lifetime consumption

maximization problem:

1 2
Max
u(c , c )
1 2
g
c ,c ,b+,b+,s

(19)

subject to:

c

1

b+
=w- l + r

-21-

The two constraints in (19) can be combined to imply:
1

(20)

c

+

c

1

2

+

r

=w +

W

s(l + r

- V)

Problem (19) is unbounded, and the resulting demands incompatible with
equilibrium unless the term in parantheses is zero:

(21)

We may verify from (5) that this condition is satisfied if the wage, interest
rate and valuation function are in the suggested temporary equilibrium relationship.
When condition (21) is satisfied the young are indifferent about their
portfolio composition among the two types of bonds and corporate equity.

Solv-

ing problem (19) implies the value of the aggregate demand for financial instruments by the young is (w - cl(r,w»L.
1
demand is c (r,w)L.

The aggregate value of their goods

Their labor is supplied inelastically.

Excess Demands of the Old.

As owners of the corporation, the old generation

must choose labor demand and equity quality to maximize the sum of after-tax
distributions and proceeds from resale of the equity interest.
their problem is:

(22)

where:

(23)

D
D
B+
D = F(K,L ) - wL - B + K - K+ + 1 + r

In other words,

-22-

Substitute (7) and (23) into (22) and derive first order conditions:

(24)

(25)

from which:

(26)

Euler's Theorem applied again gives us the value of the objective function at
an optimum of W(K,B;L,w) as defined by (18).

This is the maximum the owners of

the firm can realize, given wand the inherited capital stock and debt obligation
(and given the equity valuation function (7)).
In the solution to the maximization problem the financial policy is indeterminate.

Given the other variables, a unit increase in B+, resulting in a

net distribution larger by 1 - t, leads to a reduction of 1 - t in the market
value of equity.

The supply of corporate bonds may thus be arbitrarily set by

the owners of the corporation.

On the remaining markets they (the old) supply

inelastically 100 percent of the ownership interest.
g
goods amounting to the sum of W, Band B .

They demand consumption

In addition they demand K+ in the

goods market for the corporation to carry into the next period.
Excess Demands of Government.

Because we have chosen to consider the markets

for labor, corporate bonds, equity, and goods, we do not need to give more
consideration to the demands and supplies of the agent "government" than was
involved in establishing the appropriate version of Walras' Law for this model.
Ordinarily, the government does not appear on either side of any market except

-23-

that for government bonds, the commodity we have chosen to drop from the
dependent system of market clearing relationships.
Market Clearing.

Having established excess demands of each of the agents we

can proceed to the analysis of market clearing.

The indifference of the young

generation about portfolio composition and that of the corporation's owners
about financial policy assures clearing of the equity and bond markets.

The

young purchase all of the equity in the corporation (at the price described
by (7)) and all debt offered for sale by the corporation.
This leaves the labor and goods markets.
d
requires L

= L,

Clearing of the labor market

or, from (24):

(27)

Equating demand and supply in the goods market implies:

(28)

g
W(K,B;L,w) + B + B + cl(r,w)L + K*(r,L+)

f(K,L) + K

Use (18) to rewrite (28) as:

(19)

(w - cl(r,w))L

= K*(r,L+)

g
+ B - t(F(K,L) - wL - B + K)

quations (27) and (29) are the same as equations (1) and (2), from which we
conclude that the latter do, indeed, describe the determination of wage and
interest rate in temporary equilibrium, given expectations formed as described
in the previous subsection.

Uniqueness of Equilibrium.

This completes the argument.

As noted above, the definition of equilibrium with

rational expectations does not imply its uniqueness.

We shall not attempt here

to prove the uniqueness of the equilibrium of the model specified above.

How-

-24-

ever, we can show that what might loosely be described as the "conventional
view" of valuation of the firm, in which each extra dollar of retained earnings is reflected in a dollar increase in equity value, will not be consistent with rational expectations in this model.

For if this valuation rule

prevailed agents would be led to demands incompatible with equilibrium.
e

express the conventional view we replace V and V+ above by (1 - t)
(1 -

t)

-1

To

and

-1 e

V+' cancelling the effect of the tax on equilibrium valuation as

seen in (5) and (11).

Now the anticipated valuation problem (13), after the

substitution of D into the maximand, continues to have B++ as an argument, with
constant coefficient -t(l + r:)-l

The solution value B
++

=

_00

implies an

infinite valuation of the firm by equity demanders, and an infinite supply
of bonds by the young (individual borrowing to purchase stock).

By the

same reasoning with respect to problem (22), the owners of the corporation are
led to an infinite supply of bonds, ruling out market clearing.

The same

sort of conclusion follows if V and V: are multiplied by any other constant
different from unity.

4.

Commentary

Characteristics of Equilibrium Paths
The analysis of section 3 demonstrates the assertion made in the introduction that the indifference between debt and equity characterizing financial
policy in the absence of taxes in this no-uncertainty world continues to hold
in the presence of the tax on distributions.

The key to this conclusion is found

in the equity valuation function (5), from which it follows that an extra
dollar of retained earnings induces an increase of only 1 - t dollars in the
value of equity.

-25-

The conclusion that the investment criterion of the firm (K+

= K*(r,L+»

is unaffected by the tax on distributions is in itself not surprising, since
without uncertainty all financing, and in particular, marginal financing
can take the form of debt.

Note, however, that this result holds even if the

firm's owners do not consider financing the marginal investment through
bonds.

It is only required that the firm's potential shareholders compare the

return on a dollar retained by the corporation and invested in capital with
that on a dollar invested in bonds.
The implication that financial policy is indeterminate follows immediately
from (5).

We now go on to argue from (1) and (2) that the path of the

economy through time is independent of the choice between debt and equity
finance.

From (2) it follows that the determinants of temporary equilibrium

values of wand r include B, the inherited corporate bond obligations, when t
is positive.

g
However, equilibrium depends also on B , the inherited govern-

ment bond obligation.

In the evolution of the economy these two types of

debt are interrelated; a larger issue of corporate bonds in a period implies
a larger corporate distribution, larger tax receipts and smaller issue of
government debt.
g
B

Using the government behavioral equation,

= B~(l + r)-l + tD, and the definition (23) of D, we conclude that the time

g
path of B + tB is independent of corporate financial policy (as represented by

(30)

B~ + tB+

=

[(1 + r) (B

g

+ tB) - t(F(K,L) - wL + K - K*(r,L+»]

and it is this sum which enters the goods market clearing condition (2).

-26-

The Effects of Changes in Parameters
The equations of temporary equilibrium with rational expectations allow
us to analyze the effect of changes in the tax parameter or in government
behavior, provided these are regarded as one-time changes which are not
expected to recur.

Thus, an unexpected increase in the tax rate will, accor-

ding to (5) result in a loss of wealth (and hence consumption) for the old
generation.

If there is no change in the rate of interest, a five percen-

tage point increase in the rate results in a loss equal to five percent of
what their equity claims would have been worth in the absence of the tax.
In general, we know from (2) that a change in t, given the values of
the state variables, will lead to a change in the equilibrium values of w
and r, and consequently, a change in the future course of the economy.
this sense, the tax on distributions is not neutral.

In

But the changes in the

dynamic path derive not from substitution away from equity finance, rather
from the wealth effects of the tax.

An increase in the tax rate reduces the

perceived wealth of the economy by reducing the value of equity.

Equation (2)

suggests the wealth effect may be equivalently viewed as a reduction in the
extent to which government debt is regarded as wealth.

An increase in the tax

rate results in an increase in the implicitly expected debt retirement (by tax
receipts) in the future.
Paradoxically, the implication that an increase in the rate of tax on distributions has the opposite effect on the path of the economy from an increase in
government debt means that the latter may be the means not for shifting a burden
to the future but for confining the consequences of an unexpected increase in exhaustive government expenditure to the old generation at the time it occurs.

Con-

sider an economy moving along a rational expectations equilibrium path with tax
rate t, arriving at the time of the hypothetical moment of unexpected government

-27-

expenditure with outstanding corporate and government debt obligations
g
Band B •

The government considers an increase in t to meet the expenditure,

which we shall assume has no effects which interact at any time with ordinary
consumption in individual preferences.

From (28) we know that an increase in

t of dt, ceteris paribus, creates a goods demand shortfall of
dt(F(K,L) - wL - B + K) because it reduces by this much the value of equity
with which the old generation had planned to finance consumption.

This is

the extra expenditure which can be undertaken by the government, diverting
resources from old generation consumption, while maintaining goods market
equilibrium.

If this is financed by issuing the requisite amount of extra

debt, financial market equilibrium will also be maintained.

Suppose that in

subsequent periods the government returns to its normal debt-managing role.
Then the increased government debt will exactly offset the effects of the
increased tax rate.

In all real respects the path will be unchanged from the

pre-extraordinary events path.
To see this note that the original path will continue to be an equilibrium
one if in every period (from (2),

(31)

dt(F(K,L) - wL - B + K)

= dB g

Suppose this relationship holds in some period.

Will it hold subsequently

under the original rules of the economy's evolution?
government behavioral equation:

(32)

We wish to show this implies

We have from the

-28-

dt(F(K ,L ) - w L - B + K )
+ +
++
+
+

(33)

= dB+g

Substituting from (31) into (32) we have
g

dB
dtD + 1 ++r

= dt(F(K,L)

- wL - B + K) ,

from which, using the accounting relationship (23)

(34)

Now check that

(35)

This will hold if

which we know to be true by Euler's Theorem along the original path.
Finally, we need to show that the new government debt, created to cover
the extraordinary expenditure, amounts to dB

g

as defined in (31).

Instead

g
of the combination of changes dt, dB , we make the combination dt,dB~, where,
because of the tax, the latter depends upon the financial policy of the firm
such that
g
dB
tD + 1 ++r

=

dt(F - wL - B + K)

From (32) we see that this produces exactly the same situation in the next
period as did the originally described pair of changes.
the economy thus continues to be an equilibrium.

The subsequent path of

-29-

5.

Concluding Remarks
The principle purpose of this paper has been to demonstrate that the

double taxation of dividends characteristic of the classical corporation income
tax need distort neither corporation financial nor investment policies.

While

the model embodies drastic simplifications, these have been designed to isolate
the main point.

The usual argument by which it is concluded that double

taxation leads to distortion is developed in essentially the same setting.
What is required is an extra tax on distributions; the presence or absence
of other taxes has no bearing on the conclusion.

This analysis, therefore,

is sufficient to show where the previous reasoning goes wrong.
When the connection between the tax on distributions and the valuation
of equity is taken into account it is seen that conclusions about the distorting
effects of the corporation income tax based either on simple compounding of
statutory corporation and individual income tax rates or on measured average
tax rates using tax receipts are founded on incorrect premises.

Both the

continued existence of equity finance and the practice of making positive
dividend payments may be fully consistent with maximization of stockholder
wealth, even though dividends are subject to a tax and even though (in the model)
capital gains are not taxed.
The picture of the incidence of the double taxation of dividends that
results from spelling out its effects on asset prices is also somewhat surprising.

While the precise incidence in this model is a function of govern-

ment debt as well as tax policy, a major, if not the only, burden of a tax
on distributions is borne by equity holders at the time the tax is instituted.
A significant aspect of such wealth transfers is that they cannot be meaningfully reversed at a later date when the equity interests have changed hands.
Removing the tax on dividends cannot restore the wealth of the original losers,

-30but only provide a windfall gain to the new shareholders.

These effects

deserve careful consideration in attempting to understand such reforms as
full or partial integration of corporation and individual income taxes.

-31FOOTNOTES
*Princeton University and National Bureau of Economic Research.

This paper

was written while I was a visiting fellow at the Center for Operations
Research and Econometrics (CORE), Universite Catholique de Louvain, Belgium
(January-June 1977), and an earlier version appeared as.CORE Discussion Paper
7738, August 1977.

I would like to express my appreciation for the exception-

ally stimulating research environment at CORE as well as my thanks to UCL and
the Commission for Educational Exchange Between the United States of America,
Belgium, and Luxembourg for financial support.

Discussions with William

Andrews of Harvard Law School, Maurice Marchand and Henry Tu1kens of CORE
and Pierre Pestiau of the Universite de Liege, were of great help.

Finally,

thanks to Martin Hellwig, then of CORE and Princeton University, who went
beyond the call of duty in reading drafts and educating me on the fine points
of the theory of rational expectations.

1/ For a discussion of some of the problems and a suggested method to solve
them see U.S.·Government (1977).

1/ See also the follow-on papers by Stiglitz (1976), King (1975) and
Asimakopu1os and Burbidge (1975).

1/ There is a further difficulty with Stiglitz's representation of the provisions in U.S. tax law distinguishing return of capital from other distributions.

Whereas, Stiglitz (1973, p. 9) makes this distinction a matter of the

cumulative amount the owner has received from the corporation; in fact, it
depends upon the relationship between cumulative earnings and cumulative distributions.

Under the Stiglitz version, in effect, the first distributions repre-

sent return of capital while the U.S. law may be described as making the last
distributions return of capital.

-32-

~/

Using King's notation, the special case is that of m
t

ttl = 0, 6

=

= 0, Zt

0,

l-t, where t is the rate of tax on distributions.

2/ Diamond (1965) presents a model which includes government debt.

Unlike

the Diamond and Samuelson models, this model does not assume constant population growth, nor is the analysis confined to steady states.
~/

If population evolution were describable only by a higher order difference

equation, additional state variables, in the form of a sufficient number of
observations of past population levels to determine the solution of the difference equation, would be required.

The basic argument would, however, be un-

affected.

]j

To express this notion precisely, let T (a) denote the set of possible suce

cessors to a as a result of temporary equilibrium, given expectations vector
e.

Formally, expectations will be described as rational if there exists a map-

ping, E, from the set of state vectors into the set of expectations vectors,
such that for all possible state vectors, a, and all possible successor states,

~

King's (1974) analysis incorporates expectations concerning tax parameters

and makes considerable use of various nonnegativity constraints.

-33REFERENCES

Asimakopulos, A., and J.B. Burbidge, "Corporate Taxation and the Optimal
Investment Decisions of Firms,"

Journal of Public Economics, IV (1975),

281-287.
Diamond, Peter A., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"

American

Economic Review, LV (1965), 1126-1150.
King, Mervyn A., "Taxation and the Cost of Capital,"

Review of Economic

Studies, XLI (1974), 21-35.

- - - -, "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the cost of Capital:
A Connnent,11

Journal of Public Economics, IV (1975), 271-279.

Muth, J., "Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price Movements,"
Econometrica, XXIX (1961), 315-335.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., "Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of
Capital,"

Journal of Public Economics, II (1973), 1-34.

- - - -, "The Corporation Income Tax,"

Journal of Public Economics, V (1976),

303-311.
United States Government, Department of the Treasury, Blueprints for Basic
Tax Reform, Washington, D.C., 1977.

