                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              SOCIAL SECURITY AND RETIREMENT:
           EVIDENCE FROM THE CANADA TIME SERIES



                   Anthony J. Pellechio



                   Working Paper No. 351




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                         May 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Social Insurance. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. This paper was prepared for the
Eastern Economic Association Meeting in Boston in May
1979.  I would especially like to thank Alicia Munnell of
the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston for suggesting and
encouraging me to undertake this study. Henry Bartel and
Peter Wrage of the Economic Council of Canada provided me
with the data and other relevant material. Dave Reitman's
assistance is gratefully acknowledged.
                                                          Working Paper No. 351
                                                                       May 1979


                       "Social Security and Retirement:

                    Evidence From the Canada Time Series"


                                   Summary



      This study examines whether social security influences the aggregate retire-

ment rate in Canada. The life—cycle model of individual behavior provides the

foundation for this study. The model indicates how social security can affect an

individual's decision to retire. Further, the model is used to specify the variable

that measures this effect. This variable is social security wealth which equals the

present value of the social security benefits to which an individual is entitled.

The model for individual retirement decisions is used to construct a model for the

aggregate retirement rate.

       Time series data from Canada include a measure of social security wealth that

matches the specification given by the life—cycle model. The estimate of the model

yields evidence that social security induces retirement. An increase in social

security wealth of approximately $2300 per capita measured in 1971 dollars has been

estimated to raise the retirement rate by 5 to 6 points. The effect of the creation

of the Canada and Quebec Pension Plan was to raise the retirement rate by 1.5 points

in 1967.




                                                  Anthony J. Pellechio
                                                  Research Associate
                                                  National Bureau of Economic
                                                      Research
                                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                  Cambridge, MA   02140

                                                  (617) 868—3919
                                                                                   1




            Social security is a major source of income support for retirement in

Canada; the program paid benefits of approximately $4.5 billion in 1975. These

benefits are provided through a combination of three programs that make up

the social security system. These programs are':

            (1) Old Age Security, a universal program with a benefit paid to all

               who reach age 65;

            (2) Canada and Quebec Pension Plan, a social insurance plan with earn-

                ings-related benefits to those who contributed during their working

                lives;

            (3) Guaranteed Income Supplement, a social welfare plan with benefits sub-

               ject to an income test.

The provision of a pension as a right under Old Age Security is based on the

assumption that people retire because of poor health or because they are forced

out of their jobs and pension benefits compensate, in part, for the concomitant

reduction in earnings. This assumption implies that social security should have

little or no effect on retirement. The purpose of this study is to examine

whether this view is correct.

        Static labor supply theory holds that a person retires when his market

wage is less than the value of his time in nonmarket activity.2 Theoretical

work on life-cycle labor supply3 has generalized this static condition. The

generalization is due to the dynamic nature of the life-cycle model, which

uses the path that a person's wage follows, his subjective rate of discounting,

and   the   market rate of interest. Social security can have additional economic

effects on the retirement decision in the life-cycle model. Section I discusses

in more detail how social security can influence retirement using the life-

cycle model.4
                                                                                 2




        The main implication of the theoretical discussion is that a social

security variable (derived from the lifetime budget constraint) be included

in an econometric analysis of the retirement decision. The standard model

of labor force participation is used to construct a model for the aggregate

retirement rate; this model includes the variable that measures social securi-

ty's effect on retirement. The development of the model and a framework for

evaluating how economic variables may influence retirement are given in section

II.

        The time series data used in this study come from the Economic Council

of Canada. The data include an estimate of the value of the social security

benefits that individuals are entitled to receive. Benefits are evaluated

in a way that matches the specification of the variable derived in the

theoretical discussion for measuring social security's effect on retirement.

The data and empirical specification of the model are given in section III.

This section also discusses how a consistent estimate of the model is obtained.

The estimate of the model for the aggregate retirement rate is given in sec-

tion IV. The study is summarized and concluded in section V.



I. The Life-Cycle Model and Social Security

        The effect of social security on retirement will be discussed using

the model of life-cycle behavior. In the absence of social security, an in-

dividual chooses a path of lifetime consumption and labor supply by maxi-

mizing lifetime util:i.ty subject to the following constraint:



(I)
                  ctut =     WttDt

where     T   =    years in an individual's life
          c =      consumption expenditures in year t
                                                                               3


                  =   labor   supply in year t

            R     =   year   of retirement,        =           =   =   = 0)
                                                        £R+l
                  =
            w         wage rate in year t
                  =   discount   factor from year t to whatever year defines

                      present value


This simply says that the present value of total lifetime consumption must equal

the present value of total lifetime earnings.

        Social security lowers a person's earnings over his working life by

collecting contributions, and raises his income during retirement by paying

benefits. The budget constraint becomes:

            T             R-l                      T
(2)              cD =            (l_Pt)wttD   +         b
           t=l            t=l                     t=R

where       Pt =      contribution    rate in year t

           b = social         security benefit payments in year t



The second term on the right-hand side of eq. (2) will be called "social securi-

ty wealth" and denoted SSW. It represents the actuarial present value of social

security benefits to which an individual is entitled (the survival probabili-

ties that make itan actuarial calcualtion are included in Dt). If SSW equals

the present value of contributions then

          k-I
(3)              Ptwt[) =       SSW
          t= 1


In this case, eq. (2) is equivalent to eq. (1) and there is no change in indi-

vidual behavior. however, if SSW exceeds the present value of contributions,

social security has raised a person's lifetime income. The life-cycle model

predicts a potential decrease in labor supply on the usual assumption that
                                                                                 4




leisure is a normal good. This decrease could occur as a reduction in labor

supply (z.)   in   all years of a person's life or in the number of years of

work (R-l).    It may be harder to do the former because employers offer jobs

only at standard hours of work. This is a reasonable observation, but only

suggests that early retirement is the feasible alternative. This paper will

not examine labor market constraints or arrangements between the firm and

employee to reduce hours of work. The main point here is that the lifetime

income effect can cause early retirement.

       Barro's (1974) theory of life-cycle behavior with bequests implies that

there is no lifetime income effect. Intergenerational transfers cancel any

change in lifetime income imposed by social security. The data used in this

study permit a good calculation of how social security affects an individual

over his own lifetime. However, there is little information on transfers

suitable for this study. Consequently, this paper does not address the

Barro thesis on theoretical grounds by incorporating bequests because this

cannot be carried through in the empirical analysis. However, Barro's argument

depends on the assumption that lifetime labor supply is fixed. This paper

examines that assumption. Evidence that social security influences retirement

at least challenges Barro's conclusion that social security has no effect on

other economic behavior.

       Another effect of social security comes from the influence of an addi-

tional year of earnings on an individual's basic benefit. This influence

arises because his    benefit   is computed from an average of his annual earnings.

To see this effect consider the change in the budget constraint when a per-

son works in year R instead of retiring:
                                                                                  S


            T            R                                         T
(4)             cD =         (_pt)wttDt   + SSW   -
                                                      bRDR
                                                             +
                                                                         (b_b)D
           t1           tl                                       r=R+l

where       b =    the benefit obtained in year t by adding another year of

                   earnings in the benefit calculation.

Benefits in year R are forgone as shown by substracting hR from SSW. However,

earnings in year R may raise benefit payments in the future. Whether another

year of work is worth it with respect to social security is decided by comparing

the forgone benefit payment with the present value of the increase in future

payments. Thus, earnings are not the only compensation for market work.

There may be additional compensation from an earnings-induced increase in the

basic benefit. Like the direct monetary compensation of wage payments, the

increase in future benefits can have a price effect on behavior.

        The main point of this section is that social security has two potential

effects on retirement: a lifetime income effect measured through SSW, and a

price effect arising from an earnings-induced increase in benefits. The time

series data used in this study provide a good measure of SSW. However, it is

not clear how to measure the price effect or whether it can be measured in

time series data. The price effect is probably best examined in a cross-section

dataset in which an accurate observation on individual wage rates is given. In

this study, the coefficient for wages will incorporate the effect of additional

compensation for market work coming through social security. The retirement

model that will he developed in the next section will include SSW for the

purpose of testing the hypothesis that social security affects retirement.


II. The Retirement Model

        The analysis of labor force participation by Clark and Summers (1978)

is used to construct an econometric model for estimating the effect of social

security on retirement. The theory underlying the model assumes that indivi-
                                                                                           6



duals maximize an intertemporal utility function of the form:



(5)          U
                     IJ(c1,
                              .   . ., c,,,       ...,



subject    to the budget constraint given by eq. (2). Since the focus of atten-

tion is on retirement decisions the analysis does not rely heavily on first-or-

der conditions for the maximization of eq. (5) subject to eq. (2). As a result,

a more concise expression for the utility function than eq. (5) can be adopted:



              U =
(6)
                     EJ(ci, c. cr1. t-l' t' t÷l

where the period t-l now summarizes the past up to year t and t+l, the future

after year t.

          An individual's retirement decision depends on the minimum wage at which

he will participate in the labor force. This minimum wage is his reservation

wage, s, given by UL /Uc              .   In   other words, S   equals the rate at which
                         t        t
the   individual trades leisure for market goods. The hypothesis in

this study is that s depends on social security wealth, SSW, as well as other

variables that usually affect reservation wage. These other variables are

past employment, future wages and prices, and tastes. The shadow price relation-

ship is given in the following general form:



(7)           s =
                    f(SSW,
                              w       '
                                               ' -i'   b)



where the superscript e denotes expected future values and the variable b

measures unobserved determinants of shadow price like tastes or ability. An

individual will retire when his shadow price of time exceeds his market wage,

w. Thus, an individual's decision to retire is expressed formally as:
                                                                                   7



(8)             w < s = f(SSWt, w '             '     ' b)


          The aggregate retirement rate is derived from the preceding model for

the individual.           In general, individuals face different wages and have different

employment experiences, expectations and tastes. As a result, market and

reservation wages have a joint distribution; g(w, s), in the population. The

aggregate retirement rate, R, is given as follows:



(9)             R =   ff g(w,     s) dwds
                      w<s


This equation implies that the retirement rate is a function of market wage and

the variables that influence shadow price. A logarithmic functional form is

assumed so that eq. (9) becomes:



(10) n R =            +      2n SSW +       £n w L   9,           ifl 11 +
                                                          w:+                     + v

where v is a disturbance term.

          It is useful at this point to consider the expected signs of the coef-

ficients for the model. When SSW increases, the lifetime income of a larger

segment of the population is likely to be increased by social security. As

discussed in section I, the lifetime income effect works to reduce labor supply.

Retirement is one way in which this reduction can take place. Consequently,

      is cxl)ectcd to bc positive. The major purpose of this study is to examine

whether    RM   SSW has     a positive coefficient in eq. (10).
         The expected signs of other coefficients depend on what view is taken

about labor force participation in the life-cycle model. Two views of parti-

cipation, which are discussed by Clark and Summers (1978), are relevant in this
                                                                         8




study. One view is the timing hypothesis which states that individuals sub-

stitute market work for nonmarket activity in response to transitory movements

in real wages. As a result, individuals time their labor force activity so that

they work more when wages are high and less when wages are low. This follows

from separating life-cycle decision making into two steps. First, individuals

determine how much total time they will spend in their lifetime based on their

average wage. Also, they know that their wage will fluctuate around the average.

Consequently, in the second step, they distribute their working time so that

periods of high labor supply are timed with periods when wages are high. The

timing hypothesis has been developed formally by Ghez and Becker (1974) who

state it succinctly when they say: "In our analysis there is no income or wealth

effect because all changes in wealth are perfectly foreseen. Hence, a rise in

wage rates with age generates only substitution effects, and the supply curve

of labor would be positively sloped." (p. 12).

       The first, most obvious conclusion to draw from the timing hypothesis

is that the retirement rate will be low when w is high. Hence      is expected

to be negative. The timing hypothesis also implies how the retirement rate

should respond to w and ir. If individuals expect future wages to be high

relative to current wages they will work less in the current period. Therefore,

   should increase when w1 is high so that the expected sign of       is positive.

The argument for a positive    also implies that    should be negative. This

follows because future real wages will be lower when future prices are expected

to be higher. Ulnally, employment experience should have no effect on current

behavior according to the timing hypothesis. Any fluctuations in employment

occur in response to transitory wage changes. Because these changes are tran-

sitory, employment will not be correlated between periods and hence     should

be zero.
                                                                           9




       The   second   view of labor force participation is the persistence hypo-

thesis which emphasizes employment experience as a determinant of current

participation. This view is based on recent econometric studies5 of labor

supply which posit that an individual's past labor force status can have an

effect on current status. This effect is independent of influences exerted

by economic variables like wages, prices, and wealth, or individual differences

in behavior. This hypothesis, defined as state dependence in the econometrics

literature, asserts that there is a real effect of occupying a certain state

of economic activity on future behavior. As a result, individuals who have

participated in the labor force will continue to do so, while those who have

retired will stay in that state. The persistence hypothesis implies less

movement between retirement and work in response to economic incentives than

the timing hypothesis.

       The persistence hypothesis suggests a pattern of coefficients in the

model that differs from that given by the timing hypothesis. Both hypotheses

predict that higher current wages will decrease the retirement rate. However,

because those who are retired are likely to stay retired under the persistence

hypothesis, the magnitude of the wage effect will be smaller. Also, this

hypothesis holds that labor force status is correlated over time implying that

individuals do not closely match their labor market activity with random fluctu-

ations in wages. Consequently, future wages and prices will have a negligible

impact on current retirement status so that 83 and 84 are expected to be close

to zero. However, while the timing view predicts that         is zero, the persis-

tence hypothesis is given by the assertion that past experience influences cur-

rent behavior so that 135 should be nonzero. The sign of 85 will follow from

the definition of employment experience.
                                                                           10



        In this section a model has been developed for examining the economic

determinants of the aggregate retirement rate. The effect of social security

on retirement is the main focus of attention. This effect is measured
                                                                         through
social security wealth which enters the model as an explanatory variable

whose coefficient is expected to be positive. Two hypotheses of labor force

activity provide a framework for evaluating the effect of other economic

variables. The hypotheses of timing and persistence make different predictions

about the coefficients of variables. When one hypothesis predicts that a coef-

ficient should have a certain sign, the other predicts a zero or, at least,

smaller coefficiently. Therefore, expectations are not completely indeterminate

as a result of these different hypotheses. Empirical results from estimating

the model will show whether expectations are borne out in observed behavior.

Before this can he done the variables discussed in general in this section must

be defined based on actual data. Also, an estimation technique must be adopted

that solves econometric problems posed by the model. The next section is devoted
to these tasks.



III. Specification and Estimation

       Operational measures of the variables discussed in the last section must

be developed before the retirement model can be estimated. The data base for

estimation is time series data for Canada provided by the Economic Council.6

'I'he data give measures of social security wealth, labor force participation

rates, wages and prices in the period 1946-1975. All monetary values are

expressed in 1971 dollars in the empirical specification of the model.

       ln this study, SSW is defined to be the present value of Old Age Securi-

ty (OAS) benefits to which individuals are entitled; this present value is divided

by population to give a per capita measure of SSW. There are a few reasons for
                                                                            11



restricting attention to the OAS plan. One reason is that contributions

from earnings are made only in the Canada and Quebec Pension Plan, CQPP.

 If CQPP satisfies eq. (3) (the present value of contributions equals the

present value of benefits), then this plan does not contribute to the lifetime

income effect of social security. For the population as a whole CQPP approxi—

mately satisfies eq. (3). Therefore, in a model for the aggregate retirement

rate, it is not necessary to include CQPP benefits in SSW. Even so, lifetime

income may be redistributed between individuals and this redistribution

may influence the aggregate retirement rate. However, even for the individual,

CQPP contributions balance benefit payments to some extent and this mitigates

the lifetime income effect of CQPP. Another reason for excluding CQPP benefits

from SSW is that including these benefits would pose problems for the measure-

ment of SSW. Problems arise because CQPP became effective in 1966. As a result,

the time series for the value of CQPP benefits is zero up to 1966 and then

jumps to some nonzero value. Such a series essentially signals the creation

of CQPP and adding it to SSW would only blur what SSW is supposed to measure.

A binary variable, DCQPP, is added to the model to capture the effect of the

creation of CQPP.7 It could be argued that the public anticipated CQPP so that

the present value of CQPP benefits becomes positive before 1966.    However, the

measurement of anticipated unlegislated benefits is not an objective in this

study.

         The reason for not including Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) benefits

in SSW is that these benefits are inversely related to OAS and CQPP benefits and

are earnings—tested. Thus, GIS benefits are a small component of social

security intended for low earners.    It is important to note that OAS accounted

for approximately 80 percent of social security benefit payments in 1975. Con-

seqently, restricting SSW to OAS benefits is justified on practical grounds.
                                                                           12



       The wage variable, w, is the per capita wage. A regression of w

its values for the past three years is used to construct expected wages. The

value of w predicted by this regression equals the expected wage variable, w.

Adding the fourth lagged observation on wage or a time trend to the regression

did not substantially change the final results.

       The price expectations of the population in a given year are summarized

by the inflation rate for that year. In other words, peopl&s attitude about

future prices are formed by price changes in the current year. The inflation

rate observed at the end of the year summarizes the price expectations formed

during the year. Thus, the rate of change in the consumer price index equals

the expected price variable, i.    An attempt was made, along the lines of what

was done for wages, to calculate expected prices based on a regression for

price changes. The fitted values of this regression never followed actual

values well enough to justify using the regression for computing a price

expectation variable.

       The labor force participation rate is used to define both the retire-

ment rate and the employment experience variable. The retirement rate, R,

equals 100 minus the labor force participation rate for persons aged 65 and over.

The definition of the employment experience variable, £tl is based on the

assumption that employment experience is described, at least in part, by past

participation rates. This is equivalent to saying that i1 depends on past

values of R because the participation and retirement rates differ by a constant.

More specifically, t-l is given by a distributed lag in R as follows:

                                     2nRt-l
(ii)       2,ni
                  t-i    A1nRt-i
                        i=l
                                     1   -   AL
                                                                                           13



where L is the lag operator. For the moment, let the other variables and their

coefficients be summarized by Z so that the model can be written as:

                                    £n R
(12)                                             +v

Multiplying through by 1-AL yields the following:



(13)       2.n Rt =
                      Zt13
                              +
                                  Zti(_A8)   +
                                                 (5   + A) 2n Rti -
                                                                      v   -
                                                                              Av1

       Some implications for estimating the model follow from this tranformation.

Lagged values of the independent variables must be included in the empirical

estimation of the model. As a result, A is estimated by the negative of the

ratio of the lagged coefficient of a variable in Z to its current coefficient.

Of course, A is overidentified when Z contains more than one variable. An

important feature of the transformation for estimation purposes is that the

transformed error term is correlated with Rti. Consequently, ordinary least

squares estimates of eq. (13) are inconsistent. A method for consistently

estimating the model must be sought.

       Before discussing consistent estimation, it is important to recognize

the full source of potential correlation between Rt1 and the error term.

There are two ways in which this correlation can occur. First, as mentioned

above, the error term in the model to be estimated equals              v - Avt1     which is

correlated with Rti. Second, the v's may be serially correlated independently

of the transformation implied by eq. (11) and hence v is correlated with R1.

Therefore, either eq. (11) or serial correlation among the v's induces cor-

relation between             and the error term.8 There are techniques9 for consis-

tently estimating the model when the error term is serially correlated and the

model includes a lagged dependent variable. These techniques require some
                                                                            14



assumption about the pattern of serial correlation. Johnston (1972) points

out that these methods are computationally burdensome and "one would only

embark on them if one felt very convinced about the specification of the

disturbance term." For these reasons, these techniques are not employed

here.

        The method of two-stage least squares (TSLS) is used here for obtaining

a consistent estimate of the model. Potential correlation between Rti and

the error term from either source discussed above is eliminated by using

instrumental variables for 1t-l The model suggests what instruments to use;

they are the twice—lagged values of the Z's. These instruments appear as

explanatory variables in the equation for Rt1 and hence are correlated with

R1. Also, they are uncorrelated with the error term in the model by con-

struction. Consequently, TSLS yields consistent estimates whether Rt_i is

correlated with the error term because of eq. (13) or because the v's are

serially correlated. The consistency of TSLS does not depend on a particular

specification for serial correlation among the v's.

         Two variables are added to the model to measure other factors that

may influence the retirement rate. The unemployment rate, UR, is added to

account for general market conditions. The model also includes a time trend,

TIME,   to   control for a common trend component that may be present in both R

and   other   right-hand side variables. This trend component could make a right-

hand side variable appear to have a causal effect on R when no such effect is

present.

         Given the variables described in this section, the empirical specifica-

tion of eq. (13) is:
                                                                                            15



(14) n Rt        1() +          Yn   SSW + 3j DCQPI) +           th   w

            +nwe+4n7re+ (85+A) £nRt1

             +       Ln        UR +       TIME    -       2n
                                                               SSW1

             -                                        e   -            e
                         9,n          -                         £n
                               w_1

             -           9n
                               URt1 +     v   —




The focus of attention is on the estimates of                         and   which measure the effect

of social security on retirement.



IV. Empirical Results

       This section presents the estimated model for the aggregate retirement

rate. The estimate of the model obtained by two-stage least squares is given

in Table 1. Of primary interest are the positive coefficient estimates for

the variables measuring social security's effect on retirement - £n SSW and

DCQPP. The measurement of these coefficients is the main focus of this study.

       The signs of other coefficients conform with expectations but the

estimates are generally imprecise, except for the price expectations variable.

i'here are (at least) two reasons for not obtaining precise estimates. First,

there is a loss of efficiency when two-stage least squares is used. In other

words, there is a cost in terms of lost precision when the simplest way of

getting consistent estimates is employed. The second reason is that the re-

tirement rate for 65 year olds and over is being explained by economic variables

measured for the entire population. Consequently, the economic effects of these

variables on retirement are attenuated. In light of these reasons, the
                                                                16


                                Table 1

ESTIMATE OF THE MODEL FOR THE AGGREGATE RETIREMENT RATE


                           Coefficient Estimates
                             (Standard Errors)


     Variables

         2n SSW                                        •594
                                                   (.373)

         DCQPP                                         .248
                                                   (.199)

         2nw                                       —.291
                                                   (.400)

         fl                                             869
                                                   (1.03)

                                                   -.709
                                                   (.384)
     *   2n R                                          .412
                -1
                                                   (.388)

         2nUR                                      -.249
                                                   (.383)

         TIME                                          .411
                                                   (.438)

         9n SSW                                    - .581
                      -1
                                                   (.440)

         2nw -1                                    -.826
                                                   (1.02)

         9n we                                         .342
              -I
                                                   (359)
         2n
                --1
                                                   -   .503
                                                   (.315)

         2n UR                                         .110
                 --1
                                                   (.338)

         CONSTANT                                      1 . 66
                                                   (1.62)
                                                       .992
                                                                             17



Footnotes to Table 1

+   The method of two-stage least squares is used to estimate the model in the

    period 1948-1975; the first two years of the original sample period 1946-

    1975 had to be dropped to allow for the twice-lagged values of the variables

    used as instruments for .n R1. The "t" subscripts are dropped and the

    "-1" subscript denotes lagged values.



*   The instrumental variables for in
                                      R1 are the twice-lagged values of the
    explanatory variables -   in                               and in IJR2
                                   SSW2, in w, in we2,   h12
                                                                                18




empirical results are somewhat encouraging. In the following discussion,

the effect of a variable is illustrated by calculating the change in the

retirement rate when the value of that variable is increased by two standard

deviations around its mean and the other variables are held at their mean

values.

          The estimated effect of social security on retirement is in accord

with expectations. Based on the life-cycle model of behavior, high social

security wealth was expected to induce retirement through a lifetime income

effect. The positive coefficient estimate for Zn SSW is evidence that this

effect takes place. The point estimate of .594 for this coefficient implies

that a two standard deviation ($2300) increase in SSW raises the retirement

rate from 67.9 to 73.2 This estimate is marginally significant; this signifi-

cance is achieved in the presence of a variable controlling for a pure time

trend effect, and of the factors working against precise estimation discussed

above. Therefore, the estimated coefficient for Zn SSW consistutes some

evidence for accepting the hypothesis that social security induces retirement.

        Additional support for this hypothesis comes from the binary variable

DCQPP that attempts to capture the effect of the beginning of the Canada

and Quebec Pension Plan. IThen this program was started benefits were paid

immediately to eligible individuals.10 Because they never made contributions

into the program, it amounted to an exogenous increase in their lifetime

income. This had the      effect   of raising the retirement rate by approximately

1.5 points in 1967. The      positive   coefficient estimates for Zn SSW and DCQPP

taken   together   provide sul)port for the theoretical argument that social

security has a lifetime income effect on behavior.
                                                                           19




      The coefficient estimate of the wage variable, 9.n w, has the expected

sign but is insignificantly measured. Accepting for the moment the point

estimate of this coefficient, a two standard deviation increase in real per

capita wages lowers the retirement rate from 75.9 to 63.2. However, the

insignificance of this estimate may be interpreted as evidence in support of

the persistence hypothesis.

       The two variables measuring expected future wages and prices enter the

model with coefficient estimates predicted by the timing hypothesis. The

standard error of the coefficient for 9ri e is large so that its sign and

magnitude are not statistically significant. The point estimate of .869 im-

plies that the retirement rate increases from 54.3 to 91.6 when expected

wages rise by two standard deviations. The effect is large but has a wide

margin of error. However, the measurement of the coefficient for £n     is

close to conventional levels of significance. An increase in the inflation

rate of two standard deviations lowers the retirement rate from 71.3 to 69.8.

This response of retirement to inflation is expected based on the timing

hypothesis and is of reasonable magnitude.

       The coefficients of the wage, expected wage, and expected price variables

have the signs predicted by the timing hypothesis. While only the expected

price coefficient has a significant sign, these coefficients taken together

may be interpreted as providing some evidence in favor of the timing hypothesis.

Such an interpretation would stress the importance of obtaining the correct

pattern of signs for the wage and price variables given the factors working

against precise estimation given above.

       The estimate of the model can also be interpreted to give some support

to the persistence hypothesis. The coefficient for 2n      has the expected

sign and implies that a two standard deviation increase in the lagged retire-
                                                                          20




ment rate raises the current rate from 67.4 to 73.8. The magnitude of this

effect, however, is not precise. In general, the esitmate of the model can-

not be used to resolve whether the timing or persistence hypothesis explains

behavior. The imprecision in the coefficient estimates makes an inter-

pretation of the evidence in favor of one hypothesis a matter of selective

emphasis.

       The coefficient for TIME shows that the retirement rate does follow

the expected trend of increasing retirement over time. The point estimate

of this coefficient implies that every year in the sample period adds on aver-

age .3 to the retirement rate. The unemployment rate was added to the

model to measure the effect of general market conditions on retirement. The

coefficient of 2n UR is expected to be positive on the assumption that

individuals are more likely to retire when market conditions are not favorable.

This coefficient is insignificantly estimated with the unexpected sign.

       As shown in eq. (14), the factor A measuring the contribution of the

most recent retirement rate to the stock of employment experience can be esti-

mated from the coefficients for a variable and its lagged value. More precise-

ly, A is estimated as the negative of the ratio of the coefficent of a lagged

variable to the coefficient of its current value. The two variables with

nearly significantly measured current and lagged coefficients are th SSW and

        IJowever, they give estimates of A that differ; Zn SSW's coefficients

imply A equals .978 and Znir0's coefficients imply A equals -.71. This problem

arises as a result of A's overidentification in the specification of the model.

l'herc is a way to estimate A in this situation. The strategy is to select

values of A in a particular range and compute estimates of the model for A set

equal to each value. The value of A and the associated estimates of the

other coefficients that yield the minimum sum of squares are selected as
                                                                             21



maximum likelihood estimates of A and the coefficients. This is the technique

developed by Zeliner and Geisel (1970). Setting A equal to a single value can
be   justified   as an identifying constraint. The justification would rest on

the fact that the results in Table 1 did not give a precise estimate for A.

In my judgement it is best to estimate the model without incorporating a

priori constraints -at least to start.

        The main empirical result in this section is the evidence that social

security affects retirement through the lifetime income effect described in

section I. The underlying assertion of this study is that social security

can influence retirement and varies independently of other variables that

also have an influence on retirement.



V. Summary and Conclusion

        This study has examined whether social security affects the aggregate

retirement rate. The lifetime budget constraint for an indivdiual has been

used to identify a lifetime income effect of social security on retirement.

Further, this constraint also specified the variable that is used for measuring

this effect. This variable is social security wealth which equals the present

value of the social security benefits to which individuals are entitled. The

standard model for labor force participation of individuals was used to derive

the model for the aggregate retirement rate. This model includes social

security wealth. The underlying assumption of this study is that social

security can have an    effect   on retirement that is independent of other van-

ables that also influence retirement.

        The estimate of the retirement model obtained in this study yields evi-

dence for accepting the hypothesis that social security induces retirement. An
                                                                             22



increase in social security wealth of approximately $2300 per capita measured

in 1971 dollars has been estimated to raise the retirement rate by 5 to 6

points. This effect was calculated around the mean values of variables in the

sample period 1948-1975. The effect of the creation of the Canada and

Quebec Pension Plan was to raise the retirement rate by 1.5 points in 1967.

       Two hypotheses on labor force activity -    timing   and persistence -

provided    a framework for analyzing the effect of wages and prices on retire-

ment. The evidence on the effect of these variables conformed with expecta-

tions but precise estimates of these effects were not obtained. This impre-

cision did not permit a resolution of what hypothesis explained retirement

behavior.

       One purpose of this study, in its conclusion, is that the empirical

results within will encourage further research on the important policy issue

of the relationship between social security and retirement. Two reasons for

there being some loss of precision in these results were discussed. Future

work is likely to improve on the empirical specification and econometric

methodology used in this study. It is my opinion that future evidence will

continue to show that social security induces retirement and will give sharper

measures of the effect of social security and other economic variables on

retirement behavior.
                                                                        23



Footnotes


1. This description is given by Coward (1977, p. 213). A more detailed

     description and history of the development of the social security program

     is given in Chapters 18 and 19 of Coward's book.


2. See Gronau (1973).


3. See Blinder (1974), Blinder and Weiss (1976), and Heckman (1976).


4. This description is based on my effort (l978a) at incorporating a model

     of a pension program into a simplified version of the Blinder-Weiss (1976)

     model.


5. See Chamberlain (1978), Heckman (1977), and Yatchew (1977).


6. A listing of the time series data was provided by Peter Wrage of the

     Economic Council of Canada.


7. DCQPP is set equal to one in 1967 and to zero in other years. The Canada

     and Quebec Pension Plan became effective on January 1, 1966 at which time

     contributions were collected from earnings. In order to collect benefits,

     individuals had to generate a claim on the system. In order to do this,

     they had to have at least one year of earnings covered by the plan. This

     year of earnings could then be used to calculate benefit payments. Con-

     sequently, the creation of the Canada and Quebec Pension Plan would have

     its effect in 1967.


8.   It is possible that the combination of the transformation implied by eq. (11)

     and serial correlation in the error term produces an error term that is

     uncorrelated with -r     This will occur if v follows a first-order Markov
                                                                            24



     process given by:


               vt =Avt-l +u
                            t


    where the u's are independently and identically distributed. In this case,

    the transformation leaves only
                                     u. in the error term which is serially Un-
    correlated by assumption and uncorrelated with Rti. Assuming this to be

    the case, a priori, would be heroic.


9. See Zeilner and   Geisel   (1970), Johnston (1972), or Kmenta (1971).


10. This statement is subject to a slight qualification which is that eligible

    individuals had to generate a claim on the system by having one year of

    earnings covered by the program. This is explained in n. 7.
                                                                              25

Rcfe rences


Barro, Robert .J.   "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth." Journal of Political

     Economy, vol. 82, no. 6, November/December 1974, PP. 1095-1117.


Blinder, Alan S. Toward an Economic Theory of Income Distribution. Cambridge,

     Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1974.


Blinder, Alan S. and Yoram Weiss. "Human Capital and Labor Supply: A Synthesis."

     Journal of Political Economy, vol. 84, no. 3, June 1976, pp. 449-472.


Chamberlain, Gary. "On the Use of Panel Data." Harvard University, draft,

     1978.


Clark, Kim B. and Lawrence 11. Summers. "Labor Force Participation: Timing and

     Persistence." Harvard University and National Bureau of Economic Research,

     draft, 1978.


Coward, Laurence E. Mercer Handbook of Canadian Pension and Welfare Plans.

     Don Mills, Ontario: CCH Canadian Limited, 1977.


Ghez, Gilbert R. and Gary S. Becker. The Allocation of Time and Goods Over the

     Life-Cycle. New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1975.


Gril:iches, Zvi, "Distributed Lags: A Survey." Econometrica, vol. 35, no. 1,

     January 1967, pp. 16-49.


Gronau, Reuben. "The Effect of Children on the Housewife's Value of Time:

     Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81, no. 2, part 2, March/April 1973,

     pp. S168—S199.


Ileckman, James. "A Life-CYcle Model of Earnings, Learning, and Consumption."

     Journal of Political Economy, vol. 84, no. 4, part 2, August 1976,

     PP. Sll-S44.
                                                                            26



Heckman, James. "Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data Developed and

     Applied to Test the Hypothesis of True State Dependence Against the

      Hypothesis of Spurious State Dependence." draft, July 1977.


Johnston, J. Econometric Methods, New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1972.


Kinenta,   Jan.   Elements of Econometrics, New York: The Macmillan Company, 1971.


Munnell, Alicia H. The     Future   of Social Security. Washington, D.C.: The

      Brookings Institution, 1977.


Pellechio, Anthony J. "Pension Programs and Labor Supply." National Bureau

     of Economic Research, draft, l978a.


____________      "The Effect of Social Security on Retirement." National Bureau

     of Economic Research Working Paper No. 260, l978b.


Yatchew, Adonis. "heterogeneity and State Dependence in Labor Supply." Harvard

     University, draft, 1977.


Zellner, Arnold and Martin S. Geisel. "Analysis of Distributed Lag Models with

     Application to Consumption Function Estimation." Econometrica, vol. 38,

     no. 6, November 1970, pp. 865-888.
