NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL INFLATION POLICY

Lawrence H. Summers

Working Paper No. 35I

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
May 1979

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 354
May 1979

Optimal Inflation Policy

ABSTRACT

This paper considers the problem of optimal long run monetary policy.
It shows that optimal inflation policy involves trading off two quite

different considerations. First, increases in the rate of inflation tax
the holding of many balances, leading to a deadweight loss as excessive

resources are devoted to economizing on cash balances. Second, increases
in the rate of inflation raise capital intensity. As long as the economy
has a capital stock short of the golden rule level, increases in capital

intensity raise the level of consumption. Ignoring the second consideration leads to the common recommendation that the money growth rate be set

so that the nominal interest rate is zero. Taking it into account can
lead to significant modifications in the "full liquidity rule." Interactions of inflation policy with financial intermediation and taxation are

also considered. The results taken together suggest that inflation can
have important welfare effects, and that optimal inflation policy is an
empirical question, which depends on the structure of the economy.

Lawrence H. Summers
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 868—3912

January 1978
Revised May 1979

The widely accepted "Natural Rate" hypothesis implies that
monetary policy can have no long run effect on the level of employ-

ment. The unemployment rate deviates from the natural rate only
when economic actors are "fooled" by the rate of inflation. In
the long run, it is not possible to cause rational agents to
systematically under (over)estimate the rate of inflation, so

the level of employment must return to.its natural level. Some
have interpreted these results as implying that monetary policy

has no long—run real effects. For example, Sargent and Wallace
(1975) write, "In the rational expectations version of tEe model,

one deterministic money supply rule is as good as any other,
insofar as concerns the probability distribution of real output."
However, as Fischer (1978) has d.em6nstrated, monetary policy does
have real effects when inflation's long run impact on capital intensity
is considered A faster rate of monetary growth raises the rate of inflation,

leading individuals to economize on cash balances, and raising

aggregate capital intensity through the Tobin effect. Since
monetary policy has real effects, acceptance of the rational
expectations hypothesis alters but does not eliminate the problem

of optimal monetary policy.
The long run monetary policy problem involves trading off

two quite different considerations. First, increases in the rate
of inflation tax the holding of money balances, leading to a
deadweight loss as excessive resources are devoted to economizing

on cash balances. Second, increases in the rate of inflation

—2—

raise capital intensity affecting steady state consumption. As
long as the economy has a capital stock short of the golden rule
level, increases in capital intensity raise the level of consump-

tion. Ignoring the second of these factors leads to Friedman's
(1969) recommendation that the rate of money growth be set so

that the nominal rate of interest is zero. Feldstein (1977), using
the same basic framework, has argued that the cost of excessive

inflation can be very large. Neither of these analyses consider
the impact of inflation on capital intensity. Studies of optimal
capital accumulation typically neglect the optimization of money

balances. This paper attempts an analysis of optimal monetary
policy in which capital intensity is explicitly considered within

the context of a simple monetary growth model. The analysis is
then extended to examine how optimal inflation policy is affected

by the presence of inside money, taxation, and a government
budget constraint.

Section I outlines the basic model, a variant of Tobin's
(1965) formulation of the monetary growth problem, and uses it to
derive an explicit solution for the optimal rate of inflation. The

model differs from Tobin's in that money holding is treated as a
consumption good and its demand is derived from utility maximization.

In Section II, the role of inside money and the implications of

paying interest on money balances are examined. The impact of
capital income taxes on the optimal rate of inflation, as well
as the problem of indexing taxes, is considered in Section III.
Section IV discusses the implications of the government budget

—3—

constraint, and the revenue gains from inflationary finance.
The fifth and final section summarizes the results of the paper
and discusses their implications.

I.

The Model

In this section a variant of the Tobin (1965) monetary
growth model suitable for examining optimum monetary policy is

outlined. Since only the problem of finding the optimal steady
state path is considered, the dynamics of expectation formation
and convergence to equilibrium are ignored.
As is standard in the literature, we assume that population
growth is given by
N =

N0ent

(1)

In numerical examples it will be convenient to treat n as the

growth rate of labor measured in efficiency

units, that is,

the sum of the rates of population growth and labor augmenting

technical change. The fraction of the population in the labor
force is assumed to be constant.

Production is described by an aggregate production function

with constant returns to scale. The relationship between per
capita output and capital stock is given by

y=f(k)

(2)

with ft>O and f"<O. Depreciation is ignored to highlight the
essential features, though none of the qualitative results would
be affected by its inclusion.

—4—

Along a steady state growth path, k is constant. All
output not invested is consumed. It follows immediately that
per capita consumption is:
c =

f(k)

—

nk

(3)

We will make extensive use of the golden rule relationship apparent

from (3). Increases in capital intensity raise per capita steady

stat consumption so long as f' - n

>

0.

A maximum level of consump-

tion is achieved where f' = n along the golden rule path. When k is
further increased, f' <

n, andper capita consumption is reduced. It

will be assumed throughout the paper that f' >

n, so consumption is

below its maximum sustainable level. It should be emphasized that
when the utility of money balances is considered, achievement of maxi-

mum consumption may be neither necessary nor sufficient for welfare
maximization.

Following Tobin, we assume that savings are a fixed proportion

of disposable income.1 None of the results in the first two sections
would be altered by allowing the savings rate to depend on the real

rate of interest. Savings are represented by

(4)

s =

Disposable income is equal to national income, less the
fall in real money balances due to inflation, 1IM/P, (where II is

the rate of inflation), plus the value of government transfers

of newly printed money (DM/P). Disposable income is therefore
= Y

+ (a

- 1I)M/P

(5)

—5—

where a is the rate of money growth, DM/M.
Along a balanced growth path, monetary velocity is constant.
This insures that the rate of inflation equals the excess of the
rate of money growth over output growth or

Tt=a-n

(6)

Using (6), (5) can be rewritten in per-capita terms as

yd =y+nm

(7)

where m represents per—capita holdings of real money balances.
In order to close the model, the demand for real money

balances must be specified. The conventional approach is to let
the money-capital ratio depend on the nominal rate of interest.
Since inflation's role as a tax on money balances is of central
concern here, this approach is rejected in favor of one based
on utility maximization.

In making steady state welfare comparisons, it is postulated
that money holdings are chosen so that at each instant a concave

utility function U(c,m) is maximized. TheutilityfunctionhastheproperUrn> 0 and that: lim U. = for i = c ,m.2 It is also assumed
i÷O
that real balance satiation occurs, that is U2(c,m)
0 for m

ty that:

sufficiently large.3 These conditions insure that both consumption and money holding occur in all steady states. By holding
an extra dollar,

individuals forego consumption equal to the

nominal interest rate i, which they could have earned by holding

their wealth in the form of capital. It follows that money holdings will be chosen to satisfy:4

—6—

(8)

U2(c,m) = itJ1(c,m)

.5

It is assumed that U is homothetic, and that all individuals
have identical utility functions. These conditions imply:

limL=t

m=L(j)c

X9)

i0

That is, the ratio of individual money holdings to consumption
varies with the nominal interest rate.
Competition insures that factors are paid their marginal

products. The interest rate, which equals the nominal return
to capital is,
i =

r

+

11

=

V

(k) +

Ti

(10)

All savings must be absorbed in money or capital holdings.
Hence the requirement for equilibrium growth is

s=nk+nm

(11)

where s represents per—capita savings. Using (4), (7), (9) , (10)

and (11), the steady state condition for the model may be derived
as
cyf(k) —

nk

—

(1 —

cy)nL[ft(k)

+

1T][f(k)

—

nk] =

0

(12)

By differentiating (12) we can find the impact of inflation

on steady state capital and money holdings. The effect of
a change in the rate of inflation on capital intensity is given by

—7—

dk —

of'

— n — (1 —

(1 —

)nLt
—

ainL(f'

(f —

nk)

n) — (1 —

cr)nL'f"(f

—

nk)

(13)

The denominator of (13) is unambiguously negative so long as
af' < n <

V.

This assumption, holding that capital intensity

is below the golden rule level but above the point where f' =

is

maintained throughout the paper.6 The numerator is unambiguously

negative. Hence the model exhibits the Tobin effect, an increase
in the rate of inflation raises steady state capital intensity.7
Equations (4), (7) and (11) imply that changes in capital and

money holdings are related by the identity
din

—

aft

-

(1 —

n

a)n

dk

i

(14)

Hence, under the condition noted above, that cf' — n <

0, money

and capital holdings move in opposite directions. Since they
are alternative portfolio assets, this is to be expected. An
increase in the rate of inflation thus reduces per-capita real
money holdings.

At this point we are ready to consider the problem of

optimal monetary policy in this simple model. In subsequent sections
more realism is adnieveci as itiside mOney anci taxation are introduced

into the model. Equation (6) demonstrates that the problem of cnoosing

an optimal growth rate of money is equivalent to the cnoice of an
optirtal rate of inflation. We will be concerned here only with the
comparison of steady states. Problems of transition are ignorect. However, Feldstein (1977) has argued that it is always desirable to drive

the inflation rate to its optimal level regardless of the initial

—8—

conditions and transition costs. The maximand is steady state
utility which can be represented by
tJ(c,m) =

tJ(f

—

nk,

L(f' + Tt)(f —

nk))

(15)

It remains only to specify the policy instruments at the government's disposal.

We first consider the case in which the government can
control both the rate of inflation 11, and the level of the steady

state capital stock k, by controlling capital formation. This
second instrument might be taken to represent the capabilities

of open market operations or public investment. In this case, the
first order conditions for maximizing (15) are
U2L' (.)r(f —

nk)J=

0

— n) + tJ ((V —

(16)

n)L

Condition (16) implies that U2 =

+ L'f"(f —

nk)) =

0

(17)

0, which along with (8) indicates

that H = —r, so the nominal rate of interest is zero. This is

the same result found in Friedman (1969); however, his paper
does not make clear the dependence of this monetary rule on
the simultaneous optimization of the capital stock.

Equation (17) implies that V - n = 0 since U2 = 0.

This

is the famous golden rule. When both capital intensity and
liquidity are subject to control, optimality requires full

liquidity and golden rule capital intensity. It is clear then
that H =

-n

and so (6) implies that ct = 0 is required in order

to maximize steady state utility. That is, the money supply

—9—

should be fixed, allowing prices to fall at a rate equal to the

economy's growth rate. This result closely parallels Samueleson's
(1958) finding that a constant money stock is optimal in a

consumption loan economy. It is also in accordance with Friedman's
(1969) actual policy prescription.

The analysis so far has assumed that the monetary authority
can simultaneously optimize the rate of inflation and the capital

stock. A more realistic assumption is that the monetary authority

takes , the private savings rate, as given, and can control only
the rate of inflation. 8

In this case, the full liquidity golden

rule optimum described above will not, in general, be feasible.
Optimal monetary policy becomes a second best problem.
The full impact of a change in inflation on steady state
welfare may be found using (8):

dU

—
-

,dc + •dm

U1

(18

Substituting from equations (3) and (14) into (18) yields:

dU_ dk
dlI

dfl

—

n)

+ (V

+1I)y-f'
n(l — a)

Given the assumption made above, that f' >

_

—

(19)

n, we see that opti—

raality requires a capital stock below the golden rule level.

The second term in (19) reflects the "liquidity cost" of pushing

the capital stock towards the golden rule level. The welfare
gain from raising capital intensity to its first best level is
insufficient to offset the loss from reduced liquidity.

—10—

Solving (19), we can find the optimum rate of inflation:
=

(f'

—

n

n)n(l
— af'

—

a) —

(20)

This equation makes clear a strong virtue of the approach adopted
here. The optiiral rate of inflation can be expressed in terms of
observables and does not depend on the form of the utility function.

In particular, the elasticity of the money demand func-

tion does not enter the expression for the optimal rate of
inflation.

The first term of equation (20) reflects the increased

capital intensity brought about by inflation. When capital is
optimized, at the golden rule level, it equals zero, and so (19)

implies the familiar zero nominal interest rate rule. In the
plausible case where f' >

n,

and capital intensity is too low,

a higher rate of inflation is implied. The larger the divergence
from the golden rule, the greater is the optimal rate of inflation.
Feldstein and Summers (1977) present evidence that the U.S.

capital stock is well below the golden rule level. The net
marginal product of capital f' is estimated to be about

in

contrast to an output growth rate of about .03.10 Assuming
a =

.1,

which is consistent with the observed capital output ratio

of 3, (20) implies that the optimal rate of inflation is -.005.
This is consistent with a nominal return to capital of about .105,

significantly above the zero nominal interest rate rule. These
conclusions are quite sensitive to the parameter values chosen.
Table 1 presents the optimal rate of inflation for various values
of f', a, and n.

—11—

Table 1
Optimal Rates of Inflation
n
.03

.04

.044

—.005

—.028

.172

.019

—.018

—.014

—.028
—.027

—.049
—.023

.02

a =
a =
a =
a =

.10,
.15, f' =
.10, V =
.15, V =
f' =

While

.1
.1
.05
.05

the

—.009

exact rate of inflation which should be set as' a

target varies with the parameter values, it is almost always well

above the full liquidity level. Indeed with a =

.15,

and n =

.02,

the optimal inflation rate is very large, 17.2%. The existence
of the Tobin effect seems to be an important factor in deter-

mining the optimal rate of inflation. Surprisingly however, its
magnitude does not affect optimal monetary policy.11 These calculations indicate that considerationof capital intensity effects can
lead to significant modifications in the full liquidity rule. Below
we explore the implications of taxation and the existence of outside

money for the optimal monetary policy problem.

II. Inside Money
The standard monetary growth model treats all money as
an asset to the private sector, and liability of the public

sector. Inside money, provided by financial intermediation, is
ignored. Inside money holdings are taxed, and hence reduced by

inflation. Since inside money is a liability of the banking
system, the revenues accrue to banks rather than to the government.
However, the Tobin effect involves only the substitution of capital

—12—

for

outside money. It would therefore seem likely that the extent

of intermediation would affect optima-I monetary policy.

In order to consider inside money, we modify the basic

model of Section I by allowing for financial intermediation. In
particular, we distinguish inside money, m1, the liabilities of

banks, and outside money, m0, the government's liabilities. It is

assume that individuals are indfferent between holding money
in its inside or outside form. Banks accept individual demand
deposits and then use the funds to purchase capital.

We can

represent the balance sheet of the private sector in per—capita
terms as follows:

Households

Assets
m. +
1

Liabilities

0

kh
Banks

kb+mb0
m.+m
1
0 +k
Total

in.
1
in.
1

private net worth is unaffected by the presence of

inside money since it is an asset to the household sector, and
12

a liability to the banking sector. Initially we assume that households hold a fixed proportion d, of their money in the outside
form; (currency) and that banks hold a fraction r of demand

—13—

deposits in the form of cash reserves. It follow that outside
money represents a fixed fraction v =

d

of total money

holding.

The steady state condition (11) must be modified to take

account of inside money. It becomes

s=nk+vnm

(21)

This reflects the fact that only outside money is a source of

net worth. Using (21) the balanced growth condition (12) may
be altered to take account of inside money as follows:
f — nk — (1 —

)nvL(f'

+ II) (f — nk) =

0

(22)

where it is recognized that only the increase in outside money

is treated by households as disposable income. This condition
is the same as (12) except that it takes account of the fact that
financial intermediation makes it possible for savings to yield

money services, and simultaneously be channelledinto real
capital formation.

Maximizing steady state utility as in the preceding section
yields a condition for the optimum rate of inflation:

11*

=

—

n

'I

—

(1

cf'

—

a/V

—

fI

Comparing (23) and (20) we see that the "capital creation" term
is smaller by a factor v, the proportion of outside money. This
is because an inflation induced reduction in inside money holdings

does not increase capital intensity. It is also clear that the

—14—

presence of inside money reduces the optin1 inflation rate.
In the U.S., the monetary base, or outside money stock,

represents about 1/3 of M1, and about 10% of M3, the money stock
including savings accounts, at commercial banks and savings and

loans. Even using the narrower money stock defintion, consi—
deration of inside money significantly reduces the optini rate
of inflation. For the parameter values assumed earlier, and a
value of v =

1/3,

the optimal rate of inflation is -.068 rather

than -.005, as calculated above ignoring inside money. Table 2
presents a calculation of optinal inflation for various parameter

values. Almost all plausible assumptions imply the optimality
of a negative rate of inflation, though not necessarily a negative

rate of money growth. The Tobin effect cannot be used to justify
rates of inflation which approach current levels once inside money
is considered.

Table 2

Optimum Rates of Inflation with Inside Money
n

.10,
a = .15,
a = .10,
a = .15,
a =

It

.1
V = .1
f' = .05
V = .05
f' =

.02

.03

.04

—.052

—.068

—.076

—.009

—.060

—.072

—.038

—.042

—.049

—.036

—.042

T04-

is frequently proposed that interest be paid on money

holdings. This suggestion is justified as eliminating the

—15—

distortion due to the taxation of money balances. With interest
at rate ii

paid

on all money balances, steady state condition (22)

nk

(1 —

becomes:

f(k) —

—

)nvL(f'(k)

+

i — 1i)(f(k)

—

nk)=

0

(24)

after modifying (9) to let money holding depend on the differences

between the return on money and capital. It is clear from (26)
that capital intensity depends only on the differences between
and II.

Hence in this model, inflation is completely neutral

and has no welfare effects if all money balances are fully indexed.
However, payment of interest on currency is not feasible, or at
least not normally proposed, so it is useful to consider the case
where interest is paid only on inside money holdings.
In order to study the effect of allowing interest to be
paid only on inside money, it will first be useful to study the

consequences of changes in v. Changes in v can result either
from changes in the household propensity to hold currency or

banks' reserve holdings. Differentiating (22) with respect to
v yields:

dk —
L(f — nk) (1 — am
f' — n — (1 —
dv
)nv[L(f' — n) +

L'f"(f—nk)]

(25)

This expression is unambiguously negative, under the maintained

assumptions. Since inside money does not represent wealth to the
private sector, it does not displace capital. Hence the substitution of inside for outside money raises capital intensity.

—16—

Using equation (21), it can be shown that
din

—

dv

-dk

(af' - n)

(26)

dv (1 - cy)nv

Hence a reduction in the proportion of outside money raises real

money holdings as well as capital intensity. The welfare effect
is therefore unambiguously posiUve. Using (18) along with (26),
we find

dv

=

-1.(f'
tLdv

—

+ 'ii) (ef'

n+

n(l -

—

(27)

n))

which is unambiguously negative. It follows immediately that there
are gains from increasing financial intermediation. If we assume
that L' =

0, an approximation to their magnitude can be found.

Using the parameter values assumed above, and taking iT as .06,
dtj/dv =

.029ct31.

This figure implies that a reduction in the

proportion of outside money from 1/3 to 1/6, corresponding to a
doubling of financial intermediation, would raise welfare by about
$5 billion based on current U.S. values of L =

.3 and c = $1

trillion. This calculation does of course ignore the direct costs

of intermediation)3
If interest is paid on inside money but not on outside money,
inflation will change the proportion v of money held in the outside

form. In this case, inflation will have real effects even with
indexation. The change in steady state welfare resulting from a
change in the rate of inflation may be written as:

dU U+ u
dli —

v

3v

(28)

V
—17—

The first term of (28) is zero, as long as

= 1.

The second term

is positive, since an increase in the rate of inflation will promote

intermediation, whichas (27) shows, raises welfare. Fully indexed
inflation's only real effect is to raise the proportion of inside

money, and so it is desirable. Under these conditions there is no
optimal rate of inflation. Inflation should be raised until outside
money is wrung entirely out of the economy.
It has thus been shown that the welfare effects of steady state
inflation in an economy with inside money depend critically on the

nature of indexation. If no interest can be paid on inside money, a
negative rate of inflation is optimum. If however, inside money yields
are indexed, optimal policy may call for very high rates of inflation.

III. Inflation and Taxation
This section begins consideration of the influence of taxation

on optimal inflation policy. Four separate interactions of inflation
and taxation may usefully be distinguished. First, inflationary
finance is a source of government revenue and so, ceteris paribus,

makes possible a reduction in other distortionary taxes. Second,
inflation, by altering the size and composition of output will

change the size of the real tax base. Third, as emphasized by Green
and Sheshinski, inflation affects tax collections by altering the
effective tax rate on capital income in a non—indexed tax system.
Fourth, as stressed by Feldstein (1976), inflation may substantially
reduce after tax yields, leading to large effects on savings and portfolio decisions. While the interaction of taxes and inflation may reduce

—18—

incentives for capital accumulation, taxation of interest
income does tend to offset the inflation tax on money balances.

In this section, the last of these interactions is analyzed. The
first three are taken up in the next section.
The appropriate way to model the taxation of capital income

is not at all clear. Feldstein (1976) and Green and Sheshinski
assume that all capital is financed by corporate debt. As Feldstein and Summers (1978) demonstrate, the assumption of all debt

corporate finance may be very misleading. Observed interest rates
are more consistent with the view that at the margin, debt accounts

for only about one third of corporate capital. Moreover almost
half the capital stock is non-corporate, consisting largely of

residential housing. Its tax treatment is radically different
than that of corporate capital.

A full analysis of the impact of capital income taxation
on the size and composition of the capital stock is far beyond

the scope of this paper. We assume that the net impact of the
tax system is to tax the real return on capital, f' (k), at rate

t1 and the return due to inflation at rate t2. The after tax
return to capital as a porfolio asset is then
in = (1 —

t1)f'

(k) + (1 —

t2)Tt

(29)

It is important to understand that the values of t1 and
t2 are to be interpreted as averages of the very different
effective tax rates on the real and inflationary parts of various

forms of capital income. The non—indexed character of our tax
system does not imply that t1 =

t2.

In order to illustrate this

—19—

point, and to shed light on realistic interpretations of the model,
we derive below effective tax rates, t1 and t2, under various
assumptions about the nature of capital.
Consider first the model of Feldstein and Green and Sheshinski
in which firms finance all capital investment through the sale of

bonds to individuals. Here firms equate the nominal return from
capital to its nominal cost
(1 —

T)f'

(k) + II = (1 —

r)i

(30)

where r is the corporate tax rate. Individuals pay tax at a rate
® on nominal interest income. Substituting from (30) the after
tax return to debt holders is found to be:
in = (1 —

®)f' (k)

—

+ (1 —

HI

(31)

Hence in this case t1 = G, the individual income tax rate. The
tax on inflationary income, t2, in the all debt world is at rate

:- which

is negative as long as the corporate tax rate exceeds

the individual rate. The tax treatment of owner occupied housing
is quite similar to debt financed corporate capital. The difference
is that homeowners deduct interest payments at the individual rate

while creditors pay taxes at the corporate rate. Capital gains on
homes are taxes at the individual level.
The results in an all equity world are radically different.

We assume that a fixed proportion

y of operating profits ft (k)

are retained by the corporation, and taken by individuals in the
form

of

capital gains, taxable at rate 9g• The remainder are

paid out in dividends taxable at rate 0. Individuals are taxed
at the capital gains rate on the appreciation of their equity,

—20—

due to inflation. In this case the nominal after tax return to
individuals is

T)(1

in = 1 — (1 — (1

—

— (1 —

r)Gg))f'

+ (1 —

(32)

Gg)l•[

Equation (32) implies that while both inflationary and real gains

are taxed, real gains are taxed at much heavier rates. The effective rate of tax on real gains t1 is 1 - (1 - T) (1 —

— (1

while inflationary gains are taxed at a rate of only

Gg In an

-

Y)Og)i

economy with mixed debt and equity finance, the effective tax rates
on real and inflationary capital income are weighted averages of
the expressions derived above, with weights being the shares of
capital financed by debt and equity.

The real and inflationary capital income from different

sources are taxed at very different rates. Effective tax rates
are presumably some average of rates on the different forms of

capital income. It is difficult to estimate such effective rates.
In particular, the sign of t2 is unclear. Inflation reduces tax
liabilities on debt financed corporate capital, and on housing,

but increases liabilities on equity. The absence of replacement
cost depreciation also causes inflation to raise effective tax
rates.

In the presence of taxation, steady state condition (22)
becomes:
f —

nk

—

(1

—

a)nvL(i ) (f — nk)=

0

(33)

where it is assumed that all revenues are returned to households
in

a

lump sum manner. It is immediately apparent that any combi—

—21—

nation of changes in It, t1 and t2 which leaves in unchanged, also

does not affect steady state capital intensity or money holding.
The optimum value of in is therefore independent of the tax

system. Increases in in will increase capital intensity, while
decreases will reduce capital accumulation. Thus if taxes may be
adjusted, optimality can be achieved at any rate of inflation.

Likewise, any tax effects may be undone by changing the rate of
inflation.

Since the optimal value of in does not depend on the tax
system, it is apparent that
in =

V (k)

+ rr*

= (1 —

t1)f' (k)

+ (1 —

t2)It

(34)

or
=

11*

÷ t1f'(k)
1 —

t2

(35)

where ff* represents the optimal rate of inflation with no taxes.

Equation (37) implies that the optin1 rate of inflation rises with
A greater tax on real capital income tends to encourage money

holding at the expense of capital. Increased inflation offsets this

distortion. The effect of an increase in t2 on the optimal rate of
inflation is ambiguous. If It +

t1f'(k)

>

0, increases in t2 raise

the optimum rate of inflation, else they decrease it. On balance,
it appears likely that the conclusions of the previous section must

be modified upwards to take account of taxes, though lacking estimates of t1 and t2, it is impossible to say by how much.

—22—

rates of inflation for various combinations of tax
presented in Table 3, for the standard case consi-

Optimal

parameters are
dered in previous

sections. For all reasonable combinations of

tax parameters, the optImal rate of inflation is negative. -The

presence of capital taxes cannot justify positive inflation. It
is important to note, however, that the optimal rates found here are
far above those implied by the zero nominal interest rate rule.
Table 3
Optimal Inflation with Taxation
=

t1 =

0

—.2

.2

0

068

—.056

.085

.2

—.048

—.040

—.060

.4

—.028

—.023

—.035

Equation (36) may also be used to evaluate proposals for

indexing the ta system. It is often suggested that neutrality
and optimality require that t2 =

0, so real tax liabilities are inde-

pendent of the rate of inflation. This is not OptiIrai. in our model.

If t1 is fixed, t2 should vary with the rate of inflation so that
in =

i*.

The greater the rate of inflation, the larger is the

optimal value of t2. Not only should capital income due -to inflation

be taxed, the tax rate should rise with the rate of inflation. This
result follows from the need to offset the inflation tax on money
balances.

—23—

These results reflect the fact that in this model capital

intensity depends basically on portfolio allocation. The assumption
of a constant savings rate eliminates any tax effects on the rate

of accumulation. While relaxation of this assumption would be
valuable, little could be said without more definitive empirical
evidence

than is now available. The direction of the real interest

rate effect on savings is ambiguous on theoretical grounds, since
substitution and income effects oppose each other.

Moreover, the

effect of inflation on the real after tax return to savers is

unclear. In the debt finance and owner occupied housing cases
considered above, increases in inflation actually raise the real

after tax return. The opposite result occurs with equity financed
corporate capital.

So far it has been assumed that tax revenues are distributed

in a lump sum fashion. Government revenue needs have been ignored
as have the distortionary effects of alternative sources of revenue.
In the next section we explicitly introduce a government budget
constraint.

—24—

IV. Inflationary Finance as a Revenue Source
This section first considers the revenue yield from the
inflation tax and then studies how the optimal rate of inflation is

affected by the existence of a government budget constraint. The
revenue yield from increases in inflation has received much atten-

tion in the literature. Cagan (1956) argued that to maximize its
revenue, the government should raise the rate of inflation to the

point where money had unitary demand elasticity. Friedman (1972)
showed how this condition must be modified to take account of econo-

mic growth. Both these contributions ignore inflation's effect on
revenue from pre—existing taxes. While Feldstein (1976) and Green and
Sheshinski. (1977) have considered these revenues, their analyses neglect

the effect çf inflation on the size of the monetary base stressed
by Friedman and Cagan.

The model developed in previous sections

permits simultaneous consideration of all these issues.
In this section we assume that all real income is taxed at

an effective rate t1and that the inflationary part of capital
income is taxed at rate t2. Total tax revenue T is
T = (II +

where

n)vm + t1f

+

t2kir

the first term represents the revenue yield from printing

money. By differentiating (36), the revenue impact of changes in
the rate of inflation may be calculated. Using the steady state
condition (22) and letting
= vm

+ t2k

+

=

[(II + n)v +

we find that

(t2 + t1f')]

(37)

—25—

The sign of this expression is indeterminate even with specific

assumptions about the values of t1 and t2. It is however clear
from (22) that inflatjon's effect on revenue from other taxes

dwarfs any revenue derived directly from inflation. Consider only
the second term of (37). In the U.S., k /vrn
t2I >.

40. Hence if

.025,16 this term will be more important than the first

term which reflects the direct revenue gain from inflation.
Even in a fully indexed tax system, t2 = 0, inflation has

an impact on income tax revenues represented by the term
in (37).

= —.45.

Using the parameter values assumed above

The interest elasticity of demand for money in the U.S.

is estimated to be about .3 (by, e.g., Goldfeld, 1974), implying that
= —1800 billion. An income tax rate of 40% implies that an

extra point of inflation raises revenue by about $325 million.
While this is not a large effect, it is comparable to the direct

revenue from the inflation tax. Starting with an inflation rate of
6%, the values assumed above imply that an extra point of inflation

raises revenues from the inflation tax by about $460 million. Again,
it is important to realize that both these effects are very small
relative to the revenue effects on the non—indexed parts of the
tax system.

Phelps (1973( has argued that a high rate of inflation may be
optimal because raising revenue through the inflation tax makes

possible reductions in other distortionary taxes. As the above
discussion makes clear, this argument is dubious since if t2 < 0,
inflation may reduce revenues requiring increases in other distor—
17

tionary taxes.

In

our model it is possible to calculate the

—26—

ratio of the welfare loss to the revenue yield from increases

in the rate of inflation. The calculation here improves on past
calculations of this sort in that the welfare consequences of

inflation—Induced changes in capital intensity and the full
revenue implications of changes in inflation are incorporated. In
finding the optimal rate of inflation, the excess burden from
inflationary finance can be compared to that from alternative
revenue sources.

The revenue raised from increases in the rate is given by

equation (37). The welfare cost of changes in the rate of inflation
is:

=

U1(f'

— n +

[(1

—

t1)f'

t2)rt)[t

+ (1 —

(38)

a)nv

To measure welfare loss in consumption units, U1 is set equal to 1.
Table 4 records the ratio of the welfare loss to the revenue gain
from raising the rate of inflation for various values of IT and

t.

All other parameters take on their previously assumed values.
(a =

.1, V = .1,

n =

.03, v = 1/3,

.4,

t1 =

=

.45,

Table 4

Welfare Loss per $ Revenue Raised
—.2

t2 =
IT =

—.02

0

.2

—.01

.12

.03

0

—.06

.44

.06

.04

—.19

1.36

.13

.08

—.325

2.70

.21

= $1800).

—27—

The first column illustrates what is apparent from the

previous discussion. When t2 < 0, increases in inflation reduce
revenues, as well as welfare. In this case, consideration of the
revenue constraint will reduce the optimal rate of inflation. In
the case t2 =

0, where the tax system is indexed, inflation does

not appear to be a viable revenue source. Even at an inflation
rate of zero, the welfare loss from increases in inflation approaches

half the revenue gain. At current rates of inflation, the welfare
loss is about twice the revenue gain. These figures must be
compared with loss from increases in other tax instruments. While
such estimates are difficult to make, it seems clear that the loss
from increases in income tax rates is much smaller than the losses

implied by moderate rates of inflation. The analysis here thus
confirms Phelps' conclusion that consideration of inflation policy
in the context of the government's public finance problem can

substantially alter the optimum rate. However, the results
here emphasize the importance of taking account of inflation's
effect on revenues from pre—existing taxes.
In the case where t2 =

.2,

inflation is a viable revenue

source. Even at 8% inflation, the welfare loss—revenue ratio is
a very moderate .21. This reflects the fact that when the tax
system is not indexed, inflation will have very large revenue
effects. With a non-indexed tax system, the optiiral rate of
inflation may be very high though the probab1e responsiveness of
savings to very low real yields limits the potential of inflationary
finance.

—28—

V. Conclusions and Implications
The results presented here show that at least in certain
circumstances the full liquidity rule may be a very poor guide

for inflation policy. The effect of monetary policy on capital
intensity must also be considered. This can lead to substantial
increases in the optimal rate of inflation. The results imply that
the presence of taxes- may further increase the optimal rate of

inflation. It is also shown that dynamic considerations change
entirely the nature of the optimaJ- public finance problem in which

the government chooses among inflation and other revenue sources.
This analysis of optimal long run inflation policy could

usefully be extended in several directions. Most importantly,
the analysis here has relied entirely on comparison of steady

states. This procedure ignores issues surrounding the transition
to an optimal path. The steady state character of the analysis
also precludes any consideration of unemployment. It would be
valuable to consider the monetary policy problem-in an explicit

optimal control framework. The model employed here has relied on
ad-hoc formulations of savings behavior. Altering the assumptions,
or using a savings function derived from utility maximization, might

alter the conclusions. Finally, it would be useful to explore in
more detail the effect of inflation on the composition of the capital

stock. Section III implies that inflation may significantly
exacerbate distortions already present due to differential taxation
of corporate and non—corporate capital.
It is not likely, however, that theoretical analysis can
shed much-light on the optImal rate of inflation, until more

—29—

empirical evidence is available. Reliable estimates of the impact
of inflation on capital formation do not yet exist.

Likewise, little

is known about the effect of inflation on financial intermediation

or on effective tax rates. Until these gaps in our empirical
knowledge are filled, calculations regarding optimal inflation
will remain highly speculative exercises.

—30—

Footnotes

1. A natural alternative assumption would be to allow the savings
rate to vary as individuals maximize an intertemporal utility
function. If the horizon is infinite, Sidrauski (1967) showed
that the rate of money growth has no effech on steady state
intercapital intensity. Barro (1974) has argued that
generational bequest motives make the infinite horizon assumption
tenable. Drazen (1977) notes several considerations including
corner solutions, liquidity constraints, and the non-fungibility
of human capital, which suggest that a finite saving horizon is
a more reasonable assumption. In this case, as Diamond (1965)
showed, there is no reason to assume that the capital stock will
be driven to the optimal level. Our assumption of a fixed, not
necessarily optimal savings rate, a, captures this phenomenon.
It also comports with observed constancy of the American savings
rate (David and Scadding, 1974).
A constant savings rate out of disposable income can result from
utility maximization ina two—period overlapping generations
framework under quite restrictive assumptions. If the elasticity
of substitution between present and future consumption is one, a
constant share of first period income will be saved. Typically,
the share of total income received by the young generation will not
be constant. If, however, the production function is Cobb—Douglas
as well, labor and hence the young, will receive a fixed share of
real output so savings can be expressed approximately as a constant
fraction of income. An approximation is still involved since the
savings rate will depend on which generation receives the transfers
of newly created money.

real

2.

money balances is
a simple way of explaining why individuals hold money. An analysis
of conditions under which this procedure is legitimate may be found
in Fischer (1974). The existence of such a utility function is
implicit in past analyses of inflation's welfare cost, which employ
the money demand function to measure the value of money services.

3.

It is plausible that individuals derive utility from the holding
of capital apart from any return which it renders. This possi-

Specification of a utility function containing

bility is excluded from consideration here.

4. Samuelson (1947), p. 117—122, derives an equivalent first order
condition for real money balances in a somewhat more general
context. The equation in the text follows directly from the observation that the "price" of holding money in terms of foregone
consumption is the interest rate.
5. This condition is sufficient for the existence of a steady state path.

6. This condition is sufficient but not necessary for the negativity
of the denominator. It is satisfied by most plausible combinations
of parameter values. The same condition arises in Sidrauski's (1967)
consideration of inflation's effect on capital intensity.

—31—

7. This result is a property of many but not all monetary growth
models. Levhari and Patinkjn (1968) show that inflation may
reduce capital intensity, when savings out of the "imputed real
income" from money balances and money as a factor of production
are allowed for. A general discussion of the conditions under
which inflation raises capital intensity may be found in Dorn—
busch and Frenkel (1973).
8. This conclusion is motivated by the separation of fiscal and
monetary authorities, the multiplicity of targets at which policy
instruments must be aimed, and the observed constancy of the
savings rate over the past 70 years.
9. Actual real interest rates are far less than this for a host of
reasons, the most important of which are taxation and the existence of equity finance. These issues are discussed in detail in
Feldstein and Summers (1978).
10. This figure represents the growth rate of output, which is partially
due to technical change. The maximum steady state welfare criteria
used here does lose some of its appeal when technological change is
introduced.
11. This is essentially because both the "capital intensity" and "money
balance" effect are proportionaa to the reduction in real money
balances brought about by inflation.
12. Note that the value of private ownership claims on financial
intermediarieswill in a steady state, equal the value of the
capital owned by intermediaries.
13. The analysis obviously has implications for various forms of
banking regulation, i.e., reserve requirements, but this topic
is not pursued here.

14. The results in this and the next paragraph follow immediately from
total differentiation of (36).
15. Note that the notation has changed from that of the preceding section.

16. Recall that the sign of t2 depends on assumptions about how capital
is financed.

17. The argument is not clear—cut even within Phelps' static framework.
Money holding is likely to be a substitute for leisure. Since
leisure cannot be taxed, this creates a presumption that it should
be subsidized, as long as there exist other taxable goods more
complementary with leisure and revenue needs are not too great.

—32—

Ref erences

M. J. Bailey, "Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance," Journal
of Political Economy, April 1956, 93—110.
P.. Barro, "Are Government Bonds Net toalth?" Journal of Political
Eco.nomy November, 1974,. 1Q95—11l7.

P. Diamond, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"
American Economic Review, December 1965, 1126—1150.

R. Dornbusch and J. Frenke]., "Inflation and Growth: Alternative
Approaches,"jeurnal of Money, Credit and Banking, February
1973, 141—156.
A. Drazen, "Government Debt, Human Capital, and Bequests in a
Life Cycle Model," American Economic Review, June 1973, 505—516.

MS. Feldstein, "Inflation, Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest:
A Theoretical Analysis,", American Economic Review, December
1976, 809—819.

_____

"The Welfare Cost of Inflation," (unpublished), 1977.

______,

J.

Green and E. Sheshinski, "Inflation and Taxes in a
Growing Economy with Equity and Debt Finance," Journal
of Political Economy, April 1978, 553-570.

_____ and L. Summers, "Is the Rate of Profit Falling?" Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1977:1.

______ and ______, "Tax Rules, Inflation and the Long Term Interest
Rate," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1978:1
S. Fischer, "Money and the Production Function," Economic Inquiry,
December 1974, 517—533.

_________

'Anticipations

(unpublished) ,

and the Non-neutrality of Money,"

1973.

M. Friedman, "The Optimum Supply of Money," in his The Optimum
Supply of Money and Other Essays, Chicago, 1969.

______

"Reienue Gains from Inflationary Finance," Journal of
Political Economy, 1970.

J. Green and E. Sheshinski, "Budget Displacement Effects of
Inflationary Finance," American Economic Review,
September 1977, 671—683.

—33—

D. Levhari and D. Patinkin, "The Role of Money in a Simple
Growth Model," American Economic Review, September 1968,
713—753.
E.S. Phelps, "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance,"
Swedish Journal of Economics, March 1973, 67-82.
P. A. Sarnuelson, Foundations of Economic Analysis (1947).
______, "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest with or
without the Social Contrivance of Money,"Journal
Politic1Ectnotn', December 1958, 4G7-482.

T. J. Sargent and N. Wallace, "Rational Expectations, the Optimal
Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule,"
Journal of Political Economy, April 1975, 241-254.
M. Sidrauski (1967) , "Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in
a Monetary Economy," American Economic Review, May 1967,
534—544.

