NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN SOCIAL
SECURITY AND SAVING

Martin Feldstein

Working Paper No. 355

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
May 1979

(\

NBER Working Paper N~ 355
May 1979

INTERNATIONAL DIFFERENCES IN SOCIAL SECURITY AND SAVING
Martin Feldstein
SUMMARY
The U.S. Social Security Administration, in cooperation
with similar agencies in other countries, recently developed estimates
of social security benefits for twelve major industrial countries. More
specifically, these estimates provide information on the ratio of social
security pension to preretirement earnings for a newly retired couple in
which the man had the average earnings in manufacturing industry.
The present paper uses these new data to estimate the
effects of social security benefits on saving and retirement in an
extended life cycle model. The parameter estimates indicate that, with
retirement behavior given, social security significantly reduces private
saving; an increase of the benefit-to-earnings ratio by 10 percentage
points reduces the saving rate by approximately 3 percentage points. The
reduced form parameter indicates that allowing for the effect on saving
of induced retirement lowers this implied decrease in saving from 3
percentage points to about 2 percentage points.

Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
(617) 868-3905

International Differences in Social Security and Saving
Martin Feldstein*
The traditional life cycle theory of saving implies that an individual
who expects to receive social security benefits will reduce his personal
saving by a corresponding amount.

In a more general theoretical framework,

the effect of social security on saving is ambiguous:

by inducing changes

in retirement behavior or intergenerational transfers, social security can
either increase or decrease aggregate private saving. l

Only empirical ana-

lysis can determine the actual net effect of social security.
The retirement benefits that are provided by public social security
programs differ significantly among the major industrial countries.

These dif-

ferences provide a potentially useful basis for measuring the impact of social
security on aggregate savings.

In a previous study (Feldstein, 1977), I esti-

mated the average level of social security benefits for 15 countries and used
these estimates to examine how benefits affected aggregate private saving.

The

results of that study indicate that social security benefits did depress saving
by a substantial amount.

*Harvard University and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper
was prepared for presentation at the NBER-SSRC Conference on Empirical Research
in Public Economics in Cambridge, England, on June 14-16, 1979. I am grateful to
Charles Horioka for his help with this research and to the NBER and National
Science Foundation for financial support of this work. This research is part of
the NBER Social Insurance Program and of the NBER Program of Capital Formation.
The views expressed here are however my own and should not be attributed to any
organization.
l:iec Feldstein (1974) for a discussion of the effect of induced changes in
retirement and Barro (1974) for a discussion of intergenerational transfers.
Feldstein (1979) discusses other reasons why the implication of the traditional
life cycle model may not be appropriate.

-2-

A fundamental problem in any study of the effect of social security is
estimating the level of benefits that individuals anticipate that they will
receive when they retire.

In my earlier international study, I used the ratio

of the average benefit currently received per retiree to the average per capita
income in the country.

This "average replacement ratio" is appropriate if the

individuals who are working base their estimates of the benefits that they will
eventually receive on the experience of those who are currently retired.
are two problems with this approach.

The first is conceptual:

There

if the social

security program has changed substantially in recent years, the current workers
rnay correctly perceive that the experience of the older individuals who retired
many years ago is less relevant than the experience of those who are just
retiring.

The second is practical:

the average level of social security bene-

fits is difficult to calculate in practice for several countries because the
data on aggregate benefits do not distinguish retirement benefits from benefits
paid to survivors and to the disabled.

Dividing total benefits by the number of

older persons or the number of retirees produces a value that is very much
influenced by the treatment of survivors and the disabled and by their importance relative to retirees.

It is frankly surprising that the study based on

the "average replacement ratio" permitted parameter estimates that were as
plausible, precise·and robust as they appeared to be.
rfhe present paper was stimulated by the publication of anew, and I believe

more reliable, source of data on social security benefits.

The U.S. Social

Security Administration, in cooperation with similar agencies in other
countries, recently developed estimates of social security benefits for twelve
major industrial countries (Haanes-Olsen, 1978).

More specifically, the Social

Security Administration estimated the ratio of the social security retirement

-3pension of a newly retired aged couple to the average earnings of a worker in
manufac turing employment.

This "new retiree replacement ratio" has the advan-

tage that it is not distorted by the experience of individuals who retired many
years ago.

Because it is based on a careful analysis of statutory provisions,

it is also not subj ect to the measurement errors in the "average replacement
ratio."
Although the "new retiree replacement ratio" should permit more reliable
estimates of the effect of social security on saving, this ratio also has significant problems.

First, since the benefit schedules are generally progressive

and manufacturing workers better paid than average, the Social Security
Administration calculation will understate the benefit replacement ratio of the
average retiree; the extent of this understatement will differ among countries.
Second, no allowance is made for taxes; the effective replacement rate will be
understated to the extent that earnings are taxed and social security benefits
are not.

This discrepancy will also differ among countries, depending on tax

rules and on the relative reliance on value added taxes.

Third, the "new

retiree replacement ratio" contains no information on inflation indexing, a
feature that clearly affects the lifetime value of benefits.
data only on public retirement pensions.

Finally, we have

Private pensions have become

increasingly important and also differ significantly among countries. 1

All of

these shortcomings can introduce substantial error into the measurement of
expected social security benefits.
Dl'he f)~cial Security Administration study does contain information on private
pensions in 5 countries in 1975 that emphasize these differences. For example,
while 45 percent of the U.K. working population is covered by private pensions
and these average 23 percent of earnings, in the Netherlands 80 percent are
covered and benefits average between 7 and 11 percent.

-4These problems should be borne in mind in considering the results presented
in this paper.
'rhe current study focuses on the estimates based on the "new retiree
replacement ratio."

'I'he statistical estimates indicate that savings behavior

in the first half of the 1910's in the twelve sample countries is quite
consistent with the implications of the extended life cycle model and that
higher levels of anticipated benefits do significantly reduce private saving.
For comparison, the study also presents estimates based on the "average
replacement ratio. "

Although this variable showed an important effect of

social security on saving in the previous study using data for the 1950's,
the current study finds no statistically significant effect.

It is not clear

whether this difference reflects the shift in time, measurement problems in
the average replacement ratio, or other factors. 1
The next section of this paper reviews the theory ahd specification of
the "extended life cycle model."

The data are described in section 2.

estimated parameter values are then presented in section 3.

The

There is a

brief concluding section.
1. The Specification of Saving Behavior
The net saving in an economy is the difference between the gross saving of
the savers and the dissaving of the dissavers.

The traditional life cycle model

of saving emphasizes that the working population are the savers while the
retirees are the dissavers.

This implies that the net saving rate will be

IBarra [1919) also studied the experience of the 1950's based on this
variable. He used a mix of time series and cross-sections (rather than
averaging the data for all sample years) and found a significant social
security effect only when he included individual country constant terms.

-5~

higher when the income of the generation of workers is high relative to the
income that the retirees had when they were working and saving.

A key conclu-

sion of the traditional life cycle model is therefore that an economy with a
faster rate of growth of total private income will have a higher private saving
rate. l
The life cycle theory also suggests that an economy's saving rate will be
higher when the working age population is large relative to the numbers of
retirees and of younger dependents.

When the population grows at a constant

rate for a long period of time, the demographic composition is also stable
and is itself a function of the growth rate.

Under these conditions, the

effect of the demographic structure might be subsumed in the effect of the
growth of total income.

A more realistic disequilibrium view of population

growth must recognize that the population growth rates have been changing
substantially.

This in turn implies that the demographic composition of

the population should be recognized explicitly in any empirical model of
intercountry differences in saving rates.
Previous empirical research by Houthakker (1961, 1965) and Modigliani

(1970) confirm that the traditional life cycle model is a useful framework for
explaining differences in saving rates among countries.

In a crosssection of

countries, higher saving rates are associated with faster rates of growth of
private income and with smaller fractions of the population who are before or
beyond the working age.
IThis implication was recognized by Harrod (1948) and later developed and quantified by Modigliani and his collaborators (1954, 1966, 1970).

-6This life-cycle model of intercountry differences in saving rates can
be extended to include the expected effect of social security benefits.

A

high level of benefits relative to previous earnings can substitute for
private wealth accumulation and should cause individuals to save less for
their retirement.

This reduces both the gross saving of the working pop-

ulation and the subsequent dissaving of the retirees.
saving rate is reduced.

In equilibrium, the net

The current paper, like Feldstein (1977), therefore

adds the social security benefit replacement ratio to the growth and
demographic variables of the Houthakker-Modigliani specification.
A weakness of the traditional life cycle model is that it treats the
retirement period as fixed.

In fact, the fraction of men over age 65 that is

working has been falling over time and varies among countries.

Men who expect

to continue working beyond age 65 will have a smaller incentive to save for
retirement.

The extended life cycle model with endogenous retirement is deve-

loped explicitly in Feldstein (1974, 1977) and will not be repeated here.

It

suggests that international differences in saving rates depend in a complex way
on the labor force participation of older persons, the extent to which benefits
are reduced by a "retirement test," the life expectancy of individuals at age

65, and the ways in which the social security program has changed in recent
years.

It is clearly impossible to capture all of these effects in an analysis

with only 12 country observations.

The current study does however explicitly

include the labor force participation of the aged in order to test this aspect
of the extended life cycle model and to distinguish the direct effects of
.changes in social security benefits with retirement given from the total changes
when retirement can also vary.
The specification of the basic savings function that I have estimated
can therefore be written:

-7-

(1)

Where S/Y is the private saving rate, G is the growth rate of total private
income, AGE is the ratio of the number of retirees over the age of 65 to the
population age 20 to 65, DEP is the ratio of the number of younger dependents
to the working age population, B/E is the benefit-earnings replacement ratio,
and LPAGED is the labor force participation rate of older men.

S4

Although the extended life cycle theory predicts unambiguously that
is negative, i.e., that higher social security benefits reduce the saving

rate when the retirement bahavior is held constant, there are other economists
who have asserted that social security may not depress savings.

Thus Katona

(1965) and Pechman et ale (1968) have argued that individual savers are
not rational and that such individuals may ignore social security benefits
or may even Save

mo~e

because they perceive that the goal of a more comfor-

table retirement is brought "within reach" by social security.

Barro (1974)

also reached the conclusion that social security benefits may not affect
aggregate saving (even with fixed retirement rates) because individuals
Save more in order to increase their bequests to compensate their children
for the extra social security taxes that they will bear in the future.

The

estimate of S4 provides a direct test of the "irrationality" view of Pechman,
et. al as well as of the "offsetting private transfers" view of Barro. l
A complete characterization of the relation between social security
and saving requires specifying how the benefit replacement ratio affects the
labor force participation rate of older men.

A higher benefit replacement

IFor a more general discussion of this "offsetting private tranfers" view,
see Feldstein (1979).

-8ratio provides a greater incentive to retire l and the lower labor force participation of the aged in turn encourages more saving.

The net effect of

social security on saving depends on the relative strength of the traditional
wealth substitution effect (S4 in equation 1) and the indirect effect of
benefits on induced retirement. 2
Of course, the relative strengths of these two effects may differ from
time to time and country to country.

It is noteworthy that the average rate

of labor force participation among older men dropped from 41 percent in my
previous study (based on the experience of 1954 to 1960) to only 17 percent
in the current sample. 3

Moreover, while the labor force participation of

older men ranged between 25 percent and 74 percent in the data for the 1950's,
by the 1970's the range was reduced to 8 percent to 32 percent; the standard
deviation was also more than halved (from 9.6 percentage points to 4.9 percentage points).

This suggests both that there is much less information

on the effects of the labor force participation in the current sample and
that further increases in the social security benefit replacement ratio can
no longer have as powerful effect on retirement as they previously did.
Intercountry differences in the labor force participation rate of the
aged will also reflect a number of other factors, only some of which can be
quantified.

My previous study, building on earlier work by others, identified

the level of income as a significant influence on retirement behavior.
Iprevious international evidence by Aaron (1967), and Feldstein (1977) confirms
this effect, as does more detailed microeconomic evidence for the United States
(Boskin, 1911 and Pellechio, 1978).
2As well as the. irrational effects, induced changes ~n private intergenerational transfers, etc.
3The sample of countries is of course slightly different but this accounts for
very little of the change.

-9Because of offsetting income and substitution effects, a higher level of
earnings can either increase or decrease the demand for leisure after age
65.

A nonlinear specification indicated that the income effect dominated

for the typical country in the sample for the 1950's while the substitution
effect dominated for the high income countries in that sample (Feldstein,
1977, pp. 197-98).

The same nonlinear specification will be examined in

the current study.
The decision to retire should also depend in an important way on whether
the payment of social security benefits is contingent on retirement.
Unfortunately, there is usually considerable ambiguity about the structure
of the retirement test in each country.

That ambiguity may explain why a

dummy variable representing the retirement test was almost always insignificant
in the previous study.

A similar variable will nevertheless be included in

the current analysis.
The specification of the labor force participation equation is thus:

LPAGED

where y* is the average per capita income in the country measured in 1970
U. S. dollars and RET indicates the presence of an earnings test.

The specifi-

cation of linear and inverse terms in income parallels the earlier analysis.
In the notation of equations 1 and 2, the total effect of the benefit
This can be calculated from the estimated structural parameters of equations 1 and 2 or it can be obtained directly
by estimating the reduced form equation:

-10"-

s

y

= (SO

+ SSo. O) + S1 G + Sz AGE + S3 DEP

+ (S4 + SSo. 1 ) : + SSo. Z

(l~g)

+ SSo. 3

(1~~)

+ 8S o.4 RET
Estimating the separate structural equations is asymptotically more efficient
than estimating the reduced form, a property that may be of little significance
with the current sample of only 12 observations.

More relevant is the fact

that a direct estimate of equation 3 would inevitably result in very wide
confidence intervals because collinearity would raise the standard errors
while the very small number of residual degrees of freedom would imply
proportionately wider confidence intervals.
discussed below.
form coefficient

Both types of estimates are

It is worth reiterating that while the composite reduced

f\ + 8So. 1

measures the total effect of benefits on saving

in the sample, it is the structural coefficient 84 that tests the proposition of
Pechman and Barro that, even with no change in retirement behavior, social
security does not decrease private saving.
2.

The Data and Estimation Method
The present analysis is based on data for the twelve countries l for

which the Social Security Administration estimated the "new retiree replacement
ratio."

To reduce the effects of cyclical fluctuations, the income, saving and

benefit variables are averaged over the period 1969 through 1975.

National

income account data were obtained from National Accounts of OECD Countries, 1974
(OECD, 1976) and The 1976 Yearbook of National Account Statistics (United
IAustria, Canada, benmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, and United States. Equations involving "life
expectancy at age 65" exclude Austria for which data on this variable are not
available.

-11Nations, 1977a).1

Demographic data were obtained from the Demographic Yearbook,

1976 (United Nations, 1977b) and The 1977 Year Book of Labor Statistics
(International Labor Organization, 1977).
More specifically, private saving (S) is defined as total private saving
and includes the savings of households, private institutions serving households,
and corporations. 2

Unfortunately, the savings figures are all based on nominal

accounting definitions; the result of this is to understate depreciation and
overstate saving.

!1oreover, the extent of this overstatement will differ among

the sample countries.
Private national income (Y) is the difference between total national
income and personal and corporate tax receipts net of tranfers.

The growth rate

(G) is the implicit constant annual percentage rate of growth of real private
national income for the 15 year period from 1960 through 1975.
The variable AGE is the ratio of the number of retired persons age 65
and over to the number of persons between 20 and 65 years old.

Similarly,

DEP is defined as the ratio of the number of persons under 20 to the number
between 20 and 65.

The labor force participation of the aged (LPAGED) is the

percent of men aged 65 and older who are economically active.
The basic benefit replacement ratio (B/E) is the "new retiree replacement
ratio" (based on the benefits for a couple and the average earnings of a worker
in manufacturing industry) as calculated by the Social Security Administration.
The alternative "average replacement ratio" used in my earlier research is
defined as the relative "benefits per aged person adjusted for the retirement

IStatistics for 1975 were obtained from the Data Resources, Inc. data bank containing these OEeD and U.N. sources.
2 Inc l uding public as well as private corporations.

-12-

test" (BPARA/y) and calculated by dividing the total amount of benefits received
by the aged, survivors, and the disabled by the number of persons over age 65
or, in those countries with a retirement test, by the number of retired persons
over age 65.

The data on social s~curity benefits is from International

Labor Organization (1976).
The average per capita income in 1970 U. S. dollars (y*) is calculated
by converting domestic currency values to U. S. dollars at official exchange
rates.
The retirement test indicator (RET) is a binary variable equal t~ one
if the country imposes an earnings test as a condition of benefits for those
beyond the normal retirement age for that country.
tion (1978).

The classification of

In some specifications, we examined the implications of

including the life expectancy of males at age 65 (LE65) and of a variable
indicating the year in which the nation's social security system was started
(START).
Because the savings function contains an endogenous variable as one of
the regressors (LPAGED), ordinary least squares is not appropriate.

Although

two stage least squares has only asymptotic consistency, it still seems better
to use this method even with the current small sample.

The variables in

equation 2 (plus LE65 and START) are included in the set of exogenous variables.

Equation 2 can of course be estimated by ordinary least squares.

The parameters of the reduced form equation can then be calculated from the
estimated structural coefficients.
I have followed the procedure of Houthakker (1961, 1965), Modigliani
(1970) and Feldstein (1977) by weighting each observation to reflect the
size of the country's population.

The estimation program adjusts the degrees

-13of freedom, standard errors, etc. for these weights. l
Table 1 represents the values of the key variables for the 12 countries.

IWhen the principal equations were re-estimated without weights, none of the
basic implications were altered.

-14-

3.

The Parameter Estimates
The estimated parameter values are generaily consistent with the extended

life cycle model described in section 1 and with the qualitative properties
implied by the parameter estimates in Feldstein (1977).

In particular, the

coefficient of the social security variable in the saving function supports
the conclusion that a high level of social security benefits depresses private
saving when retirement behavior is fixed.

Although the labor force partici-

pation equation confirms that high benefits also induce earlier retirement,
the reduced form parameter implied by the structural coefficients indicates
that, on balance, higher social security benefits reduce private saving.
Equation 4 presents the estimated parameter values of the savings
function specified in equation 1:
(4)

S
y

= 0.92 + 5.24 G - 1.21 AGE - 0.77 DEP
(1.33)

(0.45)

- 0.37 (B/E) - 0.54 LPAGED
(0.13)

(0.27)

(0.20)
2
R
SEE
N

=

0.90
0.0182
12

Note first that the five coefficients are all statistically significant l and
correspond to the qualitative predictions of the extended life cycle model. 2
A high rate of growth of total real income (G) raises the saving rate while
more of the population over 65 (AGE) or under 20 (DEP) decreases the saving
rate.

These findings replicate the earlier Houthakker-Modigliani-Feldstein

confirmation of the implications of the traditional life cycle theory.

A

higher fraction of older men who are working (LPAGED) implies less need for
retirement assets and therefore a lower saving rate, a key feature of the
IWith only 6 degrees of freedom, the 10 percent significance level (for
a two tailed test) is 1.94 and the 5 percent significance level is 2.45.
2The coefficients are qualitatively similar to the estimates for 1954-60
presented in Feldstein (1977) but indicate that the sensitivity of saving
to each of the variables has increased. This may however reflect the substitution of the new benefit replacement ratio for the previous average replacement
ratio.

-15extended life cycle model. 1

The coefficient of -0.54 (with a standard error of

0.21 implies quite substantial sensitivity of saving to this measure of retirement behavior; a one standard deviation increase in the retirement ratio (i.e., a
move of LPAGED by 0.049) reduces the saving rate by 0.02 or half of one standard
deviation of the saving rate in the 12 country samp1e. 2
The coefficient of the social security benefit variable (B/E) is - 0.31
with a standard error of 0.15.

This is clearly incompatible with the proposi-

tion that social security is ignored by savers or that it induces greater
savings for retirement.

It is also incompatible with the view that a shift in

private intergenerational transfers negates any other effect of social security
on private saving.

The magnitude of the coefficient implies that a 10 percen-

tage point increase in the benefit replacement ratio would, ceteris paribus,
lower the saving rate by 3.1 percentage points or approximately one standard
deviation. 1
A number of other secondary variables that might cause intercountry differences in saving. were tried as additions to the variables in equation 4 but
their coefficients

~ere

always insignificant.

For example, when the variable

measuring life expectancy at age 65 (LE65) was added to equation 4 its coefficient was positive as expected but completely insignificant (a t-statistic
of less than 0.5).

The coefficients of the other variables remained essentially

unchanged but their standard errors increased as a result of the col1inearity
among the regressors.

The other variables that were tried include the retire-

ment test (RET), the starting date (START) and the level of income (100/y*).
lIt might of course be argued that when the saving rate is low for other
reasons individuals cannot "afford" to retire, implying that the direction of
causation is reversed or at least simultaneous. I have not explored that possibility.
2For the 12 countries, Sly has a mean of 0.12 and a standard deviation of 0.04.
3According to the calculations by the Social Security Administration, the U.S.
new retiree replacement ratio rose 13 percentage points between 1969 and 1915.
(Haanes-Olsen, 1918, p.4)

-16Equations with these additional variables are presented in appendix table A-1.
Equation 4 and the related equations with additional variables were reestimated using the "average replacement ratio" ca1u1ated from social security type
benefit payments (BPARA!y).

The overall fit of the equation was substantially

worse; the standard error of the estimate rose from 0.0135 in equation
0.0273 when B!E was replace by BPARA!y.

4 to

All of the standard errors became

larger and no variable had a coefficient with a t-statistic as large as 2.0.
The replacement rate variable itself was completely insignificant.

The addition

of other explanatory variables did not change the general character of this
result and left the standard error of the estimate substantially larger than in
equation

4.

It seems reasonable to conclude that saving decisions are being

influenced more by the benefits being paid to new retirees than by the average
benefit being paid to retirees of all ages. l

It is not clear why the average

benefit variable no longer appears to influence saving in the way that it did in
the earlier sample.

The difference in coefficients may reflect an increased

discrepancy between average benefits and new retiree benefits, greater measurement error is the calculation of average benefits, or the possibility that
either the current or the previous estimates were merely the result of chance.
Equation 5 presents the estimated coefficients of the basic labor force
participation function:
LPAGED

+ -0.74 + 11.0

(10~)

(10.1)

- o. 29 (~)
E
(0.13)

y

- 3.0 RET

(7.1)

+ 0.023

(1~~)

0.019

2
R
SEE
N

0.71

= 0.024
= 12

1 Individual households and pension planners may also be basing their saving
decisions on more accurate knowledge of future benefit rules which are better
approximated by B!E than by BPARA!y. Alternatively, the poor statistical performance of BPARA!y may only reflect measurement problems with this variable.

-17The coefficient of primary interest, that of the benefit replacement ratio,
confirms that higher benefits do induce earlier retirement.

An increase in the

benefit ratio of 10 percentage points reduces the labor force participation by
2.9 percentage points; for comparison, the labor force participation rates in
the sample had a mean of 17.5 percent and a standard deviation of 4.9 percent.
Although the coefficients of the two income variables are subject to
substantial uncertainty, it is interesting to note that the combined effect of
the two coefficients is similar to the behavior implied by the coefficients for
1954 to 1960 in Feldstein (1977):

for the lower income countrie~, the income

effect dominates the substitution effect and increasing income lowers LPAGED
while for higher income countries the opposite is true.

Because the mean real

income is much higher in the current sample than it was in the 1950's, the
substitution effect now dominates at the mean income.
The coefficient of the retirement test variable (RET) has the correct sign
but is not significantly different from zero, a result that characterized the
earlier study as well.

This may reflect the inadequacy of this binary variable

as a measure of the complex earnings tests, the .oversimplicity of the linear
specification, or even the unlikely possibility that it is the availability of
benefits rather than the earnings test that is the crucial determinant of retirment behavior.
Equation 5 was also estimated with the addition of life expectancy at age 65
(LE65) and the maturity of the social security program (START) but neither of
these variables was significant.

Substituting the average benefit replacement

ratio (BPARA/y) for the new retiree replacement ratio (B/E) leaves the estimated
effect of social security on retirement essentially unchanged l but makes all
of the other variables completely insignificant (i.e., their coefficients have
IThe coefficient falls from -0.29 to -0.23 but BPARA/Y is larger on average
than B/E.

-18t-statistics of less than 0.5).1
The parameters of the reduced form savings function (equation 3) can in
principle be estimated directly by ordinary least squares.

Unfortunately, esti-

mating the 8 parameters with only 12 observations leaves all of the coefficients
with relatively large standard errors (no coefficient is as large as 1.5 times
its standard error).
dard error of 0.27.

For example, the coefficient of B/E is - 0.16 with a stanThere is too little information in the sample to obtain

useful estimates of reduced form parameters in this way.
Alternatively, the estimated coefficients of equations 4 and 5 can be combined to calculate the reduced form parameters.

The resulting equation is:

~ = 1.32 + 5.24 G - 1.21 AGE - 0.77 DEP
(6)
- 0.21 <:) - 5.9

(l~~)

- 0.012

<l~~)

+

1.6 RET

The net effect of higher social security benefits is thus to reduce the saving
rate; the wealth replacement effect outweighs the induced retirement effect.
An approximate standard error of B + B a
4
5 1

= -0.21

can be obtained easily

on the assumption that the parameter estimates of equation 4 and 5 are uncorrelated.

The error variance of this nonlinear function of the parameter estimates

is then approximated in the usual way by the expected value of the square of the
first order terms in the expansion of this function.

The standard error esti-

mated in this way is 0.16, indicating that the probability is less than 0.15 that
lIt is of course possible that BPARA/Y is the relevant variable for determining
retirement since that behavior depends on the benefits available to the current
population over age 65 while B/E is relevant for the more forward-looking saving
decisions among the population of working age.

-19the estimated effect of social security benefits of 0.21 could be obtained by
chance if· the true value were zero or negative. l

4.

Conclusion
The results of this study should be evaluated in conjunction with all of

the other evidence on private saving and social security.

By itself, the pre-

sent sample is too small and the problems of measurement are too great to
warrant reliance on the specific parameter values.

But the new estimates do

support and reinforce the conclusions of earlier studies that indicate the
appropriateness of the extended life cycle model of saving behavior in general
and the negative impact of social security benefits on private saving in particular.

lIn an earlier stage of the analysis, the sample was restricted to the eleven
countries (excluding Austria) for which data on LE65 were available. For this
sample, the total effect of social security is estimated to be -0.33 (instead of
-0.21) and its approximate standard error "is 0.11.

TABLE A-I
ALTERNATE SAVING RATE EQUATIONS
Equation

Constant

-G

-AGE

-DED

B/E

LPAGED

LEGS
-

A-I

0.92

5.24
0.33 )

-1.21
(0.45)

-0.77 . -0.37
(0.20) (0.13)

-0.54
(0.27)

A-2

1.02

6.07
(1.06)

-1.35
(0.33)

-0.92 -0.45
(0.16) (0.12)

-0.42
(0.17)

A-3

1.02

6.37
(1.50)

-1.44
(0.46)

-1.01 -0.53
(0.33) (0.30)

-0.49
(0.29)

0.85
(2.75)

A-4

1.21
(3.34)

6.97
(0.61)

-1.75
(0.41)

-1.21 -0.66
(0.41) (0.34)

-0.62
(0.33)

1.43
(0.28)

A-5

1.05

4.84
(2.81)

-1.44
(0.52)

-0.85 -0.30
(0.43) (0.46)

-0.37
(0.37)

-0.62
(3.88)

A-6

2.21

5.64
(2.34)

-1.41
-0.89 -0.37
(0.56) . (0.47) (0.47)

-0.31
(0.51)

0.51
(0.34)

100/y*

RET

START

SEE

0.0135

0.0144
I

0.0142

-0.41
(0.51)
-1.64
(2.41)

0.0164

-0.07
(0.15)

0.0174

The dependent variable in each equation is Sly. Equations are estimated by weighted TSLS for the sample
described in the text. Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Equation A-I repeats equation 4 of the
text. Equations A-2 through A-6 are based on only 11 observations.

N

0
I

-21References

Barro~

R. (1978) ~ "The Impact of Social Security on Private Savings~" The

American Enterprise Institute
Barro~Robert

J. and

MacDona1d~

in an International Cross
Boskin~

Studies~

Glenn

M.~

Section~"

#199.

"Social Security and Consumer Spending
Journal of Public

Economics~

forthcoming.

Michael J. (1977)~ "Social Security and Retirement Decisions~" Economic

Inquiry~ (January)~
Fe1dstein~

(1977)~

M.

vol. 15~ no. 1.

"Social Security and Private Savings:

Evidence in an Extended Life-Cycle

Mode1~"

International

in The Economics of Public

an International Economic Association Conference

Vo1ume~

Services~

M. Feldstein

and R. Inman (eds.).
Fe1dstein~

Martin

(1978)~

"Do Private Pensions Increase National Saving?"

Journal of Public Economics
Feldstein~

(December)~

vol.

10~

no. 3.

Martin (1979) ~ "The Effect of Social Security on Saving~"

National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 334.
Haanes-Olsen ~ L. (1978)

~

"Earnings-Replacement Rate of Old-Age Benefits ~

1965-75~ Selected Countries~" Social Security Bu1lentin~ (January) ~ Vol. 41~

No.1Harrod~

R. (1948)~ Towards ~ Dynamic Economic.

Houthakk.er~

H.

(1965)~

H.

(1965)~

Underdeveloped
(ed.).

London:

Macmillan.

"An International Comparison of Personal

Bulletin of the International Statistical
Houthakk.er~

London:

Institute~

Saving~"

#38.

"On Some Determinants of Saving in Developed and

Countries~"

Macmi11an~

in Problems of Economic
ch. 10.

Deve10pment~

E. Robinson

-22-

United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Social Security
Administration, Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security
Throughout the World, 1977.
Printing Office, 1978).

Washington, D.C.:

Progr~ms

United States Government

