                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND INCOME DISTRIBUTION:
                   A RECONSIDERATION



                      Paul   Krugman



                  Working Paper No. 356




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138
                        June   1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 356
                                                                June 1979



              International Trade and Income Distribution:
                            A Reconsideration

                                    SUMMARY


     The postwar expansion of trade among the industrial countries has not

had the strong distributional effects which standard models of trade would

have led us to expect. This paper develops a model which attempts to explain

this observation, while at the same time making sense of some other puzzling

empirical aspects of world trade.

     The basis of the model is a distinction between two kinds of trade:

"Heckscher—Ohlin" trade, based on differences in factor proportions, and

"intraindustry" trade, based on scale economies and product differentiation.

To incorporate intraindustry trade into the model it is necessary to drop the

usual assumptions of constant returns to scale and perfect competition;

instead the paper deals with a world where economies of scale are pervasive

and all firms possess some monopoly power. Surprisingly, it is nonetheless

possible to develop a fully—worked—out general equilibrium model which remains

simple and can be used to compare autarky and free trade.

     Two main results emerge from the analysis. First, the nature of trade

depends on how similar countries are in their factor endowments. As countries

become more similar, the trade between them will increasingly become intra—

industry in character. Second, the effects of opening trade depend on its

type. If intraindustry trade is sufficiently dominant the advantages of

extending the market will outweigh the distributional effects, and the owners

of scarce as well as of abundant factors will be made better off.



                                               Paul Krugman
                                               Department of Economics
                                               Yale University
                                               28 Hillhouse Avenue
                                               New Haven, CT 06520
                                               (203) 436—3246
Introduction


        In principle, free trade can make everyone better off; but received theory,

from Stolper and Samuelson (1941) to Jones (1971), suggests that this is unlikely

to happen in practice. The changes in relative goods prices that come with ex-

panded trade produce changes in the distribution of income; and in the simple

models which make up the core of trade theory these changes in income distribution

invariably -leave the owners of some factors of production absolutely worse off.

The implication is that trade liberalization always involves trading off gains

for some against losses for others, suggesting that moves toward freer trade will

occur only rarely and after severe political struggles.

          If one looks at the historical record, however, especially in the post-

 war period, it begins to appear as if this is one of those unusual cases in

 which theory has been too pessimistic about the consequences of laissez—faire.

 The last thirty years have been marked by a great increase in trade, especially

 among the industrial countries, with very few problems of adjustment. Only in

 recent years, with the growth of imports from the newly industrializing coun-

 tries, have the pressures for protection again became strong. This experience

 of painless    growth in   trade is in itself a major riddle, but it is wrapped in

 the   larger   enigma of the pattern of trade. Standard theory predicts trade

 between countries with different factor endowments, with countries specializing

 in goods with different factor intensities. Yet the growth in trade. has largely

 been among the industrial countries, which appear to be fairly similar in factor

• endowment and surely have become more similar over time •    And the trade among

 these countries is largely, and increasingly, two—way trade in similar products.

 Thus there are three great paradoxes of international trade: who trades with

 whom, what they trade in, and why it hurts so little.
                                                                                       2


         The purpose of this paper is to provide a tentative explanation of these

paradoxes, one which gives some guide to identifying situations in which expan-

sion of trade will and      will   not pose serious problems of income distribution.

The explanation is not a new one: it is essentially the same as that put f or—

ward by Balassa (1967), Grubel (1970), and Kravis (1971), among others. What

this paper does is put the argument in terms of a formal model, a step which

may be of some help in clarifying and        disseminating   ideas which have been "in

the    air" for some time.
         Briefly, the argument runs as follows. There are two kinds of trade:
Heckscher—Ohlin trade, which is based on differences in          factor proportions,

and "intraindustry"      trade, which is based on the interaction of economies of
scale   with product differentiation. Countries with similar factor endowments

will have little incentive for engaging in Heckscher—Olin trade, but will still

engage in intraindustry trade. But intraindustry trade does not have the strong

distributional effects of Heckscher—Ohlin trade. The result is that expansion

of trade between countries with sufficiently similar factor endowments will not

pose the distributional problems which Heckscher—Ohlin theory leads us to expect.

         Obviously, the crucial step in formalizing this argument is to model in—

traindustry trade. In this paper I use a simple model of intraindustry trade

which was developed       in an   earlier paper (Krugman 1979), and extend   it to a two—
industry, two—factor world. The structure of this model and           the determination of

this   model's equilibrium in a closed economy is set forth in Section 1. Section
2   shows how   the   pattern of trade between two   countries   is determined in the model,
developing    the basic relationship between differences in factor endowments and

the extent of intraindustry trade. Section 3 then examines the effects of trade

on income distribution, and shows how the extent of intraindustry trade deter-

mines whether scarce factors of production gain or lose from trade. Finally,
                                                                                         3

Section   4 summarizes the results and discusses some       implications   for theory

and policy.

        It must be phasized that the model presented here is in no sense a

general one. In addition to making strong assumptions about functional forms

of   cost and utility   functions, I impose a great deal,   of   symmetry on the model

to simplify the analysis and give a natural meaning to the concept of "similar-

ity" in factor proportions. Thus the results of the analysis are at best

suggestive. Nonetheless, they se intuitively plausible, and also se to
                                                                                   -
have something to do with actual experience.


1.   The Model in a Closed Economy

        Intraindustry trade depends on the existence of unexhausted economies

of scale in production. The main      probln in modelling this kind of trade is
how to handle these scale economies, which must lead to a breakdown of perfect

competition (unless they are wholly external to firms). In this paper, as in

an earlier paper   (Krugman 1979),   I will use the   device of   Chamberlinian mono-

polistic competition,    basing the model on recent work by Dixit and Stig],itz (1977).

An "inzustry" will consist of a large number of firms, all producing somewhat

differentiated products, all operating on the downward—sloping parts of their

average cost curves. There will be two—way international trade within an in-

dustry, because firms in different countries will produce different differen-

tiated products. What prevents countries from producing a complete range of

products domestically is the existence of fixed costs in production; thus scale

economies are the basic cause of intraindustry trade.

        Let us begin, however, with a two—industry model of a closed economy.

All of the products in each industry will enter symmetrically into demand, with

the two industries—industry 1 and industry 2—themselves playing symmetric

roles. Al]. individuals will have the convenient utility function
                                                                                              4

                          0               n2    e
         U
                2.n(I c1' )
                  i—i                    jl
                                  + Ln(E c
                                               2,j
                                                     )                                    (1)

                                  0<8<1

                                          th
where C11         is   consumption of the i product of industry 1; C2j           is   con-

sumption of the th product of industry 2; and n1, n2 are the number of

products actually produced in each industry. The utility function (1) has

several useful properties. First, it ensures that half of income will always

be spent on industry l's products, half on industry 2's products. Second, if

the number of products in each industry is large, it implies that every pro-

ducer faces a demand          curve   with elasticity l/l_e. Finally, (1) will allow

us to represent the gains and losses from trade in a particularly simple way.

         On the demand side, then, an industry is assumed to consist of a number

of products which are imperfect substitutes for one another. On the supply

side, however, they will be assumed to be perfect substitutes. There will be

only two factors of production, type 1 labor and type 2 labor, each of which

is wholly specific to an industry but nonspecific among products within an

industry. Thus type 1 labor will be used only in industry 1, type 2 only in

industry 2. Within each industry the labor required to produce a particular

product will consist of a fixed set—up cost and a constant variable cost:


                — + x1        ,           i=l,...,n1                                      (2)




                  a + 8
         t2,j             X2j
                 is    labor used in producing the i
                                                         th
where £ ,                                                     product of industry 1; x1
                                                                                          ,

is   the output of that product; and so on. To go from these required labor

inputs to nominal costs we must multiply by the wage rates of the two types

of labor, w1 and w2.
                                                                                               5


          To close the model, we begin by noting that output of each product, x,

is   the sum       of   individual consumptions of the product. At the same time,        total

employment         in each industry is the sum of employment in producing all         the   in-
dividual products.             Assuming full employment, we have

          ni
          E L1—L1—2—z                                                                        (3)
         il
                                                   Ocz<l



          1 L L2z
         j—l

Thus the total labor force is set equal to 2, with the parameter z measuring

factor proportions. As we will see below,                  z will   assume crucial significance

in determining the importance of intraindustry trade and the effect of trade on

income distribution.

         We    are now     prepared    to examine the determination of    equilibrium in this

model.    This involves determining how            many    products are actually produced in
each industry, the output of each product, the prices of products, and the
relative wages           of the two kinds of labor. We should note at the outset that

it   is indeterminate which products are produced——but it               is also unimportant.

         Our first        step is to   determine the pricing policy of firms. We assume

that producers can always costlessly differentiate their products. This means

that each product will be produced by only one firm. If there are many products

the elasticity of demand           for   each product will, as already noted, be l/l—e.

(This is proved in the Appendix). Thus each firm will face a demand                  curve of
constant   elasticity. We then have the familiar result that the profit—maximizing
price will be marginal Cost plus             a   constant percentage makeup:

               —
         pl               w1                                                                (4)


                    —l
         p2—e 8w2
                                                                                6



where p1, p2 are the prices of any products in industry 1 and 2 respectively

which are actually produced.

       Given the pricing policy of firms, actual profits depend on sales:


       '1 — p1x1 — (a     + x1)v1                                            (5)


          —        — (a + 8 x2)w2


where x1, x2 are sales of representative firms in the two industries.

       But in this model there will be free entry of firms, driving each in-

dustry to Chamberlin's "tangency solution" where profits are zero. Thus we

can use the condition of zero profits in equilibrium to determine the equilib-

rium size and number of firms. Setting 'r —       — 0, and using (4) and (5),

we have


      x1 —x
          2
            a
             _._
               1—0
                          0
                                                                             (6)

for the size of firms. The number of firms can then be determined from the

full—employment condition:


          — (2—z)/(ct+8                                                     (7)
                              x1)

          • z/(cz+8 x2)


      The   final step in determining equilibrium is to determine relative wages.
This can be   done very simply by noting that the industries receive equal shares

of expenditure, and that since profits are zero in equilibrium these receipts

go entirely to the wages of the industry—specific labor forces. So w1L1

w2L2, implying


      w1/w2 — z/(2—z)                                                       (8)
                                                                                   7


         We now have a completely worked—out equilibrium for a two—sector, mono—

polistically competitive economy. It is indeterminate which of the range of

potential. products within each industry are actually produced, but since all

products appear symmetrically, this is of no welfare significance. The character

of   the economy is determined by the two parameters z and 0.       The value of z

determines relative wages: if z is low, type 2 labor will receive much higher
wages than type 1 labor. The value of 0 measures the degree of substituta-
bility among products within an industry. It is also, in equilibrium, a measure

of   the importance of scale economies. From (4) we have 0
                                                                 8w1/p1   8w2/p2.
But 8w1, 8w2 are the marginal Costs of production, while in equilibrium price

equals average cost. Thus 0 is the ratio of marginal to average cost (which

is also the elasticity of cost with respect to output).


2. Factor Proportions and the Pattern of Trade

         In   the last section we saw how equilibrium can be determined in   a simple

closed—economy    model with scale economies and differentiated products. We can
now examine what happens when two such economies trade. What we are principally
concerned with is the proposition, advanced in the introduction, that countries
with similar factor endowments will engage in tintraindustry trade, while
countries with very different endowments will engage in Beckscher-Ohlin trade.
         As a first step we need a working measure of the extent of intraindustry
trade.    The empirical literature on   intraindustry trade (e.g., Hufbauer and
Chilas 1974, Grubei. and Lloyd 1975) generally concentrates on an index of trade
overlap, i.e.,
             zlx -MI
         i—i— k k
             k                                                                    (9)
                                                                                           8



where     X is a country's exports in industry k, Mk is imports in that in-
dustry. This index has         the   property that if trade is balanced industry by
industry,        it equals one, while if there is complete international specializa-
tion, so that every industry is either an export or import industry, it equals
zero. As we will see, this index fits in quite well with the model of this
paper.
          The    other concept we need to tie down is that of "similarity" in factor
endowments.        In general this is not well   defined.   What   I will do in this paper,
however, is to consider a special case in which the concept does have a natural

meaning, without trying to arrive at a general definition.

         Let us suppose, then, that there are two       countries,    the home country

and    the   foreign country. The home country will be just as described in Section

1. The foreign country will be identical, except for one thing: the relative

sizes of the two industries' labor forces will be reversed. That is1' the

foreign country will       be a mirror image of the home country. If       we use a star

on a variable to indicate that it refers to the foreign country, we have


                                                                                       (10)
          L1—2—z             L2—z
             *                *
         L1z                 L22—z
          Obviously, given this pattern of endowments we can regard z as an

index of similarity in factor proportions. If z —            1,   the countries have iden-

tical endowments. As z gets smaller, the factor proportions become increas-

ingly different.

         Now suppose these countries are able to trade, at zero transportation

cost. As before, we can         determine   pricing behavior, the size and   number   of


firms,    and relative    wages. In     addition, we can determine   the volume of   pattern
of    trade.
                                                                                          9


       The first point to note is that the elasticity of demand        for   any par-

ticular product is still 1/1—0. This gives us price equations exactly the

sane as before:


       p1 —           By1                                                           (11)

            —

        *        —l    *
       p10            8w1
        *        —1    *
       p2—0           8w2


       Now, however, the symmetry of the setup insures that all        wages will be
equal, both across industries and       internationally:

       w1"w.w2'w                                                                   (12)


       The zero—profit condition will determine the equilibritun size of firm,

x, which will be the same for both industries in both countries:


       x — ae/5(1—0)                                                               (13)

       Finally, full—employment determines the number of firms in each industry
in each country:

            —   '4 — (2—z)/(cz+Bx)                                                 (14)

            —
                '4
       What these results show is that trade will lead to factor price equali-

zation, while leaving the pattern of production unchanged. Our         remaining    task

is to determine the volume and       pattern   of trade. We can do this by noting two

points. First, everyone will devote equal shares of expenditure to the two

industries. Second, everyone will spend an equal amount on each of the products
                                                                                                 10

within an industry. This means that the share of all individuals' income
falling on,            say, industry      1 products produced in the foreign country is
             *
1.
     •             ——that is, the industry share in expenditure times that country's
         ni-I-n1

share of the industry. But the number of products is proportional to the

labor force. Thus if we let Y be the home country's income, (equal to the

foreign country's), X1 be exports of industry 1 products, X2 be exports of

industry 2 products, M1 be imports of industry 1 products, and                      M2 be imports
of industry 2 products, we have

                       1 Y •
                             (2—z/2)                                                       (15)


            X2 4 • (z/2)
                   —        • (z/2

            N2 —       4Y   •
                                (2—z/2)


            Now    the   relations (15) have two important         implications. First, consider
the
                                                                                 4 Y.
         volume of trade, Total home country exports are               X1 + X2          Thus

the ratio of trade to income is independent of z, the index of similarity in

factor proportions. This can be regarded as an answer to the first empirical

paradox mentioned in the introduction, the large volume of trade among similar

countries. In this model                  similar   countries will trade just as much as dissimilar

countries.

           The second empirical paradox was the prevalence, in trade among similar

countries, of two—way trade in similar products. If we substitute (15) into

our expression for intraindustry trade (9), we get a simple, striking result:


           I—z                                                                            (16)
                                                                                       11


The index     of intraindus try trade   equals   the index of similarity   in factor

propprtions.

         This still leaves us with the third empirical paradox, which was that

expansion of trade, when it involves largely intraindustry trade, seems to in-

volve few problems of income distribution. To see how this can be understood

is the task of the next section.


3.   Gains and    Losses from Trade

         In this section we must again begin by tying down a concept which I

have been using loosely. This is the idea of the "seriousness" of distribution

problems. What we need is a clear way of formulating the notion that distri-

bution problems from opening trade will not be serious if          countries   are suf-

ficiently    similar in factor proportions, so that the trade which results is
primarily intraindustry trade.
      The criterion I will use to define nonserious distribution problems is
the following: distribution problems arising from trade will be held not to
be   serious if   both factors        from trade. This of course begs some questions,
since   there may be difficulties in getting groups to accept a relative decline

in income even if they are absolutely better off. But this criterion is fairly

reasonable, and turns out to give suggestive results.

         To find out whether factors gain from trade, we need to know how utility

depends on the variables of the model.           Suppose an individual receives a wage
w,   and has the   utility function (1). He will then spend vIZ on the products

of   each   industry,   and divide his expenditure equally emong the products within
an industry. Thus his utility will depend on his wage, the prices of represen-
tative products in each industry, and        the   nmber of products available:
                                                                                                             12


             —                                                                                             (17)
                 Ln{n1(W12n1P1)0]lIe + Ln[u2(W/2n2P2)e]1/e


          — — 2Ln 2 + Lu v/p1 + Lu u/p2

              1—6             1—0
         +          Lu u1 +         Lu


         The function (17) has the convenient property that all the effects enter

additively. Utility depends on real wages in                        terms   of   representative products
and    on diversity.

         To analyze the effects of trade on welfare, it is useful to introduce
                                                               --
some more     notation.

         U1, U2           utility of workers in industry 1, 2

         vii, w12 — real wage of industry 1 workers in terms of products of
                    industries 1 and 2
         w21, w22         real wage of industry          2   workers in terms of products of
                          industries 1 and 2

         Then we can substitute into (17) to get (suppressing the constant term)


         U1 — Lu w11 + Lu w12 +                  Lu n1                                            (18)


                                           1—0
                                         + —-- Lu n2


              - Lu w21 + Lu w22 +                Lu n1 +
         U2                                                         Lu n2


         We are now in a position to measure the welfare effects of trade. Sup-

pose we start from a position of autarky, as in Section 1, then move to free

trade, as in Section 2. There will then be two kinds of effects. First, there

will   be a "Stolper—Samuelson" effect as factor prices are equalized. As one
can   easily     verify, labor's real        wage   remains the same in terms of the products
                                                                                          13


of its own industry, while rising or falling in terms of the other industry's

products depending on whether the factor is abundant or scarce. Thus in the

home    country   this effect benefits labor in industry 1, hurts labor in industry

2.

         The second effect comes from the increase in the size of the market,

which   makes a greater variety of products available. This works to everyone's
benefit.
         Since    both effects work in its favor, the abundant factor must be made

better off. This leaves us with                the problem of determining the change in
utility of the scarce factor—industry 2 labor               in the home   country, and the
symmetrically placed industry 1 labor in the foreign country.
     Let a prime on a variable indicate its free trade value, while unmarked
variables refer to autarky. Then as we move from the autarky solution in

Section 1 to the free trade solution in Section 2 the change in U2 is


             —        — Lu w21/w21 +                                                    (19)
                 U2
                                     '
                          1—0
                      +          Lu n1/u1 + 1—0 Lu
                                            ——


         —   Lu z/2—z +             Ln 2/2—z


                      +         Lu 2/z


where the first term is negative, and              represents   the Stolper—Samuelson distri-

bution loss;      and the remaining terms are positive, and represent the gains
from being part of a larger market. The question is under what conditions
these terms will outweigh the first term.
         By collecting terms, we can            rewrite (19) as
                                                                                             14


           U2 — U2 —          Ln z —     Lu 2—z +         Ln 2                            (20)



           This gives us one immediate result: if 8< 0.5, the scarce factor

necessarily gains from trade, since the first term will be positive and the

third term will outweigh the second. Recall that 0 is, in equilibrium, the

ratio of marginal to average cost, and can thus be regarded as an index of the

importance of economies of scale. What this result then says is that if scale

economies are sufficien important, both factors gain from trade.

           If 0> 0.5, whether both factors gain depends on the extent to which

trade is intraindustry in character, which in turn depends on how similar the

countries are in factor proportions. When 0> 0.5, the function (20) has three
                                                                        2—20
properties: (i) as z approaches 1, U2 — U2                   goes to           Lu 2 >0;

                (ii) as z goes to zero, U2 — U2              goes to minus infinity;

               (iii) U2 — U2 is strictly increasing in z1.

Thus if we were to graph (20), it would look like Figure 1. There is a critical

value of z, ,          for   which U; — U2 — 0.       If z >        both factors gain; if

z <   z    the scarce factor loses. But z is our measure of similarity in factor

proportions. Thus what we have shown is that if countries have sufficientljr

similar factor endowments, both factors gain from trade.

           What is particularly nice about this result is that we have already seen

that there is a one—for—one relationship between similarity of factor endowments

and intraindustry trade. So this result can be taken as a vindication of the

arguments of such authors as Kravis (1971) and Hufbauer and Chilas (1974) that

intraindustry     trade poses fewer adjustment problems than Heckscher-Ohlin trade.
           We should note, however, that the critical value of intraindustry trade
depends on the       importance of scale economies. The function (20) is decreasing

in    8:         —
                     U2)/30
                              — 0      Lu z(2—z) <0. So    an    increase in 0 will shift the
function     down. As illustrated in        Figure   2,   this will   increase .    The less
                              15

— U2




                          z
       z              1




           Figure 1
                                              16




U2 — U2




                                                   z
                                      z   1




                       /
                   /
               /

           /
      I,




                           Figure 2
                                                                                      17


important are scale econom4,           the   more similar countries must be if both

factors are to gain from trade.

         We can actually calculate             for selected values of 8, to illustrate

the point:




        0.6          .490
        0.7          .692
        0.8          .825
        0.9          .923

         In   the limit, as 0 goes to 1, so does .           What this says is that a

world in which     scale    economies are unimportant is a Heckscher-Ohlin world to

which the Stolper—Satnuelson theorem applies. But in this model this is only a

limiting case.


4. Summary      and Conclusions

         This   paper began with three "paradoxes" about international trade.
Since they do not seem so paradoxical in the light of this model, perhaps we
should state them as "stylized facts":
  (i) Much of world trade is between countries with similar factor endowments;
 (ii)    The    trade between similar countries is largely "intraindustry" in charac-
         ter, i.e.,    it consists of two-way trade in similar products;

(iii) The growth of intraindustry trade has not posed serious income distribu-

         tion   problems.
         The model    developed   in   this paper, which combines factor proportions

theory   with what is sometimes called "scale economies with differentiated prod-
ucts" theory, provides a simple—perhaps too simple—explanation of these styl-
ized facts. In this model, countries with similar factor proportions will
trade just as much as countries with dissimilar factor proportions. Intrain—
dustry trade and similarity of factor proportions are directly related. And
                                                                                  18


trade between sufficiently similar countries will benefit scarce as well as

abundant factors.

       In addition to helping make sense of some puzzling empirical results,

this paper is, I hope, of some interest from the standpoint of pure theory.

The model dispenses with the two most fundamental assumptions of standard

trade theory: perfect competition and constant returns to scale. Instead,

I have dealt in this paper with a world in which economies of scale are perva-

sive and   all   firms have monopoly power. While the model depends on extremely

restrictive   assumptions, it does show that it is possible for trade theory to
make at least some progress into this virtually unexplored territory.
       Finally, the model appears to have some policy relevance. For it pro-
vides some theoretical justification for the commonly made argument that trade
in manufactured goods poses less of a problem if     it takes   place between devel-
oped countries than if it takes    place   between developed and less—developed
countries.    What this suggests is that it may have been economic forces as

much as political wisdom which made possible the great postwar liberalization

of trade among the industrial countries. These same economic forces are now,

unfortunately, working to block the growth of exports from today's newly in-

dustrializing countries.
             ppendix: Elasticity of Demand   for   Individual Products

         The analysis in Section 1 depends on the result that the elasticity of

demand   for   any particular product is 1/1—8. This appendix gives a demonstra-

tion of this.

         Consider an individual maximizing his     utility    function (1) subject to

a budget constraint. The first—order conditions from that maximization will

have the form

                         c        —(1—0)
                              1, i

                    A    tc
                         k 1,k
                                             i—i,.. .,nl




                                  —(l—e)
                —        C2j                       .   S
                    . Ec             0

                         in
                                2,m


where    A   is the shadow price on the budget constraint,       i.e.,    the marginal

utility of     income.

         If there are many products, however,   the    firm   producing   a particular

product can take the denominators of these expressions as given. Thus each

individual's dPmand for a particular product, and therefore also market demand,

will have elasticity 1/1—0.
I




                                        References


    Balassa, Bela (1967): Trade Liberalization Among Industrial Countries. New

           York: McGraw—Hill.

    Dixit, Avinash and     Joseph   Stiglitz (1977): "Monopolistic Competition and Optimum

           Product Diversity." American Economic Review 67 (June): 297—308.

    Grubel, Herbert (1970): "The Theory of Intra—Industry Trade." In Studies in

           International     Economiç, edited by l.A. McDougall and R.H. Snape.
           Amsterdam: North—Holland.

    ________ and Peter Lloyd (1975): Intra—Industry        Trade.

    Hufbauer, Gary and John Chilas (1974): "Specialization          by Industrial Countries:
           Extent and Consequences." In The International Division of Labor, edited

           by Herbert Giersch. Tubinger:

    Jones, Ronald (1971): "A Three Factor Model in Theory and History." In Trade,

           Balance of Payments, and Growth, edited by J. Bhagwati. Amsterdam:

           North—Holland.

    Kravis, Irving (1971): "The Current Case for Import Limitations." In United

           States     Economic Policy in an Interdependent World, Commission on Inter-
           national Trade and Investment Policy. Washington: U.S. Govermnent Print-
           ing   Office.

    Krugman,   Paul   (1979): "Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition, and Inter-

           national    Trade." Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
    Stolper, W.F. and P.A. Samuelson (1941): "Protection and Real Wages." Review
           of Economic Studies, (November): 58—73.
