                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PRICE EXPECTATIONS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND INTEREST
      RATES, AND DEMAND FOR MONEY IN AN OPEN ECONOMY


                    Sebastian Arango

                     M. Ishaq Nadiri


                  Working Paper No. 359




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                        June 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper 359
                                                                    June 1979


          Price   Expectations, Foreign Exchange and Interest Pates,
                    and Demand for !bney in an Open Economy
                                    SUNMZU


     Traditional studies on demand for noney have often ignored influence of
foreign nonetaxy developrrents. The literature on international capital
nobility, on the other hand, focuses on the impact of adjus1rents in inter-
national reserves on darestic noney supply with the implicit asstmption that
aggregate demand for noney is inelastic with respect to foreign nonetary
developients such as changes in exchange and foreign interest rates. These
two views have often led to the conclusion that dorrestic rronetary policy is
fairly ineffective, and donestic financial markets are highly vulnerable to
changes in foreign nonetazy develorents.
     In this paper, the formulation of a demand function for real cash
balances generalizes the traditional demand functions for rroney which
explicitly take into account changes in exchange rates, foreign interest
rates, and inflationary expectations. The underlying theoretical nodel is
a general portfolio node 1 of asset holding which specifies the channels
through which the influence of rronetary developmants abroad are transmitted
to the. supply and demand for rroney in a particular country. The demand func-
tion for real cash balances derived from this nodel is estimated using the
tile series data for the period 1960—75 for Canada, United States, United
Kingdom, and Germany. The results indicate that foreign tronetary developrents
affect demand for noney significantly, and considerable mis-specification
occurs when they are ignored. The results indicate that demand for real cash
balances is not, as the traditional theory suggests, inelastic with respect
to changes in foreign financial developmants, and is fairly stable over the
stressful period of 1970—7 5 when significant international nonetary crises
cane   in succession.


                                             Sebastian Arango
                                             M. Ishaq Nadiri
                                             National Bureau of Economic Research
                                             15-19 West 4th Street, 8th Floor
                                             Washington Square
                                             New York, N.Y. 10003
                                             (212) 598—7042
                                    I NTRODUCT I ON



            Traditional studies on demand for money have often ignored the

      influence of foreign monetary developments.' However, the question of

      monetary linkages among national economies is addressed in literature

      on international capital mobility. The focus of discussion in this

      literature is on the impact of adjustments in international reserves

     on a domestic money supply,2 with the assumption that aggregate demand

      for money in a country is inelastic with respect to foreign monetary

     developments, such as changes in exchange and foreign interest rates.

     The emphasis on the supply side and the assumption about the demand

     often leads to the conclusion that domestic monetary policy is fairly

     ineffective and domestic financial markets are highly vulnerable to

     changes in foreign financial and monetary developments. However, when

     both sides of the market are systematically considered, the effects of

    changes in foreign financial conditions upon a national economy are

    found to be milder (or even neutralized) than the traditional portfolio

    studies describe.

           The purpose of this paper is to modify the traditional demand




—   ---
                                    2




functions for money to take account of foreign monetary developments,

such as changes in exchange rates and foreign interest rates.3 A sim-

plified portfolio model of the financial market is developed to specify

the channels through which the influence of monetary developments

abroad are transmitted to the supply and demand for money in a par-

ticular country. The demand function for real cash balances deduced

from this model is shown to depend upon domestic variables such as

permanent income, domestic interest rates, and price expectations, as

well as actual or anticipated foreign monetary developments. The model

is estimated using quarterly time series data for the period 1960 to

1975 from four major industrialized countries: Canada, Germany, the

United Kingdom, and the United States.

      The major results of this study can be summarized briefly:

      1.   The demand function for real cash balances in these

countries are fairly similar. Permanent income and domestic interest

rates are important determinants of aggregate demand for money in each

of the countries, thus confirming the results of previous studies.4

      2.   Price expectations seems to be a consistent explanatory

variable in each country equation, though the magnitudes of its effect

vary from one country to another.

      3.   Changes in foreign interest rates affect desired stock of

real cash balances and excahnge rate expectations do play an important

role in portfolio decisions concerning the degree of substitution

between money and foreign assets. When these international factors
                                    3



are omitted, the empirical results point to significant misspecification

biases in the traditional demand functions for real cash balances.

      4.    There is evidence of rapid adjustment of real cash balances

to their desired values, though the speed of adjustment varies among the

countries. Further, the demand functions are stable during the sample

period, especially during, the early 1970's when extensive international

monetary instability prevailed.

      The paper is organized as follows: in Section I a simplified

portfolio model is specified and its comparative static properties are

examined. The demand for real cash balances is specified and tested

empirically for each of the four countries in Section II. A comparision

of these results is undertaken in Section III. The summary and con-

clusions of this paper are presented in Section IV.
                                      4



                                 SECTION I

                          A SIMPLE PORTFOLIO MODEL


      Consider a small, open economy and assume that financial variables

influence the real variables in this economy with a lag; income, price

levels, and the current account balance are assumed to be exogenous;5

the stock of wealth is given and capital gains or losses do not affect

current portfolio choice.6 Finally, assume that the monetary authority

buys and sells whatever amount of foreign exchange is supplied or demanded

by the private market so as to keep the exchange rate fixed but the rate

level may be changed at will.

     The model is composed of five basic elements: (i) demand functions

for aggregate domestic demand for money (fr1d)   domestic securities (S)

and foreign Securities (rS); (ii) foreign demand functions for domestic

securities (S); (iii) the supply function for domestic securities (Sd),

which consists of supplies of privately issued bonds (PBd) held by com-

mercial banks (PBb) and foreigners (PBf) domestic government bonds
                                                                     (GB0),
and domestic equity (Ed); (iv) the supply of money; and (v) an exogenous

supply of foreign securities. The exogenous variables on the domestic

side are: wealth (Wd),income (yd) price level (pd) inflationary

expectations (P'), central bank discount rate (i), required reserve

ratio (h), the fraction of money held in the form of deposits (g),

central bank holdings of government bonds (GB), current account balance

(CAB), exchange rate (r), and exchange rate expectations (ri). On the
                                          5




foreign side, they are: wealth (wi), income (yf), price level

inflationary expectations (pif), and interest rate (f)•8

      The underlying assumption is that al•l assets entering the port-

folio of the decision-making units are gross substitutes, which implies

that the relevant returns enter all demand functions.9 Finally, because

of the wealth constraint, two conditions must be fulfilled at each

point in time:   (1) for a given level of wealth the sum of the sub-

stitution effects must add up to zero, and (2) the sum of changes in

asset holdings due to a change in wealth should equal the change in

wealth itself.


A. Aggregate Demand Functions

     Aggregate domestic demand function for the three assets--money,

domestic securities, and foreign securities——and the foreign demand for

domestic securities are specified below, along with the assumed signs

of their partial derivatives)0

     Demand for 1'loney


         d = d    d d   .d .f
     M       p W-, Y., 1 ,      1 , r,    I
                                         r ,   P);
                                                                      (1.1)
            wd, d,        >   0; q.d,          r'' '   <



     Demand for Domestic Securities


     s =    d e(wd d d f            r, r', P') ÷ (1d d (l-h)g);
                                                                      (1.2)
            0d   ed. 0r' Md >0;                0; ed of erIe    < 0
                                                  6




      Demand for Foreign Securities

            d .d .f    d
      rSPy(W,Y,,1,r,P);
        f        d


                                                                                 (1.3)
                1wd,           'r'   >   0; id Yd, y. <      0



      Foreign Demand for DomesticSecurities


            =   fpf            f 1d f r1,
                                                                                 (1.4)
                       s.d >   0;        5f             S1f < 0

      Some general features of the equation system (1.1) to (1.4) should

be noted. Domestic and foreign residents are assumed to incorporate the

same set of decision variables, as can be seen from a comparison of

equations (1.3) and (1.4).               In contrast tothe conventional demand

functions for money and securities, functions (1.1) and (1.2) explicitly

include the levels of foreign interest and exchange rates as well as

exchange rate expectations and price expectations about price changes

as the determinants of asset holdings. Note also that the form of the

equations differ. For example, the aggregate domestic demand for

domestic assets (1.2) is composed of the non-bank public o(") and com-

mercial bank components e( ).                 The reason is that variables affecting

banking portfolio decisions are not necessarily the same as those influ-

encing the public's asset holdings for, among other things, the public

is assumed not to hold foreign assets while the banks do not face the

same constraint.
                                       7




      All demand functions of the public are homogeneous of the first

degree in prices. However, this is not so for the banking sector

because, as intermediaries, their concern is with nominal value.

Equations (1.3) and (1.4) are also homogeneous of degree one in hr and

r, respectively, since it is assumed that portfolio holders distribute

their wealth in terms of their home country's currency. This, in turn,

requires the inclusion of r in the remaining functions. For example,

in the case of an exchange rate decrease, domestic residents would

have to finance the increase in the foreign currency value of their

holdings    of foreign securities by drawing down holdings of other assets.
      Real wealth enters as the relevant constraint in all demand
functions    and changes in assets are positively related to changes in

real wealth, i.e., none of the assets are assumed to be inferior. On

the other hand, in distributing their portfolio, banks are constrained

by the deposits net of required reserves, which is expressed as (1_h)gMd

in equation (1.2).

      The direction of the effects of interest rates (d jf) in the

public's demand functions follow from the assumption of gross substitut-

ability between assets. The effects of changes in domestic and foreign

interest rates are negative in the demand for money while for the

remaining assets the own rate effect is positive and the cross effect

is negative. For example, a rise in the foreign rate, (1f), increases

domestic holdings of foreign securities and    decreases those of real
cash balances, (Md), domestic holdings of domestic securities, (S),
                                       8



                                               d
and foreign holdings of domestic securities, (Sf).

       The effects of changes in exchange rate expectations, Cr'), are

similar to those for the changes in the foreign interest rate, i.e.,

they are negative in all cases except in domestic demand for foreign

assets. This is due to the fact that, when individuals expect domestic

currency to depreciate, they will increase their holdings of foreign

securities at the expetise of domestic securities and money. Increases

in the expected rates of inflation, (P', pf), lead to a shift away

from money and foreign securities to other assets.


B. Aggregate Supply Functions

       1. Aggregate Supply of Domestic Securities

       The aggregate supply of domestic securities is composed of an

endogenous component issued by the non-bank private sector and an exoge-

nous part composed of domestic government bonds and domestic equity.

The supply function for domestic securities can be written as:


       sd =    d (Wd d d f,       r, r', P') +
                                                 GB
                                                      + Ed;

                                                                      (1.5)
               wd, iPd. jf 'r'' i' > 0;    th1d, r <
                                                     0

GB =   GBd —
               GB is the net supply of government bonds to the domestic
private market, that is, total government debt outstanding minus central

bank holdings. The partial derivatives with respect to        and r' are

assumed to be positive, as increases in those two variables may induce

the public to finance higher levels of desired holdings of foreign assets,
                                      9



 partially through borrowing. The signs with respect to both            and r

 are negative. The first is self-explanatory, while the second is

 explained in terms of the redistribution toward domestic assets that

 takes place when the domestic currency value of foreign securities

 increases above its desired level as a result of an increase in r.

       2. Supply of ivioney

      The sources of the monetary base are defined as:


      B =
             GB + BR + ICAB + (S rS )                                     (1.6)

where the first two terms refer to central bank holdings of domestic

government securities and borrowed reserves. The remaining terms are
                                                                   t
the foreign components or international reserves.       [CAB (=    z, CAB.)
                                                                         1
                                                                              is
                                                                  i=O
the cumulative balance on current accounts; the expression in brackets

is the difference between the stock of domestic securities held by

foreigners and the domestic currency equivalent of the stock of foreign
                                          11
securities held by domestic residents.         From the private sectors
balance sheet, the uses of the base are:


      B=RR+FR+BR+C                                                        (1.7)


RR, FR, and BR being required, free, and borrowed reserves, respectively,

and C is currency outside banks. FR is specified as:12


      FR =    [id,   .d (l_h)Md];   .d < 0;     d, 1d > 0                 (1.8)


From equations (1.7) and (1.8), the money supply function becomes:
                                                10




          = [GBd    + ICAB   +        -         -
     MS
                                 (S       rS)        FR]k            (L9)


where k= k/[l—(l-h)g]. Given that the current account component is

exogenous while the capital account component depends upon the behavioral

assumptions already specified, the effects of changes in interest rates

and exchange rate expectations upon the money supply may be easily

traced using equation (1.9).


C. Comparative Static Properties of the Model

      Given that the foreign interest rate and wealth are exogenous,

the domestic interest rate equilibrates both money and domestic secur-

ities markets. Therefore, two alternative equilibrium conditions, (2.1)

and (2.2), together with the wealth constraint,(2.3), may be considered:


      1d = 1s                                                        (2.1)



      s +     s = sd                                                 (2.2)



              -4 (NB + NS ÷ rS - PB)
          =                                                          (2.3)


where NB refers to the net monetary base and NS represents net holdings

of domestic securities of the domestic private sector. The two conditions

implied by the wealth constraint thatmust hold throughout are expressed as:

                    d
      z   e(Z.,    W )   —-= 1                                       (2.4)
      iii                w

      z e(Z X) Z. =          0                                       (2.5)
      ii
where e1 are elasticities, Z.'srefer to the different assets, and
                                          11



x = 1d   1d    r, r',      Condition (2.4) states that the weighted sum of

the elasticities with respect to wealth-—the weights given by the pro-

portions held in each asset--should equal one. Condition (2.5) indicates

that, given wealth, the weighted elasticities with respect to any return,

i.e., the substitution effects, should add up to zero.

      We shall use the money market conditon, (2.1), to derive the com-

parative static properties of the model in terms of elasticities. A

summary of the comparative static results of the model is presented in

Table 1, indicating the effects of changes in the exogenous variables


                                      TABLE 1


              THE COMPARATIVE STATIC RESULTS OF CHANGES IN EXOGENOUS

                    VARIABLES ON DOMESTIC INTEREST RATE (id)


                              Direction                                  )i rection
      Exogenous Variable      of Change             Exogenous Variable   of Change
                                                                              ml.d
                                    .d                                        .
                                ifli




f     Foreign interest rate       +
                                               GB   Open market operations        -

r'   Exchange rate                             d    Discount rate                 +
     expectations                 +


r    Exchange rate                -            h    Required reserve ratio        +


w    Foreign wealth                         d       Domestic income               ?


f    Foreign income               #         CAB     Current account balance       -

f    Foreign prices              —
                                            P'      Domestic price
                                                    expectations                  ?
                                      12


upon the domestic interest rate.

        Since the distinctive feature of the model is the explicit intro-

duction of international factors into the money demand function, the

discussion of comparative static properties will be limited to the

effects of the foreign interest rate, exchange rate, and exchange rate

expectations on domestic interest rate. The effect of changes in d on

domestic income is discussed in more detail and the expressions for

elasticities   of the domestic interest rate with respect to other variables
are given in Appendix A.
        1. Changes in the Foreign Interest Rate
        If there is an increase in the foreign interest rate, it   induces

both domestic and foreign residents to increase their holdings of foreign

securities. Domestic residents finance those increase by drawing down

money   holdings, decreasing their holdings of domestic securities, and
issuing private debt (increasing the supply of domestic securities), and
foreigners   decrease their holdings of domestic securities. These actions

have an immediate negative impact on the monetary base. However, because

of the fractional reserve system, the effect on the money supply is not

of the same magnitude. As soon as banks find their reserves diminished

by a proportion, g, of the initial capital outflow, they start decreasing

their holdings of domestic securities and thus further reduce the money

supply. Provided that the level of wealth remains constant during this

adjustment period, the excess demand and supply so generated in the money

and securities markets, respectively, push the domestic interest rate in,

an upward direction.13
                                          13




            The elasticity of the domestic interest rate with respect to the
                               14
foreign rate is given by:



  .d .f
        1   )=
                 e(Md,if)M k[e(S,i)S           (r,i)rS            R,m)e1d,iR]
                                                                                    >0 26
                                               D


where


D =   e(Md, id)Md -
                                    -
                      k[e(S,id)S e(rS, 1d)         rS - e(FR, jd)FR - e(FR,m)e(Md, id)FR] <   0;

m=(lh)gMd; and k1/[1-(l-h)g]


The first term in the numerator and the denominator of expression (2.6)

refer to money demand changes, and all succeeding terms refer to changes

in the money supply. The denominator D is unambiguously negative since

the first term in D is negative while the expression in the bracket is

positive and <0 for the numerator of (2.6), though there are forces

working in opposite directions, it can be shown that the overall sign

has to be negative.15 Thus, the net result of an increase in the foreign

interest rate is to increase the domestic rate. The magnitude of the

elasticity (id. r) however, depends on the way in which changes in

foreign asset holdings are financed out of, or absorbed by, the different

domestic assets. The impact upon the domestic interest rate is smaller

the larger the degree of substitution between foreign securities and

money holdings, and it is larger the more domestic and foreign securities

are substitutes for each other. Finally, two extreme cases: perfect

substitutability between domestic and foreign securities, and changes
                                      14




in foreign security holdings being totally financed out of money holdings

under conditions of no inside money, resulting in unitary and zero elas-

ticities, respectively. Thus, if the monetary authority engages its

open market purchases in order to prevent the domestic interest rate

from rising and ignores the sensitivity of the demand for money to the

foreign interest rate, the result could be a lower domestic rate than

its optimum level.

        2. Changes in Exchange Rate Expectations

        The effect of exchange rate expectations upon the domestic interest

rate is given by:



       ,r)-_-e(M, r')r +k[e(Sd, rI)Sde(rSf, r1)rSfe(FR,m)e(,rl)FR] >0 (27)
                                           D



The components of the numberator of (2.7) have identical signs to those

of (2.6). An increase in the exchange rate expectation and foreign

interest rate have similar effects on the domestic interest rate, though

the magnitudes of these effect may vary.

        3. Changes in the Exchange Rate

        The effect of a change in the level of the exchange rate on domestic

interest rates is given by:



   d        _e(Md,r)Mk[e(S, r)S -e(S, r)rS-e(FR, m) e(Md,r) FR]
E(i ,r) =                                                              <0      (2.8)
                                      0


        An increase in the foreign exchange rate means that domestic

residents find the value of their holdings of foreign securities increased
                                      15




while domestic holdings of foreigners, as valued in their own currency,

decrease. Given the behavioral assumption that wealth-holders evaluate

their portfolios in terms of home-currencies, this disequilibrating

process manifests itself as an increase in the domestic monetary base,

forcing the domestic interest rate downward. However, because a portion

of the repatriated funds is allocated to money holdings, the domestic

rate falls less than it would if the demand for money were independent

of foreign factors.

      4. Changes in Domestic Income

      Unlike the case of a closed economy, the effect of domestic income

on d is indeterminate in our model. The expression for the relevant

elasticity is:


            e(Md,Y)Md_k[e(rSf,Yd)rSr÷e(FR,m)e(Md,yd)FR]
                             d      d
        =                                                   o      (2.9)
                                  0


The magnitude of this elasticity depends on the means by which the higher

desired level of money balance is financed. The magnitude of the multi-

plier, k, is crucial. The first and last terms in the numerator work

in the same direction; the former depicts the effect of an increase in

the demand for money and the latter the effect of an increase in dis-

posable funds allocated to free reserves. The middle term refers to

that portion of funds obtained from abroad to partially finance the

increase in money holdings. If individuals resort heavily upon this

type of financing, a negative effect on the domestic interest rate becomes

likely. However, normally we expect that the final effect of an increase

in d d will likely be positive, though perhaps slight.
                                           16




                                       SECTION II

              THE DEMAND FOR REAL CASH BALANCES IN AN OPEN ECONOMY


        Our model suggests that domestic interest rates, exchange rates,

and real cash balances are endogenous. To estimate the structural

relations specified in the previous section, it would be necessary to

specify a complete econometric model and gather data for foreign and

domestic variables which are difficult to obtain. We have chosen,

instead, to concentrate on the demand for money function, (1.1), using

the two-stage least squares estimation technique in order to take into

account the endogeneity of d and r. We assume a log linear specifica—
                     16
tion of the form:



lnM =a0 + a1ln YF + a2ln i + a3ln i + a4ln r ÷ a5ln r + a6ln P+ u (3.1)

where M* =    desired     real money holdings (billions of domestic currency);
YP =   real   permanent income (billions of domestic currency); d =        short-
term domestic interest rate (percent);          =   short-term   foreign interest
rate (percent); r = exchange rate (domestic currency per unit of foreign

currency); r' = exchange rate expectations; P' =
                                                         inflationary   expectations;
u =   stochastic   disturbance; and the coefficients a1(l,...6) are long-run

elasticities of M* with respect to a given variable.

       According to the behavioral assumptions, the expected signs are:

a1, a4 >
           0 and a2,              0.      To incorporate dynamic characteristics
                     a3, a5, a6 <
into model (3.1), the following partial adjustment mechanism is adopted:
                                                    i7


      in       -   in Mti         (ln Mt   -   in   M)                                   (3.2)


Relation (3.2) implies that the adjustment in actual real money holdings

(M) that takes place at time t is a fraction,                    ,   of   the gap between the

desired level at that period and the actual holdings at t—l. Combining

(3.1) with (3.2):


      in Mt        Aab+ a11n YP       +a21ni             +
                                                             a3ln i + a4ln r
                                                                                         (3.3)
                   +
                       xa5ln    r + a6ln P +         (l-)ln Mti       +

Model (3.3) specifies the short-run demand for money, where Xajs give

short—run elasticities and a's long—run elasticities.17 We shall assume

that the error term,              in (3.3) is subject to a first order serial cor-

relation, _,

           =
               p€_      +
                            e                                                            (3.4)


where p is the serial correlation coefficient. The equation


      in Mt =           + 1ln YP    ÷ lni ÷ *31n i ÷ 5in                   r
                                                                                         (3.5)
                   +
                       *6ln r +    7ln   P + p8in Mti ÷

is used to estimate aggregate demand for real cash balances in four

industrial economies. According to our model specification, i, r, and

Mt are endogenous variables and the exogenous variables are VP, foreign

interest rate, and inflationary expectations, as well as a lagged dependent

variable. To deal with the simultaneity problem between
                                                                               Mt,. i, and r
                                              18




 in equation (3.5) and at the same time insure consistency of the estimates,

 a two-stage procedure developed by Fair (1970) was employed. In addition
 to the   exogenous variable included in the money demand equation, the
 following variables (included in the model but excluded from that
 equation)   were used in the two—stage procedure: foreign permanant income,

 foreign price level, foreign inflationary expectations, the current

 account balance, and the discount rate.18


       Construction   of Variables and Sources of Data
       (i)    M is stock of nominal money (demand deposits
                                                             plus currency),
 seasonally adjusted, end of period (billions of domestic currency). M is

the real money stock; M' is deflated by the wholesale price index (billions

of domestic currency).

       (ii) 1d is domestic short-term interest rate measured by call money

rate for Canada, Germany, and the U.K. and by call loan rate for the U.S.

      (iii) jf is a proxy for short-term international interest rate, con-

structed as the average of the short-term interest rates of Canada, Germany,

France, the U.K., and the U.S. For each country, its own rate was excluded.

      (iv) P is domestic rate of inflation. To
                                                    obtain quarterly figures
at equivalent annual rates, the following formula was applied:


             P =   [ dt     )4 -   1]   100
                        1

where P is the domestic wholesale price index (1970 =
                                                      100).
      (v) f is the foreign wholesale price index constructed as the

average of the wholesale price indices of Canada,
                                                    Germany, France, Japan,
                                          19




 the U.K., and the U.S. For each country, its own price index was excluded.

       (vi) p1f     is   the foreign rate of inflation generated using the same

 methodology as in point (iv) above, but based on

       (vii) PR is the premium or discount in foreign exchange3 obtained

as:



             PR =      (-.) - 1)   400


where rf is the three month forward exchange rate in units of domestic

currency per U.S. dollar, end of period, and r5 is spot exchange rate in

units of domestic currency per U.S. dollar, end of period.

      (viii) rUS is U.S. spot exchange rate, calculated as an average of

the indices (with base 1970) of the exchange rates of Canada, France,

Germany, and the U.K. (all defined as U.S. dollars per unit of each

country's currency).

      (ix) YP is domestic real permanent income. The permanent income

series is based on the following adaptive expectations mechanism:19




and
                   =
                       t-i    +
                                   b(Y_t1YPp                             (B.l)


                       t-1YP = (1
                                     +c)Yp1                              (B.2)


That is, permanent income in period t is composed by the expectation

formed at period
                    t_1(t1YPP adjusted by a proportion, b, of the difference
between the expectation and the actual current income of the period. The

expectation for period t is based on permanent income of the previous

period adjusted by a trend growth rate of income, c.      Combining (B.1)
and (B.2), the formula used for estimation of the series is obtained:
                                                   20



                     =              + (1 +c) (1
                          bY                      -b)YPi

V is real GNP and c was obtained by fitting a quadratic trend function,


                lnYt = c0 + C1 t + C2             t2    +
                                                            Ut

so that c =          +        t .     The initial value of VP was taken to be VP0 =   eCO
                C1       c2
and the assumed b was 0.15.

      (xi)           is the foreign real permanent income. This variable was

calculated as an aggregate of the permanent incomes of Canada, Germany,

the U.K., and the U.S., all converted to the respective country's currency

using the par exchange rates as of 1970—71. For each country, its own

permanent income was excluded. France was not included because of data

constrai nt..

      (xii) CAB is the current account balances in millions of domestic

currency.

      Since the estimation was carried out in logarithms, some of the

variables, like the rate of inflation and the foreign exchange premium,

may have negative values. These were introduced as 1 x, x being the

variable.

      The quarterly data for constructing the variables of the model

came from diverse sources. The main sources of data were: Main Economic

Indicators (an OECD publication), International Financial Statistics (of

the IMF), the National Bureau of Economic Research data bank, and publica-

tions of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The specific sources of

data for each variable in the model are:
                                         21




                                Data Sources*


Variable Canada Germany :U.K. U.S.            Variable Canada Germany U.K. U.S.

 CAB      MET      MET    MET      MEl          Y       IFS     IFS   IFS   IFS


   1d     MET      IFS    MEl      NBER                 IFS     IFS   IFS   IFS
                                                i
          IFS      IFS    IFS      IFS                 FRBSL    IFS   IFS   IFS



           IFS     IFS    IFS      IFS                  IFS     IFS   IFS


   r       IFS     IFS    IFS                           IFS     IFS   IFS
                                                rf



*NOte: FRBLS Rates of Change in Economic Data for Ten Industrialized Countries,
              Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
        IFS   International Financial Statistics, IMF
        MEl   Main Economic Indicators, OECD
        NBER National Bureau of Economic Research data bank
                                       22




                                  SECTION III

                            ESTIMATION OF THE MODEL


        The results of estimation for the four countries are presented in

TABLE 2. To compare the implications .f alternative assumptions about

channels through which foreign financial developments act upon the demand

for money for each country, we performed the following experiments:

(i) it was assumed that foreign influences were transmitted only through

the foreign interest rate, and (ii) a conventional demand function for

real balances was estimated by dropping the variables depicting inter-

national monetary developments in equation (3.3). The general results

of these experiments were that the fit of equation (3.3) for each country

deteriorated; when exchange rate variables were excluded, the coefficients

of interest rates       and i became larger and the average adjustment lag

between actual and desired real balances became longer. Substantial

changes occurred, especially in the coefficient of the domestic interest

rate,   when all variables depicting international monetary developments
were dropped.2°

        The estimates in TABLE 2 indicate that the overall goodness of fit

of the model is excellent and that the individual variables in (3.3) con-

tribute significantly   to the explanation of behavior of real cash balances.
As Charts 1 to 4 indicate, the model traces both turning points and levels

of the dependent variable in each country, except in the U.K. where its

performance is somewhat weak.
                                                             23

                                                          TABLE 2

            Two—Stage Estimate of .Demand for Real Cash Balances for Four Industrialized Countries,
                 Canada, Germany, the U.K., and the U.S., for the Period 1960:1. to 19751V*


Country                                                                                                DW    SEE     &




Canada             —.417     .254     —.026     —.030       .061    —.437    —.208    .734     .996   1.85   .0131 —.161
                   (5.8)     (5.4)     (2.1)      (2.5)      (.9)   (1.7)     (6.1)   (12.6)
Germany            —.901     .657    —.027       —.035     .023     _•369a   —.236    .565     .996   2.06   .0165 —.143
                   (3.9)     (4.4)    (3.3)       (2.2)     (.9)    (2.0)     (2.2)    (5.6)

United Kingdom     —.018     .152    —.028       —.020     .026     _452b    —.124    .799     .911   1.97   .0188 —.407
                   (0.1)     (4.5)    (1.9)       (1.8)     (0.5)   (2.0)     (2.5)   (17.3)

United Stiites     —.118     .188    _029C        .020      —       _•162d   _228e    .743     .990   1.94   .010   —.301
                   (0.2)     (7.5)    (4.2)       (1.9)             (2.8)     (4.6)   (16.6)


*The dependent variable is inN, R2     i     the coefficient of determination, DW the flurbin—atson statistics, SEE
the standard error of estimate, and     p    the estimated coefficient of autocorrelation.

aSCCOfld   order
              distributed lag over four quarters, with far end zero restriction.
hFirst order distributed lag over six quarters, with far end zero restriction.
Csecofld order distributed lagover three quarters with far end zero restriction.
dSecond order distributed lag over five quarters with far end zero restriction.
CFirst order distributed lag over four quarters, with far end zero restriction.
For all other countries,    the distributed lag polynomial is. specified over three quarters.
                                                                                                                                                         24
                                                                                                                                                    Chart         1


                                                                                                      CANADA        - ACTUAL AND            PREDICTED VALUES OF THE REAL )'.ONIYTOC!(
                                                                                                                                                     — 1975a4
                                                                                                                                                   tóO2




                ACTUAL
                PREDICTED

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Correlation coefficient       •   0.0957

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Regrc6sion coefficient of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              actual on predicted           = 1.0010


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Root-mean—squared   error         0.1202

                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Moan absolutepercent error= 0.97       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Theil's inequality coeffic.       0.0010
         Nm     N   rs   —N   ?   -.               -.           .*
                     Ns m N N                                                                 'A .q   -. N 'AS?     —   N 'A ?    ...         .d
                                                                                                                                        N.7        N IA .è ,. N   IA   ?   -.           -.
         OOrI00000000000000000000000                                                                                                                                            N r\.        N 'A   rn'   .N IA.?   ..I   N     Fraction of error due tol

                                                                                                       Period                                                                                                                   Dias                            0.00006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Difforent variation         = 0. 0036
              ERU OHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Different   co-variation        0.9055



 0.1      II....,.
—Cl, 1                            a    a   a   a   a    S   I   S    S       a   •a   I   a   S         I   S       5   •
                                                                         •                                      0           I   S S •   •
YMWW
                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                   Chart       2
                                                                      GIZWIANY - ACTUAL   AND   PttED1C'rD VALU!S OF ?It   RL M0NY STOCK
                                                                                                    1060s2—1975a4


      120—



      110-



      too—


                   Actual
                   Predicted
M                                                                                                                                           Correlation coefficient      —    0.997
•04
       O0_
•1                                                                                                                                          Regroasion coefficient of
C'                                                                                                                                          actual on predictud               t.004(
      70—
                                                                                                                                            Root-,ncan—cquarcderror       a   l.30(
                                                                                                                                            Hean absolute per cent error= t.02fl
      60—

                                                                                                                                            mall's   inequality coc(flc.a 0.0071

      50-                                                                                                                                     Fraction of error due tou
             NIfl' .-IN .Ji44 -NM'?     '?             -MI%IM    .pjM'?        -NM.?
                                                                         dN'NM'?                    N'?.4NI''#
             00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000°
                                                 0' 0' 0'           MM'?'?'? '?AU'.IJ1III        OOOONNNN                                     Dias                        a o.ooo:
                                         Period
                                                             0ao.o.0,a                                                                        Different variation         a 0.009
                       ERflUUS                                                                                                                Different   co—variation    a O.90G

      1.3    .   . •   .   .                  •   .1   • •   •   II. 11111 III
                               .j • , • • •
             • •
                   00-00
                   I •I I
                               •                                                                      •                               'I,
  —1.3 • • • •                                                                                            SI,• I, III
                                                                                           26
                                                                                       Chart    3
                                                      UNITED R!N000H   —   ACTUAL   AND PflEflIcr VALUES OF TUE REAL HONEY
                                                                                                                           STOC(
                                                                                       1960i2 — 1975.4




      10.5—



      10.0-
                          ACTUAL          _____
Il)
c0                        PREDICTED

 •1 0.5—
'.1

                                                                                                                                        Correlation coefficicAt           0.956
                                                                                                                                        Regression coctfjcjt of
      9.0-
                                                                                                                                        actual on predicted               1.0080
                                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                                        floot-men_uquared error       u 0.1625

      0,5—                                                                                                                              Mean ab,;ojutô per cent   orro 1.32%
                                                                                                                                        Thell'u Inequality cuef(jc.
                                                                                                                                                                    0.0000

                                                                                                                                          Fraction of error due to.
             .c                                                                                              0000000000000
                                                                                                                                         LlIaa
                                                               Periocj                                                                                                —   0.0001
                            ERRORS                                                                                                       Different variation              0.0310
                                                                                                                                         Different co-variation           0.9609


 0.16                     I •   P   •   III,      III.,. 11.......
              I   I   I
                                                                                                                            I. II
                                                                                               27
                                                                                           Chart 4
                                                             UNITED STATES — ACTUAL AND PREDICTED VALUES OF TUE REAL HONEY STOCK
                                                                                         10O2 — 1975i4

    220-




    210—



    200-
C
0

      —
                  ACTUAL                                                                                                                          •
                                                                                                                                                      Correlation coefficient        0.9040
                  PREDICTED
                                                                                                                                                      RogreaGion coefficient of
100—                                                                                                                                                  actual on predicted            1.0000

                                                                                                                                                      UOot—rnean-cqu.red   error     1.0.170
170-                                                                                                                                                  Hcan absolute per cent   crror3 0.75   %

                                                                                                                                              •       Theil'a Inequality coef(lc.    0.0040

       •fj... 0
       '0 C)      C)               )
                       0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 C) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 C) 0 0 0 0 0 0 C 0 0 C) C) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 C) 0 0              Fraction of   error due tos
       •'OO.C     .0                                                                                            0                    0    0
                                              .a   .ô                                       0000                                                       IJias                         0.00004
                                                                    perIod                                                                             Different   variation
                       CUR   OHS                                                                                                                                                     0.00)0
                                                                                                                                                       Different   co-variation      0.9973
                                    28



       The signs of all explanatory variables are consistent with our

 a priori specifications. The coefficient of the lagged dependent

 variable implies that there is generally a short adjustment period for

 actual real cash balances to adjust to their desired values. TABLE 3

shows the short- and long-run elasticities, Es and EL, of real cash

balances, M, with respect to the explanatory variables. They are cal-

culated by dividing the relevant coefficients in TABLE 2 (1-A), where

 A is the adjustment coefficient.

      Several features of the results given in TABLES 2 and 3 should be

noted. Permanent income is a significant variable in explaining holdings

of real cash balances, expecially in Germany and Canada. The magnitudes

of the coefficients in regression for the U.K. and U.S. are rather

small, but highly significant statistically. The long-run elasticities

of real cash balances with respect to YP is unity in the former two

countries and close to unity (.75) for the latter two countries. The

overall conclusion is that, in the long run, the elasticity of M with

respect to YP is near unity for all four countries. Changes in the

domestic short-term interest rate have the correct negative coefficient

in all the regression equations. There is a substantial similarity in

the magnitudes (about .027) of coefficients of i throughout the equations.

However, the long-run elasticities of M with respect to d is much higher

for the U.K. and the U.S. than for Canada and Germany. Note that in the

case of the U.S. a distributed lag of the domestic interest rate had to

be employed due to its high multicollinearity with the short—term foreign

interest rate.
                                                                 29

                                                              TABLE 3

          The Short and Long—Run Elasticities,    and           of    Demand for Real Cash Balances With Respect        to
                                               Es     EL,
          the Explanatory Variables, the Coefficient of Adjustment,             A,    and Average Adjustment Period,   MP

                          YP                               f                     r'                   '
iables
                                                                                                                 A           AAP
                    Es         EL        Es      EL             EL         Es           EL      E5        EL
Counti
Canada             .254        .955   —.026   —.098   —.030   —.113     —.437        —1.642   —.208   —.782    .266          2.8

Germany            .457    1.05       —.027   —.062   —.035   —.080     —.369         —.849   —.236   —.542    .435          1.3

United Kingdom     .152        .756   —.028   —.139   —.020   —.108     —.452        —2.248   —.124   —.617    .201          3.9

United States      .188        .732   —.029   —.113   —.020   —.078     —.162         —.630   —.228   —.887    .257          2.9
                                                                                                                                   t'J
                                    30



      The results verify the hypothesis that foreign financial and

monetary influences upon demand for real cash balances are transmitted

by changes in foreign interest rates and exchange expectations. The

magnitude of the short-term elasticity of real cash balances with respect

to changes in foreign short-term interest rates differs among countries,

being highest i.n Germany, followed by Canada, the U.K., and the U.S.

However, the long-run elasticity seems to be highest for Canada and

followed by the U.K., Germany, and the U.S. What is interesting is that

the elasticity of real balances with respect to changes in foreign

interest rates is similar in magnitude to its elasticity with respect

to the domestic interest rate in each country.

      The coefficients of the level of exchange rate, lnr as indicated

in TABLE 2, have the correct positive sign, but are statistically insig-

nificant in each regression. This suggests that the "rebalancing effect

brought about by changes in the exchange rate does not appear to be very

important in any of the countries, but the sign of its coefficient implies

that it is not altogether absent in the portfolio decision process. This

may reflect the relative stability of the exchange markets in the major

part of the period under consideration. On the other hand, rather than

variation in the level of the exchange rate, changes in the premium,

which depicts the acceleration of market pressures, do induce short-term

changes in the money balance. The coefficients of lnr seem to be fairly

large--about 0.4——in all countries except the U.S. However, the long-run

elasticity of real cash balances with respect to a change in exchange
                                         31




rate expectations is fairly large for the U.K. and Canada (greater than

unity) and less than unity for Germany and the U.S. The long-run elas-

ticity of real cash balances to changes in exchange rate expectations is

lower in the U.S. than in the other countries and is distributed over a

period of four quarters.21

         Changes in domestic price expectations had a significant negative

effect on real cash balances in each country. The magnitude of the co-

efficient of lnP' seems to be about -0.21 except in the U.K. This effect

is about four times the short-run effect of changes in the domestic and

foreign interest rate combined. The relatively small magnitude of short-

term elasticity of real cash balances in the U.K. with respect to changes

in expected prices is rather surprising. However, the long-run elasticity

of N with respect to changes in expected prices-—as can be seen from

TABLE 4-—is fairly high in the U.S. and Canada but lower for the U.K.

and Germany. When the effects of foreign financial markets, i.e., the

coefficients. of lnii and 1nr, were set to zero, the elasticity of real

cash balances with respect to changes in expected prices tended toward

unity.     But with foreign variables present, the magnitudes of the long—
run elasticity of M with respect to P' is less than unity.
         Finally, the results in TABLE 1 indicate that actual real cash
balances   adjust to their desired levels within a year.   The average

adjustment   period, (AAP) [calculated   as AAP =     where A   is   the
adjustment coefficient], is very small for Germany--slightly over one

quarter--and almost one year for the U.K.; the average adjustment period

for Canada and the U.S. is about three quarters. These results are con-

sistent with what has been reported in the literature.
                                            32




       Stability of the DemandFunctions

       To infer appropriate policy conclusions from the estimated results

  reported earlier, it is essential to examine whether the demand functions

  are stable over time. There are several ways to test for structural

  change. We have chosen periods during which some specific, important,

  and potentially destabilizing event occurred in the money markets rather

 than the conventional procedure of
                                           choosing arbitrary sub-samples. In
 keeping with our emphasis on international monetary and financial devel-

 opments on demand for real cash balances, we considered
                                                                three major de-

 stabilizing international financial events: the dollar crisis of 1971:3,

 the closing of the exchange markets in the first quarter of 1973, and the

 transition from fixed to floating exchange rates which was established at

 different periods in each of the countries.

      To test for structural change, we calculated the F statistics

                          SSR-SSR/m
                                       —
            (rn, n-k) —
                            SSR1/n—k

 where SSR is the sum of squared residuals of the
                                                         regression fitted to the
 entire period; SSR1 is the sum of squared residuals for the regression

estimated using the first n observations, m being the number of additional

observations Cm <   k);   and k is the number of estimated parameters.22

     The results shown in TABLE 4 indicate that the demand function for

real cash balances estimated for the four
                                                 countries remain stable, espe-
cially up to the events of 1973:1. There
                                                 was some deterioration in stability
of these functions for the two
                                  North American countries while the demand
functions for the U.K. and Germany
                                        remained highly stable throughout the
financially stressful period of 1970—1975
                                                 when significant international
monetary crises came in succession.
                                           33


                                        TABLE 4

              Tests of Structural Change for Money Demand Function


      Periods             Calcu lated F Values          Critical Values
                                                        F.05


A.   Canada*

     1970:2                      i.gg                   2.51         3.66
     1971:3                       .81                   2.35         3.32
     1973:1                      4.41                   1.99         2.64


B.   Germany

     1971:3                       .83                   2.36         3.35
     1973:1                      1.50                   1.99         2.64


C.   U.K.**
     1971:3                      2.00                   2.86         4.36
     1972:2                       .86                   2.84         4.31
     1973:1                      1.54                   1.98         2.63

D.   U.S.

     1971:3                      1.11                   2.36         3.33
     1973:1                      2.44                   1.99         2.63


*    In   1970:2 Canada abandoned the pegged exchange rate.
**   U.K. abandoned the fixed exchange rate
                                            system in 1972:2.
                                      34




                                  SECTION IV

                              CONCLUDING REMARKS


     A major implication of this study is that, in an increasingly inter-

dependent world, monetary developments in one country affect both the

supply and demand for money in other countries. This suggests that a

monetary policy directed to counteract foreign monetary and financial

developments requires not only knowledge of the sensitivity of the money

supply to those events, but also knowledge of the response of demand for

real cash balances to them.

     We have shown in the theoretical part of our analysis that changes

in domestic interest rates, induced by movements of foreign interest

rates, are partially offset by adjustments in the demand for money.

These adjustments take place through the sale or purchase of foreign

assets financed out of (absorbed by) cash holdings. Similarly, the

effects of changes in exchange rate expectations on the domestic money

market is partly offset by changes in real cash balances within the

domestic economy. The strength of those counteracting forces was shown

to depend upon the elasticity of the demand for money with respect to

the foreign interest rate, exchange rate expectations, and the level of

the short-term domestic rate.

     On purely statistical grounds, despite the data problem ecountered,

we conclude that the estimates provide a good explanation of the deter-
minants of real cash balances in an open economy. The traditional vari-
ables,   such as permanent income and domestic interest rate variations,
                                    35



 are important explanatory variablesin the demand equation for real

 balances. The long-run elasticity of real cash balances with respect

 to permanent income is close to unity and much greater than its elas-

 ticity with respect to changes in the interest rate--a result confirming

previous findings.23 Also, the changes in price expectations have a

strong negative effect on holdings of real cash balances, but the long-

run effect of changes in price expectations is less than unity. In

contrast to the traditional demand functions for money, it is clear

that:   (i) failure to take account of exchange rate expectations, as is

commonly the case in studies of capital flows, results in specification

biases, especially of the domestic and foreign interest rate coefficients;

and (ii) the magnitude of the bias is further increased when variables

that account for foreign monetary and financial developments are missing

altogether in the demand function for real cash balances.     In the last
case--in addition to the effects upon interest rate coefficients--the

adjustment coefficient is substantially affected.     Thus, ignoring the
effects of foreign interest rates and exchange rate expectations not

only leads to misspecificatjon of the demand for money, but also to the

implicit conclusion that monetary authorities have very little room to

offset changes in the inflow of capital induced by changes in domestic

or foreign interest rates or exchange rate changes.
                                       36

                                      NOTES



     'Hamburger (1974) and Willms (1971) are the only writers to our
knowledge that have postulated functions for demand for money in an
open economy.

     2Hodjera (1971) and (1973); Branson (1968) and (1970); and Branson.
and Hill (1971).

     3See S. Goldfeld (1973) for a summary of the traditional literature
on demand for money in the U.S.

     4Goldfeld.

     5it appears that this assumption may not be proper in the case of
the U.S. economy. It is adopted here for simplicity, though for empir-
ical purposes this assumption will be relaxed.

     6See Tobin (1969).

     7Defined as currency plus demand deposits.

     81n the remainder of this section, the discussion of explanatory.
variables will be mainly devoted to non-standard variables, such as the
foreign interest rate and exchange rate expectations.

     91f none of the portfolio components is constrained to zero cross-
price effects (and there are no theoretical grounds to do so), they all
would adjust to a price disturbance in any one of the components. On
this point, see Brainard and Tobin (1968).

    10For detailed specification of these functions see the APPENDIX
and S. Arango, "A Portfolio Approach to the Demand for Money in an
Open Economy."
    11Since the monetary authority transacts foreign exchange at the
rate of exchange prevailing at any given time, such stock is valued
by a weighted average of past and current exchange rates, ',

                                          A
                                  t
                           r    = E r.—
                            t    i=0 1
                                              d.
                                               1



     12The funds that banks can allocate freely to their portfolio are
DD=RR. Letting DD=gMd and RR=hDD, then DD—RR = (l-h)hMd. For simplicity,
only demand deposits are considered.
                                   37




     131t should be noted that, if the level of wealth remains constant
during the process, all that takes place is a redistributing of assets.
Furthermore, the contractionary effect on the money supply is precisely
due to the wealth constraint, since the aggregate private sector-—in the
process of acquiring foreign reserves partially with inside money--forces
private borrowing to shrink by some multiple of the initial change. In
the end, therefore, it is the monetary base that is substituted in favor
of foreign assets.

     14The signs of the individual elasticies are obtained from the
behavioral assumptions and are indicated above each term.

     5This statement holds even in an extreme case in which the entire
change in foreign securities is accompanied by an opposite but equal
change in money holdings. The former is amplified through a multiplier
effect so that under a fractional reserve system the variation in the
money supply becomes greater than that of the money demand.

     16Portfolio theory suggests a functional form multiplicative in
stock of wealth and non-linear in rates of return.

     17The responses of Mt to changes in the right-hand variables are
assumed to have identical lags. A more complicated structure, varying
with different independent variables, can be easily introduced. But
not much was gained when we experimented with different lag structures.
Similar results were obtained by Goldfeld (1973).

     18The money demand function is clearly identifiable at both the
empirical and theoretical levels. Empirically, the condition m
(where m is the number of included endogenous variables and G excluded
exogenous variables) is fulfilled. Theoretically, the money supply
function (1.9) contains several variables not included in the money
demand function (1.1).

     19This method is adopted from Darby (1972).

     20There are two opposing forces which influence the size of the
coefficient in d• The interest rates, d and f, bear a positive
relationship and their coefficients are of the same sign. Therefore,
the exclusion of f raises in absolute value the coefficient of d•
On the other hand, the exclusion of exchange rate expectations and
exchange rates may have an opposite effect that could be due to an
inverse causal relationship running from the domestic interest rate
to exchange rate expectations. That is, decreases in the domestic
interest rate cause outflows of capital that create pressure on the
foreign exchange market, and this, in turn, could lead to the formation
of expectations about depreciation of the domestic currency.
                                             38




     21The polynomial distributed lag of the second degree, with the
far end constrained to zero, had the following weights:

          v0 =   -.62;   V1 =   .07;        = .49;   and v4 = .45
                                       V2


     22The general test for structural change between two sub-periods
of a sample is the F statistics given

                             (sSR -
                                       ..i=lSSR1)/k
          FR,n+m_2k=            2
                                                         ;i1,2
                            .1=1
                                    SSR/n +       m—2k



where SSR is the sum of squared residuals of the pooled regression; SSR1
is the sum of squared residuals corresponding to the first n observations;
SSR is the sum of squared residuals corresponding to rn additional obser-
vations; and k to the number of estimatedparameters. This test is
feasible whenever n,m > k. Given that most of the sub-periods considered
in our test for structural change is characterized by m < k, we have used
the F statistics indicated in the text. (For derivation of these test
statistics, see H. Johnston, EconometricMethods, 2nd éd. New York:
McGraw—Hill, 1972). Since several structural changes within the sample
period are considered, the test is applied consecutively, each additional
test being made subject to the restriction that the null hypothesis in
the preceding test had been accepted.
                                              3g
                                          APPENDIX

                   Mathematical Derivation of the Comparative

                                       Static Properties


                   The money market equilibrium condition may be expressed as:


pdfl(p%dydjdjfI?') — k(GB+ICAB+(S                                   —
                                                                        S)   —
                                                                                 FR) = 0   (A.l)



        Total differentiation of (A.l) gives:


                            3r5           FR         FR
dd(__k__f+k d+k_+k___(l_h)g_) =
      a1d


                       arsd         aFR
  —   dwd(_+k                 +k— (1— h)g—)
            awd


                                       FR                1d
  _dyd(_+k d+k_(l_h)g                                         )


                                                                                           C•A.2)

             1d                        3r5
                                             +k(lh)g
                                                   3FR




                                             3FR
  —dr (—— k—-kS+k_——(lh)g—)
                       3r



                            5d rsE             3FR
  _dre(__k_+k d(_)g_)
                  ad          ars                             aMd
  —dl" ( +.k                        +k(l-h)g                            )




  — dpd ( — + k               d
                                  ÷k   —
                                       FR
                                             (1 — h)g    —)
                                                     40


+ dGBU
       C
           k+         dICAB         k+    dW
                                                     d
                                                    Sç
                                                (k—- )      + dYf
                                                                           d
                                                                                      f
                                                                        (k_T ) + dP' (k__
                                                                                                d

                                                                                                    )


+ dP       (k4) +               did   (k ) + dh((NB - F)g

               = (1
                                                                       (S - rS).
                      -             M and NB = GBd + ICAB +
where in                      h)g
      To transform the derivatives into elasticities, multiply and                              divide
the left-hand side of (A.2) by                        and each individual term within the

parentheses by the respective asset; the first expression appearing on

the   right-hand side is multiplied and divided by                              and each individual
term within the parentheses is multiplied and divided by the corresponding
asset, etc.
      Let
                                         di     x
                                         —---         cC' ,      x),

                                         3x y
                                         aY=        e(x,   y),

      and D =             eid,      d1d k{e(S, i)S -                   e(rS,   i1)rS — e(FR, id)FR
                          -   e(FR,   m) e ('td jd)FR} <

Thus, the cornoarative static elasticities become:


    d d            e(M,W)Mk[e(rSW)rS+e(FRm)e(MW)FR]
                                d   •d
c(i,W)=
                                                     D




c(i d ,Y   )   =                                                                        >
                                                                                            0



   .d .f
      1 )      = _e(Md,i1d+k[e(SdjSd_erSfjrS_eFRmeMdiFRl > 0
                                                                 D
                                                   41




   d
c(i ,r).=                                                            <0
                                                    D
                                              d,   d
 (ide) = _e(1d,rt)Md+k[e(Sf,r )Sf_e(rS,rI)rS_e(FR,tn)e(Md,rT)FR] > 0
                         -                              D


                         d' ci                          f   d
             —e(M ,P )}I -k(e(rSd,P1 )rSd+e(FR,x)e(M ,P' )FR]
£(jdp. t•) =                                                  <0
                                                   D



c(idpd)       = _e(Md,Pd)Md_k[e(rS,pd)rS+e(pR,)e(Md,pd)FR)
                                                                >0
                                    D


                   k.GBd
c(i,GB'1)                    < 0
                     D

         k ICAB
c(idIc) = D                      < 0



                  k e(S,W)S
              —                        < 0
                         D


                  k e(S,Y)S
c(idyf) =                                0
                         D


  d ef             k e(S,i)S
E(i ,P    )
                             D
                                         >0


                  k e(S,Pf)Sd
c(idpf)                D
                                       <0

                  -k e (FR,id)FR
   d ci
C(i           =
                         D
                                        >0

                  (NB — FR) e (k,h)k >
                          D
                                       42



                                  REFERENCES



 Arango, S. "A Portfolio Approach to the Demand for Money in an Open

      Economy." Unpublished dissertation, New York University (1977).

 Brainard, W.D., and Tobin, T. "Pitfalls in Financial Model Building."

      American Economic Review (May 1968).

 Branson, W.H. Financial Capital Flows in theU.S. Balance of Payments.

      Arnersterdam: North Holland, 1968.

                   "Monetary Policy and the New View of International

      Capital Movements." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 2

      (1970).

Branson, W.H., and Hill, R.D., Jr. "Capital Movements in the OECD Area:

     An Econometric Analysis." OECD Economic Outlook, Occasional Studies

     (December 1970).

Darby, M.R. "The Allocation of Transitory Income Among Consumer Assets.'

     American Economic Review (December 1972).

Fair, R.     "The Estimation of Simultaneous Equation Models with Lagged

     Endogenous    Variables and First Order Serially Correlated Errors."
     Econometrica (May 1970).

Fisher, D.      "The Demand for Money in Britain." Manchester School of

     Economic and Social Studies (December 1968).

Goldfeld, S.     "The Demand for Money Revisited."
                                                     Brookings Papers on
     Economic Activity, Vol. 3 (1973).

Hamburger, M.J, "The Demand for Money in an Open Economy: Germany

     and the United Kingdom." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research,

     Paper No. 7405 (April 1974).
                                    43



Hodjera, Z. "Short-Term Capital Movements of the United Kingdom:

     1963—1967." IMFStaff Papers (July 1971).

__________   "International   Short-Term Capital Movements: A Survey

     of Theory and Empirical Analysis." IMFStaff Papers (November 1973).

Johnston, H. Econometric Methods, 2d ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972.

Laidler, D., and Parkin, M. "The Demand for Money in the U.K."

    Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies (June 1971).

Nadiri, M. "The Determinants of Real Cash Balances in the U.S. Total

    Manufacturing Sector." Quarterly Journal ofEconomics (May 1969).

Tobin, J. "Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk." In

    economic Theory: Selected Readings. Edited by Williams and

    Huffnagle. New York: 1969.

Wilims, M. "Controlling Money in an Open Economy: The German Case."

    Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (April 1971).
