     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE FAMILY AS AN INCOMPLETE
         ANNUITIES MARKET



       Laurence   J. Kotlikoff

            Avia Spivak


       Working Paper No. 362




NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
         Cambridge MA 02138

            June 1979
                                                            NBER Working Paper 362
                                                                         June 1979



             The Family as an Incomplete Annuities Market



      Families provide individuals with risk sharing opportunities which

may not otherwise be available. Within the family there is a degree of

trust and a level of information which alleviates three key problems in

the provision of insurance by markets open to the general public, namely,

moral hazard, adverse selection, and deception. The informational advan-

tages of pooling risk within families must be set against the inability of

families to provide complete insurance because of the small size of the

risk pooling group.

      This paper demonstrates how families can provide insurance against

uncertain dates of death. Death risk sharing family arrangements effec-

tively constitute an incomplete annuities market. Our analysis indicates

that these arrangements even in small families can substitute by more than

70% for complete annuities. Given the adverse selection problem and

transactions costs in public annuity markets, risk pooling in familes

may well be preferred to purchasing market annuities. In the absence of

organized public markets in annuities, these risk sharing arrangements

provide powerful economic incentives for marriage and family formation.

      The paper suggests that inter-family transfers need have nothing

to do with altruistic feelings; rather, they may simply reflect risk sharing

behavior of completely selfish family members.



                                             Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                                             Department of Economics
                                             University of California
                                             Los Angeles, California 90024
                                             (213) 825—3810
                                             Avia Spivak
                                             Ben Gurion University, Israel
                                                              May 15, 1979


             THE FAMILY AS AN INCOMPLETE ANNUITIES MARKET *

                                   by
                         Laurence J. Kotlikoff
                 University of California, Los Angeles
             and the National Bureau of Economic Research

                                  and

                              Avia Spivak
                         Ben Gurion University


     The institution of the family provides individuals with risk sharing

opportunities which may not otherwise be available. Within the family there

is a degree of trust and a level of information which alleviates three key

problems in the provision of insurance by markets open to the general public,

namely moral hazard, adverse selection, and deception. In addition, provision

of insurance within the family may entail smaller transaction costs than arise

in the purchase of insurance on the open market. Therearea number of

important risks for which the "public" market problems of moral hazard,

adverse selection, and deception are especially severe. The risk of loss

of job or earnings because of changes in the pattern of demand or partial

disability is one example. Here the ability of the "public" market to

determine the extent to which the individual contributed to his earnings

loss or is simply lying about his backache is highly questionable. Other

examples are the risk of bankruptcy and the default risk on personal loans.

Many family practices in dealing with these types of risks can be explained

as implicit insurance contracts made ex ante by completely selfish family

membexs. Love and affection may be important for the enforcement of these

implicit contracts, but these need not be their sole or even chief


   * The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
Social Insurance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                    2




determinant. Healthy brother A's support for disabled brother B may simply

be the quid pro quo for brother B's past implicit promise to support A if A

had become disabled instead of B.

     The informational advantages of pooling risk within families must be set

against the inability of families to provide complete insurance •because of the

small size of the risk pooling group. The theory of insurance invokes the law

of large numbers to demonstrate that a sufficiently large group of people can

capture all the gains from risk pooling; the theory does not tell us how far

a small group of people can go in pooling risk. The rate at which diminishing

returns to additional people sets in in risk pooling appear to be an unex—

plored topic in the economic literature

     Understanding how well family risk sharing arrangements substitute for

market risk sharing arrangements is important not only for explainingthe ex-

cess insurance demand facing public markets given the existence of families, but

also for understanding the economic incentives for marriage and family formation

when complete and fair public insurance markets do not exist.

     This paper is concerned with the provision within the

family of insurance against the risk of running out of consumption resources

because of greater than average longevity. For a single individual the problem

is how to eat a pie over time when one does not know how long one will

continue to live. Too much consumption when young may mean relative poverty

later on if one lives "too long"; alternatively, if one is excessively frugal

when oung, there is the risk of dying without ever having satisfied one's

hunger. A complete annuity market permits an individual to hedge this

uncertainty of the date of death by exchanging his initial pie for a

stream of pie slices that continue as long as the individual survives. This
                                   3




paper demonstrates that implicit contractual arrangements within marriage and

the family can substitute to a large extent for the purchase of annuities in

public markets. Risk sharing arrangements within the family effectively con-

stitute an incomplete annuities market. Our analysis indicates that these

arrangements even in small families can substitute by more than7O% for com-

plete annuities. Given the adverse selection problem and transactions costs

in public annuity markets, contracting within an incomplete family annuity

market may well be preferred to purchasing annuities in the more complete public

market) In the absence of organized public markets in annuities, these risk

sharing arrangements provide powerful economic incentives for marriage and fam-

ily formation.

     Throughout the paper individuals are assumed to be completely selfish,

i.e., they obtain utility only from their own consumption. One implication of

this approach is that voluntary transfers from children to parents or bequests

and gifts from parents to children need have nothing at all to do with altruistic

feelings; rather, they may simply reflect risk sharing behavior of completely

selfish individuals. However, some level of mutual trust and honesty is required

since elements of these arrangements are not legally enforceable.

     This paper is divided into four sections. The first section describes

optimal consumption behavior for a single individual both in the presence of

and in the absence of fair annuity markets. W(discuss the income and sub-

stitution effects involved in the provision of fair annuities and calculate

the wlfarE gains from access to a complete and fair annuity market for the

case of the iso—elastic utility function.

     Section two develops the theoretical argument for Pareto efficient implicit

family annuity contracts and explores potential welfare gains arising from these
                                       4




 arrangements. We present a proof that this implicit family contracting con-

verges to a complete annuities market as the number of family members increases.

 Although the complexity of the calculations precluded analysis of large families,

we do present quantitative results for families of two and three persons. Com-

paring the two person outcome with that for three persons indicates the degree

of diminishing returns to the size of the risk sharing pool. The analysis

considers cases in which family members both do and do not have identical sur-

vival probabilities (are of similar ages). This framework permits us to ask

whether marriage betieen individuals with similar survival probabilities is

more efficient than marriage between individuals with dis—similar survival pro-

babilities.

      Optimal family annuity contracts involve agreements on the consumption

path of each family member as well as a commitment on the part of each member to

name the other members as sole heirs in his estate. Section three discusses

the problems of enforcing both aspects of these agreements. In particular, we

contrast the Pareto efficient family annuity contracts with the equilibrium that

arises when each family member cheats on the other in the sense of consuming in

excess of the optimal family plan. Section four summarizes the paper and suggests

areas for future research.

                I. A Single Persons Consumption Plans

                      With and Without Fair Annuities 2

      In the absence of an annuity market a single             consumption

choice problem is to maximize his expected utility (1) from current and

future consumption subject to the budget constraint, (2):

(1)            EU =
                              U(C)
(2)             Dt=ocR_t=w
                     t    0
                                       5




       The      of equation (1) are probabilities of surviving from age zero

 through age t. P equals one. D is the maximum longevity. For simplicity,

 we assume the utility function is separable in consumption (Cr) over time.

 In (2) R, the discount factor, is one pins the interest rate.      W
 is the initial wealth of the individual; we ignore possible future earnings

 streams.

       The budget constraint written in equation (2) is identical to the budget

 constraint that would arise in a certainty world in which individuals never

 died before age D. While individuals will, on the average, die prior to age

 D, equation (2) reflects the non—zero probability that an individual will

 live through age D, i.e., equation (2) is the relevant budget constraint

because the individual may actually live through age D, in which case his

 realized present value of consumption cannot exceed his budget.

       Let us now assume that the single person is free to purchase actuarially

fair annuities in a complete public annuities market. The budget constraint
 in this case is:

 (3)
                    t=o
                          P ct Rt=W0
       In   contrast with (2), (3) requires only an equality between the expected

present value of consumption and initial wealth. The single individual now

chooses his optimal consumption path by maximizing (1) subject to (3); he

then exchanges his initial wealth W with the insurance company in return for

its promise to pay out the C stream as long as the person continues to live.

       The PR       in (3)maybe thought of as prices. -Since each of the

in (3), except P which equals unity, is less than one, the consumption choice

in the case of a fair annuity market is
                                           equivalent to the consumption choice

without an annuity market, but with lower prices of future consumption.
                                                       6




Obviously, access to a fair annuity market increases utility by expanding

the budget frontier; it also alters the optimal consumption path because of

the income and substitution effects resulting from the lower prices of future

consumption.

        The iso—elastic utility function (4) is convenient for assssing the

potential gains from access to afair, public annuities market as well as

the gains from family annuity arrangements.

                                           cl-I
                                                  at
                                 D            t
(4)                 EU =
                             Z,        P
In (4) y is the constant relative risk aversion parameter, and a is the time

preference parameter. By considering different values of y we

indicate for this family of utility functions how the gains from annuities

and family arrangements depend on the specification of tastes.

        In the no—annuities case maximization of (4) subject to (2) leads to the

consumption plan (5):




                       -
                             W        (Rc)t' Vi
(5)                 Ct -
                                       RJ(h1) a            ili
                              3=0                           j
in    the case of fair annuities, maximizing (4) subject to (3) leads to:

                             w       (Ra)P"
                         -
                     t
                             E.
                              3=0
                                      R1 a1P
                                           -r

       Iii figure   I we compare (5) and (6) for the case R =    a   =   1;
                                    7




Consumption




                                                  Fair Annuities              , y<l)



                                                  No Annuities (y>l)



                                                           uities (y=l)
                                                           No Annuities   (y<l)
                                                                                  Time
    FIGURE I.   Consumption Paths With and Without Fair Annuities


     The ability to trade in a fair annuities market may   raise   or lower

initial consumption depending on whether y is less than or greater than

unity. Intuitively, the higher is the degree of risk aversion, y, the

greater is the concern for running out of money because of excessive long-

evity and, hence, the lower is initial consumption. At y equal to infinity,

(5) dictates equal consumption in each period.

    Plugging (5) or (6) into (4),   we arrive at two indirect utility functions

for the no—annuity and annuity cases with initial wealth, the interest rate, and

survival probabilities as arguments. These functions are presented in equations

(7) and (8) respectively.
                                       8



(7)         H0(W0) =      W'[
(8)        V(W0) =

We measure the increase in utility resulting from access to fair annuities

in terms of dollars. From (9) we solve for the value of N which represents

the percentage increment in a single person's initial wealth required, in the

absence of an annuity market, to leave him as well off as he would be with no

additional wealth, but with access to an annuities market.


(9)        H0(MW0) =   v(w0)

For the iso—elastic utility function this calculation turns out to be independent

of the initial level of wealth. Table I reports values of M for different ages

and levels of risk aversion using both male and female survival probabilities.

The survival probabilities used in this and all subsequent calculations are

actuarial estimates from the Social Security Administration.3 Maximum longevity

is taken to be 120 throughout the paper.

      Table I indicates that the utility gain measured in dollars from access

to an annuities market can be quite large. For a relative risk aversion

parameter value of .75 the gain to a 55 year old male is equivalent to a 46.90

percent increase in his initiaL wealth. The utility gain is age dependent;

for y =   .75,   the 30 year old maleTs gain is 24,46 percent, while the 90

year old male's gain is 99.81 percent. This reflects the low probabilities

of death when young; annuities are less important to young people because a

large fraction of their lifetime utility from consumption is fairly certain

due to their lower mortality probabilities in the immediate future. Higher

levels of risk aversion naturally increase the gains from access to an annui—
                                  9




                                  I:

   Percentage Increase in Initial Wealth Required to Obtain
                    Fair Annuities Utility Level*




               Relative
  Age      Risk Aversion (y)                   Males   Females

   30               .75                        24.5     18.5
   55               .75                        46.9     34.4
   75               .75                        71.2     63.0
   90          .    .75                        99.8    100.2


   30              1.25    -
                                               30.3     22.7
   55              1.25                        59.2     43.4
   75           1.25                           97.0     85.3
   90           1.25                       152.6       152.9


   30           1.75                           34.7     26.1
   55           1.75                           68.9     50.7
   75           1.75                       119.1       104.6
   90           1.75                       199.1       199.4



*Throughout table a       .99 and R =   1.01
                                      10




 ties market. The male—female differences in the table reflect the higher

male age specific mortality rates. The calculation Is somewhat sensitive

 to the choice of a and R. Raising the interest rate to 5 percent while

holding a constant increases the age 55 wealth equivalent factor from 46.90

 to 55.57 for the case of '    .75.   The 90 year old wealth equivalent is

 increased from 99.81 to 115.34.

          Income, Substitution Effects, and Unintended Bequests

       Without access to an annuity market a single non—altruistic individual

will always die prior to consuming all his wealth and, accordingly, make in-

voluntary bequests. The level of these unintended bequests can be quite

large. Using (5) we calculated the consumption path as well as the correspond-

ing wealth path for the no—annuity case. Multiplying the probability of dying

at each age times the wealth at each age and discounting back to the initial

age gives the present expected value of unintended bequests. For y =    .75,
R =   1.01 and a = .99, the present expected value of unintended bequests repre-
sents 24.47 percent of initial wealth for a single male age 55. This number

means that a 55 year old male with no annuity market will, on average, fail to

consume about one quarter of his wealth because he is risk averse. Increasing

the risk aversion coefficient to 1.75 raises the ratio of present unintended

bequests to initial wealth to .3583. These large, unintended bequests occur

despite a fairly rapid rate of consumption. In table II we present the optimal

age consumption and age wealth paths for a 55 year old single male with no

access to annuities and initial wealth of $100,000. Even for high values of

risk aversion, current mortality probabilities dictate a fairly rapid rate of

consumption. For y = 1.75 a single male surviving to age 85 consumes less than

one third of his age 55 consumption level.
                            11




                           II:


             Age Consumption and Age Wealth Paths

              for Single Male with No Annuities




               Risk
   Age       Aversion            Consumption          Wealth
    55             .75                6825          $100,000
    65             .75                4720            47,415
    75             .75                2250
              -                                       13,830
    85             .75                 395             1,420
    95             .75                  10                30


   55             1.25                5465           100,000
   65         1.25                    4395            57,200
   75         1.25                    2810            23,675
   85         1.25                     990             5,165
   95         1.25                     110               475


   55         1.75                    4795          100,000
   65         1.75                    4100           62,680
   75         1.75                    2980          30,680
   85         1.75                    1415           9,505
   95         1.75                    295            1,690

R = 1.01   a = .99
                                  —
                                     12



       The homotheticiy property of the iso—elastic utility function permits

us to use the ratio of present unintended bequests to initial wealth in separat-

ing the utility gains from fair annuities into income and substitution effects.

       Suppose a fair insurance company approached a single age 55 year old

(y =   .75) male and offered to pay him 24.47 percent of his initial wealth in
exchange for his naming the insurance company as his heir on his will. The

single male would take the 24.47 percent gain and, because of homotheticity,

consume it according to his original no—annuity consumption path. This

additional wealth would give rise to an additional .2447 times .2447 present

expected bequest. Letting the insurance company also pay for this second

round expected bequest and letting the process continue until convergence,

the insurance company ends up paying 32.40 = .2447/1—.2447 percent of the

single individual's initial wealth. This 32.40 percent figure represents the

utility gain from the pure income effect, In this scenario the individual

continues to consume at the no—annuity set of prices. Since the total gain

from being able to purchase fair annuities and thus face lower prices for

future consumption is 46.90 percent, the income effect represents 69.08

percent and the substitution effect 30.92 percent of the total gain.

            II. The Family as an Incomplete Annuities 1ärket

       Decisions by family members concerning consumption expenditures and inter—.

family transfers may reflect implicit, although incomplete, annuity contracts.

For example, when two individuals get married they generally agree to pooi

their-resources while both marriage partners are alive, and also to name each

other as the major, if not the sole, beneficiary in their wills. For each

partner the risk of living "too long" is somewhat hedged; if one partner lives

to be very old, there is a high probability that his Cor her) spouse had already
                                   13




died leaving him (her) a bequest to help finance his (her) consumption.

While each spouse will gain just from the exchanging of wills, they can

further increase their expected utilities by agreeing on a joint consunip—

tion path taking into account each spouse's expected bequest to the other.

The importance of joint consumption planning is highlighted in the case of

an implicit contract between a parent and a child. Here the parent impli-

citly promises to name the child in his will in exchange for the child's

implicit promise to care for the parent if the parent lives too long. Al-

though the child may have zero probability of dying while the parent is still

alive, both can gain because the child agrees to share consumption resources

with the parent.

     Mutually advantageous arrangements between family members do not require

either equal consumption by each family member or equal initial endowments.

If an old male marries a very young female and each enter the marriage with

the same dowry, the young female can compensate the old male for his higher

expected bequests by consuming less than the male while they are both alive.

Alternatively, the old male and the young female could consume equally while

married; in this case the young female could compensate the old male for his

higher mortality probabilities by entering the marriage with a larger dowry.

The set of Pareto efficient family contracts is derived by maximizing a weighted

sum of each family member's own expected utility from consumption subject to

the constraint that consumption of surviving family members not exceed their

own resources plus inheritances received from deceased family members.

     This view of bequest and consumption arrangements within marriage as an

incomplete annuity market becomes intuitive when one contemplates increasing

the number of members in the family. To simplify the issue, let us assume
                                            14



that all individuals within the family have identical survival probabilities,

and that they enter this multi—person family with identical resources. In

the limit as the family, or perhaps "tribe" is a better word, gets large, the

consumption path of an individual within the tribe converges to the path a

single individual would choose in a complete and actuarially fair annuities

market. While we prove this proposition for the multi—period case in appendix

A, a two period model can exhibit the main idea.

      Since all family members are identical, the family maximizes the expected

utility of a representative family member's consumption in period zero, C0, and

consumption in period one, C1. Let N+l be the number of family members and

i+1 be the number of members who survive to period one; the two period budget

constraint is then:


                                    N+1
 10       C
              1
                  —   W
                      0
                          —   C R

The term R() is the random intertemporal rate of return. Each person in the

family consumes C0 of his             endowment in period zero. For a period one sur-

vivor the return on savings reflects the interest rate plus his share of the

bequests of those who die. Assuming that each member has an identical pro—
                                                                      N+l        1 — (1_p)N+1
bability, P, of surviving to period one, the expected value of              is

The expected return is lower (the price of consumption in period one is higher)

here than in the annuity case because of the possibility that all family members

die simultaneously. As n goes to infinity this expected value converges to

The vriance of this return also converges to zero, implying that the family's

consumption choices C0 and C1 cànverge to the choices made in a perfect annuity

market.
                                            15




                   Quantitative Analysis of Family Risk Pooling

           In the case of two family members the frontier of efficient marriage

 contracts is obtained as the solution to the following dynamic programming

 troblem:


           (11) Vt1(W1) =
                            max[u(CH1) + uS(c51) +        aP,1Qt1V(W)
                      W,C1,C1 > 0, t=T,. ..,l

               ÷
                   aP/1(l_Q,1)     H(W) + OaQ, 1(l—P,             S(W)]




       (   12) W/R + C1 ÷ C_1= W]


       where             VT(WT) = max      UH(c) +   ouS(c)
                                C ,   CT




           In (11) Vt(W) is the period t maximum weighted expected utility of the

 two   family   members with joint wealth W. In the expression the letters H and

 S denote the two family members. C and C are the consumptions of the two

   and uS are their utility functions and P1 and t/t—l are their respec-

tive period t survival probabilities onditiona1 upon surviving through period

t—l. H(W) and S(W) are the maximum expected utilities for each member if

he orshe alone survives to period t. These expressions are obtained from

 (7) by replacing W0 and W and applying the appropriate probabilities. 0 is

the differential weight applied to member S's expected utility.

       The first two terms on the right hand side of (11) represent utility from

certain period t—l consumption. The third term is the family's expected period
                                   16




t utility multiplied by the probability that both members survive to period t.

The last two terms represent expected utilities when one member dies and the

other survives.

     Appendix B presents an algorithm which we programmed on the computer to

solve (11). The algorithm for solving the three family member maximization

problems is available from the authors.

                   Marriage as an Annuity Contract

     The solution to (11) permits us to contrast consumption paths and utility

levels of married people with those of single persons, assuming throughout that

there is no public annuities market. Both spouses are assumed to have identical

iso—elastic utility functions in the sense of the same degrees of risk aversion

and rates of time preference.

        The shape of consumption paths for married couples while they are

both alive may differ from that of single individuals for two reasons.

First, even if the two spouses have identical survival probabilities, the

reduction in risk within the marriage rate acts like a reduction in the

price of future consumption. If the relative risk aversion parameter y

exceeds (is less than) one, the identical survival probabilities marriage

profile will start above (below) the single person's profile. For y

equal to unity the profiles are identical (see Appendix). If we drew these

consumption profiles for married persons in figure 1 they would start between

the no annuity and complete annuity profiles.

      The second reason why the consumption profiles for married people may

differ from that of single people is possible differences in spousal survival

probabilities. Higher survival probabilities act like lower rates of time

preferences. When an old man marries a young female the slope of the optimal

marriage consumption profile reflects the survival probabilities of both the
                                    17




husband and the young wife. The two spouses compromise with respect to the

 rate at which they should eat up their joint wealth while they are both alive.

The old husband would prefer to eat up the wealth more rapidly, and the young

wife would prefer to consume at a slower rate. The formula for each spouse's

consumption when married takes both spouses' survival probabilities into

account as well as the relative spousal utility weights.

     In table III we report the gains from marriage between two individuals

who have identical survival probabilities, identical initial endowments,

and are weighted equally in the marriage contract. We report

marriage gains using both male and female survival probabilities.

The marriage gain is calculated as the percentage increase in a single

person's initial wealth needed to make him (her) as well as he (she) would be

in the marriage. The table also reports the marriage gain as a fraction

of the Table I total gain from complete and fair annuities. These utility

gains are measured in terms of their dollar equivalents. Since utility is

concave in wealth the dollar gain from marriage as a fraction of the dollar

gain from fair annuities is smaller than the actual utility gain from

marriage as a fraction of the utility gain from fair annuities. Table II

also reports this latter fraction which indicates how much of the utility
                                            4
gain from annuities is captured by marriage.

      The figures in table III indicate that marriage can offer substantial

risk pooling opportunities. For a fifty—five year old man using male

survi'val probabilities, pooling risk through marriage is equivalent to

about a twenty percent increase in his wealth if he had stayed single. The

gains from marriage increase the older one becomes since the risks to be

incurred are much greater as one ages. At age seventy—five for a relative

risk aversion parameter of 1.25 getting married is equivalent to increasing

one's wealth by thirty percent. Death risk pooling through marriage can be
                                                                     III:

                                                       The Annuity Gains from Marriage*

                                             Male Probabilities                                  Female Probabilities

                     Percent                Dollar Marriage   Utility Marriage   Percent         Dollar Marriage   Utility Marriage
         Risk        Dollar                 Gain/Dollar       Gain/Utility       Dollar          Gain/Dollar       Gain/Utility
  Age    Aversion    Marriage Gain          Annuity Gain      Annuity Gain       Marriage Gain   Annuity Gain      Annuity Gain
   30      .75               11.7               .478              .499               9.3               .504             .519
   55      .75               20.0               .425              .461              15.6               .454             .482
   75      .75               25.4               .357              .405              23.5               .373             .417
   90      .75               28.2               .282              .339              28.3               .282             .338


   30     1.25               13.0               .429              .470              10.2               .447             .479
   55     1.25               22.3               .376              .446             17.4                .401             .456
                                        I
   75     1.25               30.1               .310              .419             27.6                .324             .414
   90     1.25               37.1               .243              .367             37.2                .243             .367


   30     1.75               13.6               .393              .456             10.6                .408             .457
   55     1.75               23.5               .341              .451             18.5               .364              .450
   75     1.75               33.2               .279              .449             30.5               .292              .436
   90     1.75              43.0                .216              .420             43.0               .216              .420




*R equals 1.01 and   ci.   equals .99
                                  19




quite important even at young ages. The table reports gains from 11.7 to

13.6 percent at age thirty using the male probabilities.

      Marriage can also close much of the utility gap between no annuities

and complete annuities. For example, for a fifty—five year old with risk

aversion of .75, the marriage gain measured in dollars represents 42.5 percent

of the full annuities gain measured in dollars. In terms of utility, marriage

substitutes 46.10 percent for complete and fair annuities. Interestingly,

marriage appears to be a somewhat better substitute for fair annuities at

younger ages. In addition, there appears to be an interaction between

age and the degree of risk aversion making marriage a better substitute

for fair annuities at young ages when risk aversion is low and at old ages

when risk aversion is high.


    Three Person Polygamy and Diminishing Returns in Risk Pooling

      We next consider the case of three individuals with identical survival

probabilities and initial endowments who agree to maximize the sum of

their utilities sublect to the constraint that realized consumption can not

exceed their pooled resources. The utility maximization is similar to (11);

it takes into account each survival contingency, i.e., that either all three,

two, one, or none of the individuals will be alive and may   inherit   at each

point in the future.

      Table IV records the utility gains from three person polygamy (three

sisters would do just as nicely). Over a wide range of ages and parameter

values three people appear to be capable of capturing about sixty percent

of the gains from fair annuities. While the complexity of the calculations

precluded considering a four person arrangement, we can conjecture using

tables III and IV how well four people would do together. For example, for
                                 20



                                 IV:


               The Annuity Gains from Three Person Polygomy



                             Percent               Polygomy Utility Gain!
   Age     Risk Aversion Dollar Gain               Fair Annuity Utility Gain

    30         .75           15.85                          .665
    55         .75           28.04                          .632
    75         .75           37.16                          .571
    90         .75           43.10                          .496


    30        l.25           18.05                          .635
    55        1.25           32.08                          .612
    75        1.25           45.18                          .571
    90        1.25           58.17                         .524


    30        1.75           19.33                         .619
    55        1.75           34.51                         .613
    75        1.75           50.74                         .596
    90        1.75           68.68                         .579




Table uses male probabilities,.R =   1.01,   a =   .99
                                    21



a fifty year old male 'with risk aversion of .75, adding one marriage partner

is equivalent to a twenty percent increase in his wealth had he remained

single. From table III the marginal dollar gain from adding a third person is

8.04 percent. If the marginal dollar gain fell at a constant rate in this range,
                                         8.04               5
the   fourth     person would add 8.04 X 20 0 = 3.23 percent. By adding

3.23 to 28.04, we can roughly calculate the extent to which four people can

close the utility gap. This procedure suggests that four people can sub-

stitute by seventy percent for a fair annuities market.

      Diminishing returns to risk pooling appears, then, to set in at a

 fairly rapid rate. For this example, two people can substitute by 46 percent,

 three people by 63 percent, and four people by over 70 percent for full in-

 surance.

                Is Marrying People of Similar Ages More Efficient?

      Suppose you have to decide how to pair up four people, two who are old

and two who are young. Assume that the two old people have identical survival

probabilities, that the two young people have identical survival probabilities,

and that each of the four have the same initial wealth. Is it more efficient

to marry the old people together and the young people together than it is

to mix ages?

      Thete appear to be two competing   arguments involved here. On the

one hand marrying the old with the young minimizes society's expected loss

of resources arising when both marriage partners die early.6 To see this,

assume .that old people have a probability p of dying in the next period and

that young people have a probability q of dying in the next period. If we

marry the old with the old and the young with the young, there is a probability

p2 that both the old people will die and a probability q2 that both the young
                                    22




will die in the next period. If both couples were bringing the same resources

w into the second period, society's expected loss of resources equals (p2 + q2)w.

If, however, we married the old with the young, the expected resource loss

from the old spouse and the young spouse dying simultaneously is 2pqw. Now

(p2 + q2 — 2pg)w = (p —q)2w and, hence, the expected loss in resources to

society is greater from marrying the old with the old and the young with

the young. Intuitively, marrying two ninety year olds together and two twenty

year olds together leava large chance that both ninety year olds will die

in the immediate future; any resources which they have failed to consume

will be lost to the twenty year olds who, on average, will still be alive.

This expected loss of resources to society       (by society we mean the

four people), will be greater the greater the degree of risk aversion, since

high levels of risk aversion will lead our hypothetical ninety year olds to

postpone consumption.

      The contervailing argument against mixed age marriages is that mixing

ages involves greater risk to one of the two partners; the utility cost of

this greater risk may exceed the utility gain from the increase in expected

resources arising in mixed marriages. To see this consider an old—young

marriage in which the young person promises to consume less than the old

person in the state of nature in which both spouses survive. Suppose that

this promise to the old person o(higher consumption in the "both survive"

state is large enough to exactly compensate the old person for the loss in

expecied utility from the state in which his spouse dies, but he survives.

The old person's expected utility from this latter "bequest" state is lower

when he marries someone young, rather than someone old, because the probability

of the young person actually dying is smaller. While the old person is by
                                    23



assumption no worse off in this compensated old—young marriage, the young

person could be worse off than had she (he) married someone young. By

entering into this compensated old—young marriage, the young person reduces

her (his) payoff in the "both survive" state while leaving the payoff in the

"bequest"   state unchanged. She (he) also increases the probability of the
"bequest" state and lowers the probability of the "both survive" state.
Although expected consumption for the young spouse rises, the spreading of
the   payoffs may lower expected utility depending on the young spouse's

degree of risk aversion.
       We investigated for our iso—elastic utility function potential efficiency

gains from mixed marriage between two fifty—five year olds and two thirty

year olds, where each individual was risk averse at the .75 level. The

fifty—five year olds were given male survival probabilities, while the thirty

year olds had female survival probabilities. From table III we know that

the two fifty—five year olds would, by marrying, enjoy an increase in

expected utility worth twenty percent of their initial wealth. If the two

younger people married, their equivalent dollar gain would equal 9.31 percent

for each.

        Marrying the old with the young, assuming an equal consumption (equal

weighting) marriage contract, would leave the old person worse off and the

young person better off then if they were single. This reflects the fact

that while both partners compromise on how fast they should consume their

joint wealth, the older person is much more likely to die and therefore

bequeath first.     This equal consumption marriage gives the young person a

39.7 percent gain, while the old person loses an equivalent of 13.1 percent

of his wealth. By weighting the utility of the old spouse more heavily

than the utility of the young spouse in the marriage, we consider whether

the utility gains to the young spouse are sufficient to compensate the old
                                   24




spouse and leave both 'better off than had they married individuals

their ow-n age.

      Table V exhibits the old—young utility frontier measured in terms of

the equivalent dollar gains which result from differential weighting of the

old and young in the marriage. When risk aversion equals .75, -weights

of 1.7 for the old person and 1 for the young person yield utility levels

for both old and young which exceed those in the old—old, young—young marriages.

The additional gain to the old person from this weighted marriage with the

young person is 3.1 prcent; the added gain to the young person is 1.6

percent. The table also indicates the old spouse's share of total family

consumption while both spouses are alive; this share of consumption is deter-

mined by the utility weights.

      When the risk aversion parameter is 1.75 a weight of 2.9 applied to

the old person's utility yields outcomes pareto superior to those in the old—

old, young—young marriages. Here the old person's additional gain is .7

percent, while the young person's extra gain is 5.2 percent.

      These additional gains from mixed age marriages require, however, a

fairly skewed distribution of consumption within the marriage. In both of

the table V examples, the young—old weightingscheme that dominates old—old,

young—young coupling involve the older spouse consuming about 86 percent

more than the younger spouse while lhey are both alive. If it is too

costly to negotiate such an arrangement within the marriage, or if the type

of conumption (e.g., housing), within marriage is non—excludable, then equal

consumption marriages of individuals with similar survival probabilities (of

similar ages) will be the rule rather than the exception. Of course,

we have been discussing here marriages in which each spouse has
                                    25

                                    V:

                   The Mixed—Marriage Utility Frontier*

Old Person's     Old Person's Degree of       Old Person's          Young Person's
Utility Weight   Consumption    Risk Aversion Percent               Percent Dollar
                 Share                        Dollar Gain           Gain

    1                .50                 .75             —13.1          39.7
    1.1              .53                 .75             — 6.7          34.7
    1.2              .56                 .75             — .1           30.5
    1.3              .59                 .75                  4.8       25.6
    1.4              .61                 .75                 10.0       21.5
   1.5               .63                 .75                 14.7       17.6
   1.6               .65                 .75                 19.1       14.0
   1.7               .67                 .75                 23.1       10.6
   1.8               .69                 .75                 26.9        7.3
   1.9               .70                 .75                 30.4        4.3
   2.0               .71                 .75                 33.7        1.5


   1                 .50            1.75                 —    9.3       42.2
   1.3               .54            1.75                 —    1.1       36.1
   1.6               .57            1.75                      5.6       31.0
   1.9               .59            1.75                     11.0       26.7
   2.3               .62            1.75                     17.1       21.8
   2.6               .63            1.75                     20.9       18.7
   2.9               .65            1.75                     24.2       15.8




 *Young person's weight is 1. R =   1.01,      c. =   .99.
                                  26




the same initial dowry. The old—young marriages can dominate old—old, young—

young marriages even under an equal consumption arrangement provided the dowry

of the young spouse exceeds that of the old spouse to a sufficient degree.

     Incomplete Annuity Arrangements Among Multiple Family Members

     In this section we consider incomplete annuity arrangements between

two parents and one child and between one parent and two children. As in

the case of a marriage between old and young spouses, parents and children

can jointly pool the risks of uncertain death.

     In table VI we present the gains from implicit annuity contracting within

our two types of families. In both cases we assume equal consumption of

all family members, but permit the initial wealth of the child or children

to vary. All individuals are assumed to have the male survival probabilities;

the children are age thirty and the parents age fifty—five. The family

dynamic program is presented 'in the appendix. In each family

we maximize the sum of the three individual's expected utility taking all

survival contingencies into account. If two out of three family members

die simultaneously, the third inherits the remaining family wealth.

If one of the three dies first, the other two jointly inherit the remaining

family wealth and consume according to the equal weight optimal marriage

contract described above.

     The numbers in table VI indicate the percentage dollar increment to

wealth needed to make a single fifty—five year old or thirty year old with

the indicated initial wealth as well off as had he (she) participated in a

consumption sharing family arrangement.
                                 27




                                VI:

                    Gains from Incomplete Annuity
                     Arrangements in the Family*

                  Two Parents with One   Child      Two Children with One   Parent
Initial Wealth   Percent Dollar Percent Dollar      Percent Dollar   Percent Dollar
of Each Child    Gain to Parent Gain to Child       Gain to Parent   Gain to Child

  25,000              14.4            34.2               2.3             24.8

  30,000              23.2            20.4              16.9             18.9
  35,000              32.0            10.6              31.5             14.6

  40,000              40.8             3.2              46.1                11.5




*The Calculations assume equal consumption by all family members.
 Initial wealth of parent or parents is $20,000. R = 1.01, a = .99,
 andy = .75.
                                         28




           A comparison of table I with table VI indicates how well these small

    family arrangements can substitute for complete annuity contracts. For

    example, in the case of two parents with one child, if the child has an

    initial wealth of 35,000 and the parents have an initial wealth of 20,000,

    entering into an equal consumption—will swapping arrangement is equivalent

    for each parent to a 32 percent increase in wealth and for the child to a

    10.6 percent increase in wealth. For each parent this arrangement captures

    71.2 percent of the utility gain from full annuities; for the child the

    arrangement substitutes by 45.4 percent for full annuities.

           The last two columns of table VI tell a very similar story. Here we

    are dealing with the case of two children contracting with one parent.

    When each child contributes $35,000, the gain to the parent is 31.5 percent,

    while each thirty year old child enjoys a 14.6 percent gain relative to

    consuming as a single person. The numerical differences in the table

    for the two different types of families reflect, on the one hand, different

    monetary contributions of parents relative to children and, on the other

    hand, differences in the rate at which resources are consumed when all

    families are alive. Resources are consumed at a slower rate in the two

    children—one parent case than in the one child—two parent case since each

    individual's survival probabilities are given equal weight in determining
a
    the   optimal rate of consumption.

                         III. Enforcement with and without Altruism

            There are two elements in the marriage contracts we have described

    which raise questions of enforcement. One problem is that a spouse may

    covertly name a third party as beneficiary on his will in exchange for the

    same commitment by the third party or simply in exchange for a particular
                                      29




 service. This type   of   cheating is, however, dangerous. There is always

 the possibility that the other spouse will demand inspection of the will,

 or, even if a second will is hidden away, that the spouse will somehow become

 aware of it. Such disclosure could destroy the marriage, leaving the

 cheating spouse with a soiled reputation and unable to engage in additional

 implicit annuity contracting with either children or a new spouse. In

addition, the state, to a limited extent, plays a role in enforcing the

initial implicit marriage contract. Thus, the courts will rule invalid a

last minute change in a will which, for example, endows a death bed nurse to the

exclusion of a wife who has lived with and perhaps taken care of the decedent

husband for years.

      A second type of cheating is simply that one or both spouses consumes

in excess of the consumption levels dictated       by an optimal implicit

marriage contract. While each spouse may correctly believe that he or she

is the beneficiary on the other spouse's will, each may try to take advantage

of the other by increasing his (her) own consumption and thus reducing the

potential bequest available to the other spouse. The ability to observe one's

spouse's consumption within the marriage should effectively internalize

and eliminate this free—rider problem.

      This second type of consumption cheating as well as the first type of

cheating, viz., multiple will swapping, may be more problematic for implicit

incomplete annuity agreements between friends or relatives who are physically

separated. The consumption cheating scenario can be modeled as a Nash equili-

brium in which each partner chooses his
                                           consumption path taking the

other partner's consumption path and, therefore, potential bequest path as

given. The first order conditions for this nash equilibrium strategy are
                                      30                          -




 available   from the authors.   Resources are consumed at a faster rate in

 the Nash equilibrium as each partner fails to consider how his consumption

 will diminish his expected bequest and thus the expected utility of his

 partner.

      Using male survival probabilities we calculated for two     fifty—five

year olds the dollar equivalent utility gain relative to being single from

engaging in a Nash consumption cheating partnership. The utility gains in

the Nash equilibrium proved to be almost identical to those in the more ef-

ficient marriage contract. At     levels of risk aversion (y) of .75, 1.25,

and 1.75 the percentage dollar increments are respectively 19.9, 22.2, and

23.5. While the rate of consumption is faster in the Nash equilibrium, it

is not much faster than in the marriage contract. For example, when risk

aversion is .75 and the interest rate and rate of time preference equal one

percent, age fifty—five consumption in the Nash equilibrium equals 6.5 percent

of age fifty—five wealth; in the marriage contract age fifty—five consumption

is 6.4 percent of age fifty—five wealth. Intuitively cheating by over

consuming is fine provided one's partner actually dies; but if one's partner

survives then the early excessive consumptions will require relative deprivation

later on. Apparently this latter consideration dominates the former leaving

utility inthe cheating equilibrium at essentially the same level as under

a marriage contract. These examples suggest that consumption cheating does

not represent a substantial impediment to consumption risk sharing arrangements,

     Aside from the questions of third party will swapping, there appear

to be ways of structuring the payments of individuals within the family

so as to insure the viability of these implicit contracts. An equal

consumption marriage contract between two individuals with the same
                                   31




survival probabilities and same initial endowments is a good first

example. If each spouse maintains control over his own wealth while both

spouses are alive and consumes at the same rate as the other spouse, then

each will separately have an incentive to continue the contract at every

point in time. A similar type of individual control can be maintained

in family arrangements; rather than have the parents use up all their

resources before the children begin to contribute to their support, the

children can contribute each period in return for that period's expected

parental bequest. This scenario of parents maintaining control over their

wealth until the very end as enforcement leverage over their children may

partly explain the limited use of gifts as a tax saving intergenerational

transfer device.

     Another means of enforcing these implicit contracts is simply altruism.

All of our calculations have involved maximizing a weighted   sum of individual

family member's utilities. If, however, each family member is altruistic

towards each other and each weights each family member's utility from con-

sumption in the same way, then all family members would unanimously agree

on the utility maximand. The calculations we have presented can, therefore,

be thought of as resulting from the maximization of an agreed upon altruistic

family utility function. Since all family members agree on the maximand,

there Is no problems of enforcement.

     This discussion suggests the empirical difficulties if not impos—

sibLtIty of determining whether intergenerational transfers reflect altruism

or simply risk mitigating arrangements of essentially selfish individuals

in the absence of perfect insurance markets. Distinguishing between the
                                     32




selfish and altruistic models is fundamental to a number of major economic

questions including the impact of the social security system on national

saving and the effectiveness of fiscal policy.7



                           V.   Summary and Conclusions

     This paper has demonstrated that consumption and bequest sharing

arrangements within marriage and larger families can substitute to a large

extent for complete and fair annuity markets. In the absence of such public

markets, individualshave strong economic incentives to establish relation-

ships which provide risk mitigating opportunities. Within marriages and

families there is a degree of trust, information, and love which aids in

the enforcement of risk sharing agreements. Our calculations indicate

that pooling the risk of death can be an important economic incentive

for family formation; the paper also suggests that the current instability

in family arrangements may, to some extent, reflect recent growth in pension

and social security public annuities. The methodological approach of this

paper can be applied to the study of family insurance against other types

of risks. Of chief interest are those types of risks which anonymous public

markets handle very poorly. Disability insurance and insurance against

earnings losses are good examples.

     Our approach has been to compare family insurance with perfect insurance.

It would seem worthwhile to compare family insurance with public market in-

surance where the market insurance is subject to adverse selection and moral

hazard problems and family insurance is not. Realistic specification of the

degree of adverse selection and moral hazard may indicate that family insurance

dominates public market insurance even in small families.
                                      33




                                 FOOTNOTES

     We are grateful for financial support from the Foundation for Research

in Economic Education and the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any

opinions expressed are solely our own.

     *We wish to thank Finis Welch, Joe Ostroy, Bryan Ellickson, John McCall,

Steven Shavell, John Riley, Jon Skinner, and Gary Galles for helpful discussions.

     1The transaction costs we have in mind here include the time costs in-

volved in negotiating individual specific annuity contracts. As we demonstrate

in the text, each individual's optimal annuity contract depends on his rate of

time preference, his degree of risk aversion, and his survival probabilities.

Some individuals may prefer a constant annuity stream; others an increasing or

decreasing stream of annuity payments.

     2Yaari (1965) is the pioneering paper on this subject.


     3We use the low morality male and female probabilities reported on pages

17 and 19 of the Social Security Administration Actuarial Study No. 62.

     4                 .
         This fraction is calculated as    (l+m)1-l , where m is the fractional wealth
                                               1
                                          (l+a)'' — 1
equivalent gain from marriage, and a is the fractional wealth equivalent gain

from fair annuities.


     5This is probably a lower bound estimate for the contribution of the fourth

person; the marginal dollar gain can't fall at a constant 40 rcent rate for-

ever, because if it did the total dollar gains would, in the limit, not sum

up to46.9 percent, the full annuity gain of table 1. Presumably the marginal

dollar gain falls at a decreasing rate and 3.23 percent probably underestimates

the fourth person's marginal contribution.

     6We are grateful to Finis Welch for suggesting this line of argument.

     7See Barro (1974).
                                    34




                               References


 Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political

      Economy, 82, No. 6, Nov./Dec. 1974.

 Barro, Robert J., and Friedman, James W., "On Uncertain Lifetimes," Journal

      of Political Economy, 85, No. 4, Aug. 1977: 843—49.

Feldstein, Martin S., "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate

     Capital Accumulation," Journal of Political Economy, 82, No. 5, 1974.

Royden, H. L., Real Analysis, Second Edition, Toronto, Canada: MacMillan

     Co., 1968.

U.S. Dept. of H.E.W., Social Security Administration, United States Population

     Projection for OASDHI Cost Estimates, Actuarial Study, No. 62, Dec.

     1966.




a
APPENDIX A

Proof that Family Annuity Contracting Converges to a Complete Annuities Contract

       As we discuss in the text, the family budget constraint, assuming

identical family members, converges to the budget constraint that a single

individual would face in a complete annuities market. We now demonstrate

that as family size increases family annuity contracting leads to a consump-

tion path for each identical family member that converges to the consumption

path of an individual with perfect annuities. In addition, each family

member's expected utility converges to the expected utility with complete

annuities. The proof is based on Jensen's inequality and Fatou's lemma.

       For a family with N+l identical members the optimal consumption of each

member at time t—l, Cr1, is obtained as the solution to the following

recursive problem:


(Al)         V1(W1) =       max    u(C_i) +        E   V1(w

subject to:

             R     t—l
                         =wt—l ,          o<c    <wt—l
                                           — t—l —
and

             V(WT) =   u(WT)
                                   for all N > 1
       In   (Al) a is the time preference factor, and         is the probability

of survival through period t conditional upon surviving through t—l.

       Let (C1,WN) be the optimal solution to (Al). Since we assume strict
concavity of u, the solution is unique. Also let (C1,W) be the optimal

solution to an individual's choice problem in a complete annuities market.

This problem may be written recursively as:
                                                  A- 2




(A2)           Vt—1
                  (Wt—l            = max u(C       + aq V*(W
                               )
                                             t—l
                                                 )
                                                       t t t
subject to:
               W
               R
                   ÷   C
                           ti = W1,
                           —
                                                 0<   C1 < W1
and

               V(WT) = u(WT)

It can easily be shown that                   and V inherit the strict concavity, mono—

tonicity, and differentiability of u.

        We now state ourmain result:

                                                             =
Theorem: For all t = 0, ..., T,                  liin
                                                         t           t

                                                             =
                                                 urn
                                                         t           t

                                                 lim VN(W) = V*(Wt)                    for all W.
                                                      t

The proof of this theorem is arranged in a sequence of one remark and four

lemmas.
                                                      N N+l
        We define the random variable X = —----—, where i+l is the number of
                                          i+l
suLJvors out of N+l people when each has probability p of surviving.

                                           N+l
                               1 — (l—P)
Remark 1: E(XN) =
                               P       P


_____           E(XN) =        (N+l)   N      lN i
                                                 p (1p)N_i

                                  1 N ) — 1 ( N+l.),                             we   obtain
Tsing the. combinatorial identity1+i
                                   —( i  N+l l+i

           N+l N                                         +1 N+l
E(XN)                      (N+l)pl(1_p)N—]. =                    (       .)   pJ(1_p)N+l_J — (1p)N+1] =

                           N+1
           1   — (l—P)
                    P
                                          A3




We use recursive induction on t and Remark 1 to prove the following lemma.

Lemma 1 For all N >0, V(W) > V(W).

Proof: For t = T the condition clearly holds. We now prove the condition holds

for t—l, assuming it holds for t.

                          =           +
              V1(W_i)         u(C1)            V(W ) q(l_q)I_1
                          . u(C_1} +           V(W       q(l_q)N_1

                          =           +    E V(W XN) < u(C1) + ctqV(E W XN)
                              u(C1)
The first inequality follows from the induction assumption; the second follows

from Jensen's inequality. From Remark 1 we know:


              E       =       i— (1- (1_q)N+l) <__
                          W

So,

              V1(Wi) . u(C)           + aqV_)

                          < u(C) + cqV*(—_)      =


The last inequality holds because (C1,W) are maximizing values of (A2).

Corollary 1: l V(Wt) < V(W) for all t =           0,... ,T,   W > 0.

      The following lemma establishes a technical property of {VN}0.

Lemma 2: {v N constitutes an equi—continuous family of functions.


Proof: It is sufficient to show that -(W) is uniformly bounded by a


number ?(W) from above and by a number m(W) from below. W is held


      *
          For a discussion of this concept see Royden, p. 177.
                                           A4




constant throughout the proof; the proof is by induction. For t=T,                   M =   m•
                                                                                                =   u'.
To start the induction we note two facts:

             vNt-1
 (A3)
                              ,N
                     (Wi) —— u (C1)
             w_1
 (A4)        u' (C1) =    ctqR   E --(W                 q(l_q)N_1
(A4) is the first order condition for a maximum of (Al). (A3) is sometimes

referred to as an "envelope theorem" and may be obtained by noting that the

two sides are equal to the same Lagrange multiplier for the constrained

maximization problem (Al).
                                                          N
        Since u' is declining and            <
                                                 W1 :w >          u' (W1)

u'(W1) is, therefore, the uniformly lower bound forall N, mi(W1). To obtain an

upper bound we note that:



                   (W) j W) <Mt(w).
The first inequality holds because the derivative of aconcave function is

declining; the second follows from the induction assumption. These expres-

sions and (A4) imply:

            u'(C1) <aq. R).

   =
        Now, letC1 and W satisfy u'(C1) =

        _1 c_i)
             —           Clearly           -C        hence. u' (C1) <         ' tl'
                                                                              the constraint

                                                                                        and


u(at ) is        the uniform upper bound on tl, M1.                                  Q.E.D.
                                          t—l
Lemma 3: lim vN(w ) = V*(W
            N t t          tt    )   for   all 0 <   t <— T        t
                                                              and W .   We   again use induc—

tion    to prove this proposition. For t=T the condition holds trivially. Let

(Cj,W ) be        a subsequence of (Cr1,             converging to (Ci,W).
                                            A5




This subsequence exists because the sequence is bounded. To facilitate the

notation we drop the subscript k.

     The key step is to show that:



                   = V()
     We now specify the random variable                 as a function from the infinite

sample space ç =         {o,i}   x {o,i} x ...   to   the Reals by writing xN(w) =

where i is the number of l's in the first N coordinates of w}.

     From the Strong Law of Large Numbers, 1 XN(w) =
                                            N
                                                                     l/q t   a.e. in 2. The

next step is to define the random variable:

              No        = {vi(WN x(w)): where i is the number of l's in the first N

                                          coordinates of w}

     As N-', i-'a.e. By the induction assumption V(w) -V(w) for all


and also w xN()                   From equi—continuity, V(W xN(w)) -
                                                                              V(—).
         N
     So y (w) +
                          t                               *
                                      and Fatou's Lemma may be applied.
                        V(—)a.e.,

             Z              ) q(l_q)N_l =
Hence:
             urn
                   ,.   N()   > f V(—) =


This is true for every converging subsequence.
     Fi-om this lemma and Corollary 2 we have the result:

             i vi(wi) = Vi(Wi)                                                   Q.E.D.


Using the same technique, we conclude by proving:


     *
         Royden, p. 83.
                                     A6




          N
Lemma 4: Ct C          t =   0,.. .,T.
    Again let C1} denote a subsequence converging to             and let

(C1,Wi) be another feasible consumption plan.

    For all N, the optimality of (C1,W) implies



u(C1) +               V(          q(l_q)Nl      u(C_1) +        -o (W          qi(l_q)N_l

    By repeating the argument of Leimna 3 the two sides tend to:



         u(tl) +       v() >u(C1) + V()
    Since (C1,W) was arbitrarily chosen (Ci,W) solves the maxmimization
                                 =             since the solution to (12) is
problem (12). Hence                  (c1,W),
                                                                 N
unique because of strong concavity. But if every subsequence of Ct_l

converges to C1, it means that the entire sequence is converging as well.

                                                                        Q.E.D.
APPENDIX B

Computational Algorithm For the Two Family Members Dynamic Risk Pooling Problem



       This appendix indicates the algorithm used to solve the two family members

dynamic programming pro1em, copied here as B(l). The algorithm for

the case of three family members is similar to that for two members and is

available from the authors. While we consider the iso—elastic family of

utility functions, our algorithm can be applied to any homothetic utility

function.

(Bi)        v1(W1) = axjH(cI1)           + US(cS) + t/t—1         V(W)
                                >   0,   t=T,..


            +                              +
                                 H(w)          OaQ,1(l_P,1) S(W)]
subject to:

(B2)        Wt/R +       + C1 = W1
Again, the lettersH and S correspond to the two family members with respective

conditional survival probabilities i—1 and                   is joint family wealth,
                                                         W
and U is the weighting factor. Ht(W) and S(W) are the expected

utility levels for each family member if he alone survives to period t.

       Optimal values for C and C are found recursively starting at period T

and proceeding to period 0. We demonstrate that V(W) may be written in

the form:

                         W1-Y
(B3)        V(W) =   v          where V IS a constant. We also show that total

family consumption, C, is given by:
                                                      B2




                                        vl/T
                                         T
(B4)              c
                   t—l
                           =w
                                   v'' + (aKR)1'' R1

where          is another constant. Given total family consumption, consumption of

the two members is:


                                C1
( B5)
                   H
                  C1
                           —
                                       , c1
                                          s       —
                                                      c1 _______
We   demonstrate that Kt is a function of v and that v1 is a function of

Kt. Starting then at the initial value for Kt. K,ri, we can compute VT;

VT lfl turn gives Kr which, in turn gives VT1• Proceeding in this fashion

to period zero we compute the entire sequence of Vt'S and Kr's. These values

can then be used in (B4) to compute the ratio of consumption to wealth at each

period. These ratios together with an initial level of wealth plus (B2)

and (B5) generate the optimal consumption path. The homotheticity of the

utility function permits us to calculate recursively the shape of the con-

sumption path independently of the initial level of wealth.

        Starting with period T the (Bi) maximization problem is:

                               = max               + 0
               vT(WT)

                  s.t.          C+C<     WT,
                                                                 > 0.


Solving       this maximization and eomputingh indirect utility function for VT,
we have:

(B6)           VT(WT) = VT                    ,   where
                                                             VT
                                                                  =   (1+0).
                                                           1/1
                       —
                  T        T   iIy' T             T

        For   t   < T, (Bi) for the iso—elastic case is                 written as:
                                                            B3




                                                               1
                                                               H )1_Y
 (B8)                 V1(w1) =         max
                                                           -- (Cvi                  + 1_L (CS )l—Y
                                                                                             t-l




                                                                    i
                                       C_1 ,C1
                                           P

                                           Pt—i
                                               t ___
                                                               t        1
                                                                            t
                                                                                +
                                                                                     P
                                                                                    a___ (1 -
                                                                                     pt—i
                                                                                                   Q
                                                                                                       )h             t
                                                      P         Q
                                                                    t  —-— W1
                                   + Oa(l—
                                                     E'_1
                                                           )
                                                                _i t s1—y  t
                                                               w
                  s.t.             C1+CSt—1+—=w
                                            R  t—1

In going from (Bi) to (B8) we use the fact that Ht(Wt) = h
                                                                                                    w1
            wi_I
                     -                                     t                                       1-y      and

             =               for the iso—elastic utility function. The values for
S(W)              s
and s are implicitly defined as the bracketed term in equation (7) in the text

with j = 0 corresponding to time t and with each family member's survival

probabilities from time t substitutes for P..
                                                                            3
        It    is easy to see from (B8) that for given total family consumption,

 t            t
     and CS will always satisfy (B5). Hence we may                                    rewrite   (B8) as:

(B9)              Vi(wi) =                            _Lc'Y +
                                       —l           VT l—y t—l

                                                       P                                                          P
                                                                    t v+        P
                                                                                      (1 — ____)h + 0(1-
                                                                                                              P
                                                                                                                  t1 t-l
Denoting the term in brackets by Kt we now have:


(BlO)             V           =                         1 C1'+ct—--W1'I(
                   t—1(wt—l )                       VT l—y t—l  l—y t                    t
                                       w
                  s.t. ti          +           = w
                                       R            t—1

        Maximizing (310) and computing the indirect utility functions yields

(Bil)             v1 =       (VT
                                 1/y +
                                           (aRK
                                              t )l/I R1)
                                                l/y
                                               VT
(B12)             C         =w
                      t—l        t—l 1/I
                                    VT + (aKtRY' R1
