                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CAN PRODUCTIVE CAPACITY DIFFERENTIALS
        REALLY EXPLAIN THE EARNINGS DIFFERENTIALS
      ASSOCIATED WITH DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS?
                 THE CASE OF EXPERIENCE

                     James L. Medoff

                  Katharine G. Abraham

                  Working Paper No. 363




            NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                         June 1979




We are grateful to Gary Chamberlain and Zvi Griliches for
their economic advice and to Martin Van Denburgh for his
care and efficiency in doing the programming required for
this study. The project has been supported by the NBER
under its program for research on Labor Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                        NBER Working Paper 363
                                                                     June 1979



         Can Productive Capacity Differentials Really Explain
        the Earnings Differentials Associated with Demographic
              Characteristics?      The Case of Experience


                                  ABSTRACT



      This study uses computerized personnel microdata on the white male

managerial and professional employees in a major u.S. corporation to address

the following question:   Can the additional earnings which are associated

with more labor market experience at a point in time really be explained

by higher productivity at the same point in time?     Our answer to this

question, based on both cross-sectional and longitudinal information, is

that performance plays a substantially smaller role in explaining cross-

sectional experience-earnings differentials or earnings growth than is

claimed by those who have adopted the human capital explanation of the

experience-earnings profile.     Since our response to the question under

analysis depends critically on our having assumed that the performance

ratingswhich supervisors give (individually or collectively) to their

white male managerial and professional subordinates adequately reflect the

subordinates' relative productivity in the year of assessment, we present

a great deal of evidence which very strongly supports this assumption.




                                               Professor James L. Medoff
                                               Katharine G. Abraham
                                               National Bureau of Economic Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138
                                                (617) 868-3914
     The human capital explanation of the experience-earnings profile

has dominated most economists' thinking about why workers' relative

earnings increase with labor market experience.        This theory has at its

heart the assumption that the observed growth in relative earnings reflects

growth in relative productivity, attributable to individuals' investment

in on-the-job training.     Since there are numerous     other plausible

explanations of why relative earnings grow with time on the job in which

relative productivity growth plays virtually no role, the superiority

of the human capital model over these alternatives must be established

by demonstrating that when relative earnings are growing with labor

market   experienc~ relative   performance is growing as well.    Despite the

widespread acceptance of the human capital model of the experience-earnings

profile and the straightforward nature of the experiment required to

empirically establish its superiority over alternative models in which

factors other than productivity growth determine earnings growth, no one
has ever provided evidence which demonstrates that experience-earnings

differentials can in fact be explained by experience-productivity differ-

entials.    Thus, as is not atypical in economics, acceptance of the human

capital theory of why relative earnings grow with experience is based

solely on a priori logic.

     The first experiments designed and conducted to ascertain the validity

of the human capital interpretation of experience-earnings differentials are

discussed in Medoff and Medoff and Abraham.      These studies analyzed the

earnings and rated performance of white male managerial and professional

employees in three major U.S. corporations.      They found that, among

employees doing comparable tasks, while greater experience typically was
                                                                  2



associated with substantially greater relative earnings it generally

was associated with no greater or lesser relative rated performance.       Hence

the results of this experimentation lend no support to the human capital

model of productivity-augmenting   on-the-job training or to any other theory

which attempts to explain experience-earnings differentials in terms of
                                         1
experience-productivity differentials.

     As would be hoped, the experimental design employed in our earlier

studies has elicited a fair amount of criticism.    The two most fundamental

questions raised by our critics are:     Do, as we assumed, the performance

ratings given subordinates by their supervisors each year adequately reflect

differences in the subordinates' current relative productivity?     And, would our

conclusions have been very different if our analysis were based on

longitudinal data as opposed to the cross-sectional data employed?

     The purpose of this study is to use a very rich body of personnel

data from a fourth company (hereafter referred to as Company C) to address these

two queries.   In Section I, we discuss the nature of our experimental

design in greater detail, summarize the results presented in the two previous

pieces, and outline some potential criticisms of our methodology.     We

describe the data drawn from Company CiS computerized data file and their

transformation for use in this analysis in Section II.    The Company

C data are employed in Section III both to provide additional evidence

which supports our use of performance ratings as an index of relative

productivity and to demonstrate that our previous findings were not

artifacts produced by cross-sectional data sets.    The final section

restates our major conclusion that, at least in the case of experience,

a very substantial fraction of observed earnings differentials does

not really reflect productivity differentials and discusses how we
                                                                 3



might begin developing an empirically-based explanation of what experience-

earnings differentials are really about.



I.   The Experiment

      In this section we first briefly layout the human capital explanation

of the upward-sloping experience-earnings profile.   We then discuss the

design of the experiment used to test the explanation's validity and summarize

the results of our earlier experimentation.    Finally we consider

criticisms of the experiment, some of which were anticipated and dealt

with in Medoff and in Medoff and Abraham and some of which will be addressed

for the first time in Section III.


The Belief to Be Tested

      The human capital model of the age-earnings profile posits that the

upward sloping segments of an experience-earnings profile reflect    on-

the-job training, which causes the corresponding segments of an underlying
                                                 2
experience-productivity profile to slope upwards. There are, however,

other potential explanations of the relationship between experience and

earnings in which productivity growth plays a very minor, if any, role.

For instance, Mincer (p. 80) recognizes    the possibility that the positive

association between experience and earnings might only "reflect the prevalence

of institutional arrangements such as seniority provisions in employment

practices."   He then makes an observation that implicitly describes the

nature of a seemingly good experiment for testing the human capital belief:

"Such practices, however, do not contradict the productivity-augmenting

hypothesis, unless it can be shown that growth of earnings under seniority
                                                           3
provisions is largely independent of productivity growth."

      Thus the human capital interpretation of the experience-earnings

profile is distinguished from other interpretations by the prediction:
                                                                     4



earnings growth reflects productivity growth.      Therefore it is possible

to falsify the theory by demonstrating that, over much of an employee's

work life, the corresponding pieces of experience-earnings and experience-

productivity profiles do not have the same sign.


Experimental Design

      The primary problem in designing an experiment which could provide

evidence inconsistent with the human capital hypothesis is the measurement

of an individual's productivity.      In our two earlier studies, this problem

was dealt with byassuming that the annual job performance ratings done by

immediate supervisors are valid indicators of the relative productivity in

the year covered by the appraisal of white male managerial and professional

employees engaged in comparable work (i.e., that an employee rated ahead of

X percent of his peers was, in the year of the rating, more productive than

X percent).     Under this assumption, it was possible to compare, for a given

year, the relative earnings and relative productivity of employees in

similar jobs.     In particular, we could assess whether at a stated point in

time the typical senior worker in a job received higher pay than a comparable jcunior

worker in a similar job because the senior worker had higher productivity.

     Our first experimental design employed standard semilog earnings

functions to address the following three questions:      1.   By how much does

the pay of more experienced managers and professionals exceed that of

otherwise comparable but less experienced managers and professionals?

2.   Does a substantial part of the return to experience occur within grade

levels, where the availability of performance ratings permits inference

regarding the relative current productivity of more and less experienced managers

and professionals?     3.   Within grade levels, can the higher earnings of more

experienced managers and professionals be explained by their current performance?

      To answer the first question, we fit the following equation for each
                                                                           5


company's white male managers and professionals:

     1)   In(y) = a +   SX +   £,

with y equal to annual salary rate, the vector X capturing educational

attainment, pre-company experience and company service, a and        S representing
parameters to be estimated and      £   representing the equation error.

The estimated coefficients implied in each case that, at the appropriate

mean of the relevant experience variable, an additional year of pre-company

experience was associated with approximately one half of 1 percent higher

earnings and an additional year of company service with approximately 1

percent higher earnings.

     Next, regressions similar to equation 1 but with grade level dummies

added on the right hand side were estimated for each of the three white

male managerial and professional samples.         The results from this second

set of equations indicate that approximately 40 percent of the implied

return at the mean to an additional year of either pre-company experience

or company service occurred within grade level.

      The finding that within-grade-level experience-related earnings

 differentials are a substantial fraction of total experience-related

 earnings differentials for white male managers and professionals at the

 three companies studied was very important because the available information

 on employee performance only permitted inference regarding the relative

 productivity of managers and professionals in the same grade.         In

 each of the data sets employed, an overall performance rating awarded by

 a superior '7as recorded for all managers and professionals who had been

 on the job for at least four to six months.         Superiors were expected to

 base their ratings of each subordinate on the extent to which during the

 year of appraisal that subordinate fulfilled the requirements of his or her
                                                                      6


job.   Since companies group their managerial and professional jobs into

grade levels on the basis of the difficulty and importance of each job,

it seemed reasonable to assume that within a grade level white male

managers and professionals with high       ratings were more productive in

the year covered by the rating than were white male managers and pro-

fessionals with lower ratings.     However, no clear inference regarding

relative productivities could be drawn from the performance ratings of

persons in different grade levels.

       One approach to   ascertainin~   whether performance mediated the

documented link between labor force experience and higher within-grade

earnings among white male managers and professionals was to add

performance rating dummies to the variables included on the right hand

side of the second set of semilog earnings function regressions (the

set with grade level dummies included).        If more experienced people

received higher within-grade salaries in a year even in part because they were

more productive in that year, the introduction of performance rating dummies as

controls for relative within-grade productivity should have moved the

 estimated within-grade return to experience towards zero.       In no case did

 this occur.

       Another experimental design for examining the same set

of interrelationships entailed multinomial logit estimation of the

 effect of labor force experience (and other personal characteristics)

 on the probability of a white male manager or professional being at the

 top, in the middle or at the bottom of the salary distribution for his

 grade level and on the probability of a white male manager or professional

 being at the top, in the middle or at the bottom of the performance

 distribution for   his grade level.      The results of the multinomial logit

 estimation implied in all cases that while an additional year of either
                                                                   7


pre-company experience or company service substantially and significantly

reduced the probability of a sample member with mean characteristics being

at the bottom of the relevant within-grade salary distribution, the same

year of either pre-company experience or company service increased or did

not affect the probability of a sample member with mean characteristics

being at the bottom of the relevant within-grade performance distribution.

     Thus, results from three companies support the conclusion that at

least a substantial fraction of the higherintrafirm earnings associated

at a given point in time with additional labor force experience among

managers and professionals is unrelated to productivity at that same point

in time.    Comparable cross-sectional results presented in Section III

below based on data from the fourth company we have called Company C

reinforce this basic conclusion.


Criticisms and Responses

     One criticism of the basic cross-sectional result might start out

by noting that although four to six performance ratings were available to

supervisors at each of the three companies originally studied, in fact

at each of these enterprises most people received one of only two ratings so

that in effect only one cut in each within-grade performance distribution

was made.     Thus, this line of argument might continue, although more

experienced employees were no more likely to be above than below the one

cut in the relevant performance distribution, within each of the two parts

of the performance distribution more experienced employees might be

uniformly more productive than otherwise comparable less experienced

 employees.    If such were the case, while introduction of crude performance

 rating dummies into the semilog earnings function which controlled for grade level

 would not produce any movement of the estimated within-grade return to
                                                                      8

expe~ience   towards zero, introduction of finer performance measures would

lead to a substantial reduction in the estimated return to experience.

Better performance measures contained in the Company C data set permit the

exploration of this possibility.   As discussed further in Section II of

this study, supervisors at Company C were required to follow a forced

distribution in awarding one of the six (beginning in 1976) or nine (prior to 1976)

possible ratings to each of their subordinates so that bunching of ratings

was not a problem.   In addition, each employee was ranked annually by a

group of supervisors against a group of his colleagues, providing an even

more precise measure of relative performance.   Results reported in Section III

below demonstrate that the use of these finer performance variables strengthens
the basic conclusion that, within grade levels at a given point in time,

higher earnings of more experienced white male managers and professionals

are unrelated to productivity.

    Another approach to criticizing our basic finding might be to assert

that performance ratings are too flawed to offer any reliable information
                                                             4
about the relative productivity of workers within a grade.       One commonly

cited problem with performance ratings is that most supervisors tend to be

overly lenient; hence, it is argued, ratings are inflated.       This problem

is irrelevant for present purposes provided that leniency in rating does

not lead to a distortion of the relative position of employees.       Further,

the performance measures available in the data set explored in this study

appear to be much less susceptible to charges of inflation than those

available in the original three data sets; the Company C ratings follow

a forced distribution and rankings are inherently immune to inflation.

     Another potential problem with performance ratings is that different

supervisors might employ divergent standards of evaluation.       Even if

divergences in individual supervisors' rating standards were typically
                                                                     9

substantial (available evidence suggests they may typically be small)

this source of variation in employee's rated performance could not explain

our results unless employees with different observed characteristics were
                                                                            5
systematically paired with supervisors applying different sets of standards. ,6

We know of no evidence which indicates that a pairing of this nature would

be other than a very rare event.
     Furthermore, variation in the standards applied in awarding the

Company C ratings and rankings should be minimal.   Since (as stated above)

neither performance measure can be seriously inflated, variation in

leniency on the part of supervisors should not be a significant source

of variation in rating standards.   The fact that both the ratings and

the rankings reflect a consensus reached by a group of supervisors rather

than just one person's opinion also argues against there being significant

variation in rating standards.

     It is also possible that employee's personal characteristics

(race, sex, age, time with company) might influence supervisors' performance

assessments.   We see no reason to conclude a priori and have seen no

evidence suggesting that supervisors discriminate against older or more

experienced employees in giving out performance ratings.   In fact, available

evidence suggests that if there is any experience-related distortion in

performance ratings, it works in the direction of overstating the more

experienced person's true relative performance in the year of appraisal.?

     Another possibility is that the rated performance of a group of more

experienced employees would most likely be an understatement of their true

relative productivity if their supervisor had greater expectations for them

as opposed to their less experienced grade-level compatriots and systematically

gave them more difficult assignments.   It seems unlikely a priori       that

supervisors will expect more of and give more difficult tasks to individuals
                                                                   10

in a given grade level with greater than average experience, since this

group of "stayers" can be expected to be less able.    Evidence supporting

this claim was unearthed in a study (supported by the Harvard Business School)

of 2,500 engineers and managers at six technology-based companies done by

Dalton and Thompson.    Their findings indicate a nontrivial (in absolute

value) negative relationship between supervisors' assessment of the com-

plexity of the tasks a subordinate engineer was typically asked to perform

and the subordinate's age.    Two reasons why older engineers might be asked

to perform less complex tasks than younger engineers are, first, that the

typical older engineer is most likely less able than the typical younger

engineer since the more able members in any cohort of engineers tend to

be promoted to supervisory positions as they become older and, second, that

the skills possessed by the typical older engineer are likely to be some-

what obsolete.    Similarly, one would expect that older managers in any

grade level might be asked to perform less complex tasks than otherwise

comparable younger managers in the same grade level because older managers

in any grade level are probably less able than younger managers in the same-

grade level having the same amount of education and because the skills of

older managers are probably somewhat obsolete.
     Some readers of our earlier studies have asserted that we should seek

a "hard" or "objective" measure of the present value of the marginal revenue

product of each employee's current actions since it would clearly dominate

our "soft" or "subjective" performance rating or ranking.    For this statement

to be correct, two thing would have to be true.   First, the dimensions of

an employee's current true value to his or her firm would have to be

quantifiable.    Second, either there would have to be only one relevant

dimension in assessing the employee's true worth or the researcher would

have to know the proper set of weights or shadow prices to attach to

each relevant dimension.
                                                                      11


      Unfortunately, for the vast majority of occupations in an advanced

industrial society these two prerequisites will not hold.    To see the nature

of the problem, consider the job of a secretary.    No one quantifiable measure

(e.g., words typed per hour, phone calls answered per hour, etc.) would

adequately capture a secretary's true value to his or her employer.    Moreover,

it is unlikely that all of the relevant dimensions of a secretary's value

marginal product are quantifiable.   Furthermore, even if all of the relevant

factors could be quantified, we see little reason to believe that any set

of aggregation weights chosen by a researcher for -creating a single productivity

measure based on the various relevant factors would be better than those

implicitly chosen by the secretary's supervisor in awarding a performance

rating or ranking.   Even for blue-collar jobs in which workers are paid

by the piece, deriving a satisfactory "hard" or "objective" measure of

current productivity is likely to be difficult.    For instance, one tire

assembler might assemble, more tires than another tire assembler without

having any greater true current productivity by turning out a relatively

large number of flawed tires (which sneak by inspectors), being relatively

remiss in maintaining the machinery he or she uses, being relatively

wasteful of materials, or being less willing to assist his or her compatriots

than the typical assembler acting in a way consistent with long run profit
   ..
maxJ.mJ.zat i on.8

      In the case of managerial and professional jobs, the problems of

deriving a "hard" or "objective" measure of relative value to the firm are

particularly complex.   While the bottom line might at first blush appear to be

the current output to input ratio in the unit under an employee's supervision,

it is not at all obvious that this measure would dominate the performance

ratings and rankings employed in our analysis.     This is because the current

output to input ratio can most likely be increased by utilizing capital

and subordinate labor in ways clearly inconsistent with long-run profit
                                                                     12

maximization.   For this reason, most companies tell supervisors to consider

factors other than short-run unit success in doing their assessments of

subordinates' worth.     For instance, at the airline analyzed in Medoff an

"Overall Evaluation" was to be based on "Subordinate Coaching" and "Teamwork"

in addition to "Unit Achievement," and currently at Company C the "Overall

Appraisal" is to be based on 20 factors in addition to "Quantity of Work", those

factors including "Quality of Work", "Resource Utilization", "Planning Effective-

ness", "Developing People", "Security Sensitivity", and "Safety Consciousness".

It seems most unlikely that a researcher could attach a better set of weights

to the various factors determining a manager or professional's value to his

company (e.g., a weight of one for "Unit Achievement" or "Quantity of

Work" and a weight of zero for all other factors) than those implicitly

assigned by the supervisors of jobs in rating or ranking the performance

of their subordinates.     In sum, it is not at all obvious that researchers

can derive "hard" or "objective" indexes of relative true productive

value which will in fact dominate the index based on performance ratings

and rankings we used.

     Substantiation of the validity of managerial and professional performance

ratings can be sought by assuming that, holding other personal characteristics

constant, firms should be more willing to promote and give larger raises to

more productive managers and professionals, and subsequently interpreting

evidence that managers and professionals with higher performance ratings are

significantly more likely to be promoted and receive larger raises as

supportive of the proposition that there must be a significant positive corre-

lation between measured performance and true relative productivity.       Results

reported in the original Medoff and Medoff and Abraham studies demonstrate a

strong positive partial correlation (after controlling for education, experience,

grade level, and, in the salary increase equations, In(annual salary»

both between higher performance ratings and promotion in subsequent years
                                                                     13


and between higher performance ratings and percentage salary increases in

subsequent years.   Replication of these promotion and percentage salary

increase experiments using the Company C data yields the same conclusions;

the results are reported in Section III.

     While it is reasonable that performance ratings would be one

piece of information utilized by firms in making promotion decisions, there

would be cause for concern if performance ratings did not reflect solely

a manager or professional's productivity in his current job but also his

supervisor's assessment of his potential for advancement within the company.

Since, all else equal, more experienced (older) managers and professionals

are typically less likely to be promoted out of any given grade level than

less experienced (younger) managers and professionals and hence apt to

be perceived as having limited potential for future advancement, to the

extent that performance ratings are affected by supervisors' assessments

of individuals' future potential, more experienced workers might typically

receive lower performance ratings than warranted simply on the basis of
                              9
their current productivity.

     The institutional basis for this argument is weak insofar as at all four

companies whose data have been analyzed the instructions to supervisors

preparing ratings clearly ask for an assessment of how well each employee

ia ful=illing the requirer1cnts of his or her current job, not for a

forecast of the employee's productivity profile over his or her work life.

At the airline studied in Medoff, the "Reviewer's Workbook" gave supervisors

the following instruction concerning the time period covered by their

appraisals:   "Considering the specific performance evaluations on the

preceding pages, state below your overall evaluation of the manager's

performance over the past 12 months" [our italics].   At Company A

(discussed in Medoff and Abraham) supervisors are asked to make entries on
                                                                       14

a performance review worksheet "during the year for the purpose of providing

supporting information for the annual employee assessment" [our italics];

the intent is clearly that each employee's annual performance rating should

reflect his or her performance during the appraisal year.     At Company B (also

discussed     in Medoff and Abraham) the "Supervisor's Guide for Performance

Review and Development Planning" states that "[r]eviews should be based

on the employee's performance in his present position and only for the

period [typically one year] since his last review" [our italics].     At

Company C, as will be discussed below, the instructions to raters tell

them that "[e]ach employee should be rated on his current performance
and contributions based on requirements of his present assignment" and

that "career potential and promotability should not enter into ratings

of an individual's performance" [our italics].

     It should also be pointed out that the Dalton and Thompson study of

age-earnings and age-performance differentials among engineers at six

companies, which provided evidence consistent with our findings, derived

performance rankingsby asking supervisors to assess the "contribution
made to the company during the past· year" [our italics] by their subordinates.

The Dalton and Thompson analysis was not based on ratings and rankings done

under companies' actual appraisal programs which would provide inputs into

salary growth or promotion decisions.     Finally, it should be noted that at

many companies, including two of the four whose data we have analyzed, each

employee's promotability is formally assessed separately from his performance; at

Company C, for example, each employee's supervisor annually records the highest

grade level within the company which he or she believes the employee is likely to

attain.     The results of statistical analysis presented in Section III imp1 v

that the Company C performance ratings and the Company C potential measures

really do capture different things; while performance ratings do very much

better than potential ratings in explaining current salary, potential ratings
                                                                   15



strongly dominate in predicting promotions.

     Some critics have accepted our assumption that performance ratings

adequately capture current relative productivity but have argued that

our basic finding is an artifact of the cross-sectional data employed

and would not be observed with longitudinal data.    One possible story

about why this might be true assumes that at each of the companies studied

there had been a secular decrease in the share of the costs of firm

specific on-the-job training borne by employees.     It would then be possible

(as is shown more formally in Section III) for longer service employees

to earn more and perform less well than shorter service employees without

contradicting the tenets of human capital theory.    Adequate response to

this line of argument requires the presentation of longitudinal evidence

showing that at least some individuals have increasing. relative earnings

but decreasing relative productivity over time.     Perhaps the most

important result reported in this study is the finding that at Company C

the relative within-grade earnings position of white male managers

and professionals remaining in the same grade level over a period of

years improves significantly and substantially with the passage of

time while the relative within-grade performance position of those

same managers and professionals deteriorates over the same time period.

Section III discusses this finding in detail.
                                                                   16



II.   The Company Personnel File

      All of the results reported in the next section of this paper are

based on information extracted from a computerized personnel file made

available to us by a large   u.s.   manufacturing corporation which we have

called Company C.   The raw Company C data file consisted of five annual

segments, one for each year from 1973 through 1977, each segment

containing a record for every exempt employee who lvas "active" with the

company at any time during the given year.      Each annual employee record

included information on the employee's education, length of company service,

date of birth, physical work location, current job grade, date of entry

into current job grade, current salary and recent salary increases; in addition,

it included two separate assessments of the employee's performance and an
assessment of the employee's potential for advancement within the company

prepared during the summer of the previous year (so that, for example, the

1973 records contained performance assessments and potential assessments

prepared during the summer of 1972).      Under the assumptions that all

changes in grade level during 1973 were promotions from one grade level to

the next higher grade level, that no persons changed grade level more than

once during 1973, that the salary increase information on the 1973

records captured all salary changes made during 1973, and that no employee

changed educational status or physical work location during 1973, a

complete fix on each employee's year-end status (including demographic

information, grade level, salary and evaluations of performance and

potential received during the year) was constructed for each year from

1972 through 1976; similar data except for the performance and potential
                                        10
evaluations were available for 1977.

      One further adjustment was needed to prepare the year-end data for
                                                                  17


analysis.    Because the performance and potential evaluations done

each year were completed during the summer while each employee's grade

level was recorded as of year end, the grade levels originally present

on the annual employee records corresponded imperfectly to the grade levels

the employees were in at the time of their annual performance and .potentia1

reviews.    To correct for this shortcoming in the data, it was assumed that

employees with a grade change date later than June 30 of the relevant

year had been evaluated prior to changing grade level.    For these

employees, the grade level entered on the relevant annual record was

reduced by one to the next lower grade level.    Whenever subsequent

reference is made to an employee's grade level, it is this adjusted grade
                          11
level which is indicated.

     The populations for each year 1972 through 1976 on which all of the

subsequently discussed data transformations were based consisted of all

domestically based white males "active" with full time exempt status as

of the relevant year end and with (adjusted) grade level in the Company C

managerial and professional range for whom complete performance and year
                                                          12
end salary information for the relevant year was available. Those

included in the samples used for the experiments reported in Section III had

in addition to meet more restrictive information availability requirements

as dictated by each particular experiment.

     The schooling information on the Company C file was used to categorize

population members in each of the years 1972 through 1976 by highest level

of educational attainment:    less than high school, high school diploma,

bachelors degree, masters degree or doctorate.    Pre-company experience

variables were computed to equal age as of each year end minus schooling

minus company service minus five.    For this purpose, it was assumed that
                                                                    18


non-high school graduates had spent 10 years in school, high school

graduates 13 years, college graduates 16 years, masters degree holders

18 years and Ph.D.' s 21 years.   Dummy variables were created which placed

each Company C physical work location in one of four regions:    Northeast,
                             13
North Central, South or West~


Performance Rating and Ranking

     At Company C, supervisors formally assess the performance of each

managerial or professional employee once a year.     Two separate performance

measures are recorded:     an overall performance rating and a ranking of

 each employee relative to others in an appropriate comparison group.

      Performance ratings are prepared initially by each employee's
immediate supervisor.    The rating form in use during the period under

analysis gave supervisors the following instructions:


     Each employee should be rated on current performance and contributions
     based on requirements of his present assignment.   An employee should
     be measured both as to his contributions in terms of the standards
     of his job and against others performing similar work at similar
     levels. Career potential and promotability should not enter into
     ratings of an individual's performance.

 Prior to 1976, the overall rating scale comprised nine categories;

 beginning in 1976, the number of appraisal categories was cut to six

 by merging the top two categories and merging the bottom three categories

 from the old rating scale.

      In addition to rating the performance of each subordinate, supervisors

 at Company C are required to rank each employee relative to a group of

 his peers.   Management provides each supervisor in a department or other
                                                                   19



appropriate organizational unit with a list of employees doing reasonably

comparable levels of work~4The supervisor is first told to strike off

the list employees "whose work you do not know well" or "whose work in your

opinion is so different from most of the others that you do not think

he (or she) can be compared with them" and then instructed to rank the

remaining people.    The ranking is done by first picking the best employee

on the list, then picking the worst employee on the    list, next designating

the best employee of those remaining on the list, and then designating the worst

employee of those remaining on the list, and so on until all of the

employees have been ranked.    The same criteria used in assigning the

performance ratings underlie the rankings.   That is, employees

are ranked on the basis of how well each is meeting the requirements of

his or her own particular assignment compared to how well others are

meeting the requirements of their assignments.    Rank group   lists are

designed to be as large as practicable, with as many supervisors as

possible serving as rankers for each group consistent with their having

adequate knowledge of the employees being ranked.

     After all of the supervisors at a given level of the corporate

hierarchy have assigned performance ratings to their subordinates and

ranked those employees whose work they are qualified to assess, the rating

and ranking forms are reviewed by managers at the next level of the

corporate hierarchy.    Any major disparities among rankers are reconciled

and a consensus is reached regarding each employee's position in his or

her ranking group.

     Finally, the performance ratings made by the immediate supervisors

may be modified so that they are consistent with the consensus rankings

and so that the overall distribution of ratings within the ranking

group is reasonably consistent with the company's expected performance
                                                                  20



distribution.   In 1976, for example, the enunciated goal was that no

more than 10 percent of all employees rated should receive the highest

possible rating, approximately 25 percent should receive each of the next

three ratings and approximately 15 percent should receive one or the

other of the bottom ratings.   In all years, the actual distribution of

ratings ultimately given closely matched the desired distribution.      In 1976,

to continue our example, the actual proportions of those included in our

population versus the desired proportions of employees receiving each rating were

(from top to bottom) as follows:    9 percent versus 10 percent; 25 percent

versus 25 percent; 26 percent versus 25 percent; 25 percent versus 25

percent; and (for the bottom two rating categories combined) 15 percent

versus 15 percent.

     As noted above, both performance rating and ranking are designed

to measure an employee's performance relative to "the total requirements

and standards of the job."     According to a manual describing their

salary system which we received from Company C:

     Every management and professional position at [the Company]
     is assigned to a classification level which is determined
     by an evaluation of the job and a measurement of the value
     of that job relative to other jobs in the Company. Thus
     positions of similar value are placed in the same classification
     level.

Given the way jobs are assigned to grade levels at Company C, we felt

comfortable assuming that within a given grade level those with high

performance ratings or high rankings were more productive than those

with low performance ratings or low rankings.

     For some experiments, sets of dummy variables were constructed

from the recorded performance ratings.    For other experiments, the

recorded performance ratings were transformed into variables reflecting

percentile position in the relevant within-grade performance distribution.
                                                                  21



One rating percentile variable (P) was calculated based on the 1976

population using the formula P = F/2 for persons with any of the bottom

three performance ratings in 1976 and the formula P = F + (1 - F)/2

for persons with any of the top three performance ratings in 1974 where

F represents the proportion of 1976 population members in the relevant

grade level who were given anyone of the bottom three performance

ratings in 1976.   Five more refined rating percentile variables (p')

were calculated, one set for each of the years 1972 through 1976, using the

formula P' = F(i-l) + [F(i) - F(i-l)]/2,where F(i-l) represents the

fraction of the relevant year's population members in the appropriate

grade level with a rating in the given year of i-lor below; F(i)

represents the fraction of the same group with a rating in the given year

of i or below; and i represents the rating received in the given year by the

individual for whom P' is being calculated, with i having possible values

of one (worst) through nine (best) in 1972 through 1975 and possible

values of one (worst) through six (best) in 1976.

    The raw ranking information for each of the years 1972

through 1976 was transformed into continuous ranking percentile

variables (R) using the formula R=(N-Q+l/2)/N,where Q represents the

individual's rank within the relevant comparison group in the given year

and N represents the number of people against whom the individual was

ranked in the given year.   Ranking percentile variables with a limited

number of possible values (R')     were created for each of the years

1972 through 1976 for use in those experiments where both a ranking variable

and an analagous salary variable were required.     Where R was between zero

and .10, R' was set equal to .05; where R was between .10 and .20, R'

was set equal to .15; and so on.
                                                                  22



Salary Variables

     A salary variable (SP) analagous to the 1976 two category (low or

high) rating percentile variable (and also based on the 1976 population)

was constructed by cutting each year-end within-grade salary distribution

at the cumulative frequency corresponding to the proportion of 1976

population members in the relevant grade level with anyone of the bottom

three ratings, then setting SP=F/2 for those individuals with salaries

at the end of 1976 below the cut and setting SP=F+(1-F)/2 for those individuals

with salaries at the end of 1976 above the cut, where F again represents

the proportion of 1976 population members in the relevant grade level with

anyone of the bottom three performance ratings in 1976.

     Five salary variables (SP') analagous to each of the more refined

rating percentile variables (and also based on the 1972 through 1976

populations) were constructed by cutting each year-end within-grade

salary distribution at the cumulative frequences corresponding to the

proportions of the relevant year's population members in the appropriate

grade level with the given rating or a worse rating in the given year,

then, dependfng on the individual's year-end salary and grade level in the

relevant year, setting SP'=F(i-1)+[F(i)-F(i-1)]/2,where F(i) represents

the cumulative proportion of the relevant year's population members in

the appropriate grade level with year-end salaries at or below the cut

closest above the individual's salary and F(i-1) represents the cumulative

proportion of the same group with year-end salaries at or below the cut

closest below the individual's salary.

     :or comparability with thc R' ranking j"'crccnti1c variah1cG. a Gct

of salary variables (SR') (also based on the 1972 through 1976 populations)

were calculated.   To do this, each relevant year-end within-grade salary
                                                                   23


distribution was divided into dec11es; individuals with salaries

at the end of the relevant year in the first decile were given a percentile

score SR' equal to .05, individuals with salaries at the end of the

relevant year in the second decile were given a percentile score SR'

equal to .15, etcetera.

     To summarize, for each individual for whom the requisite raw rating,

raw ranking and raw year-end annual dollar salary figures were available,

the following transformed variables were created:   1. Sets of performance

rating dummies; 2. A two category (low or high) 1976 rating percentile

variable and an analagous two category 1976 salary percentile variable;

3. A more refined rating percentile variable and an analagous salary

percentile variable for each year 1972 through 1976; 4. A continuous ranking

percentile variable for each year 1972 through 1976; and 5. A ranking

decile variable and an analagous salary decile variable for each year

1972 through 1976.

Rated Potential

     In addition to evaluating the current performance of each employee

and awarding performance ratings and rankings, supervisors at Company C

were required to perform an annual assessment of each employee's potential

for advancement within the Company.   Based on consideration of such factors

as quality of performance, capacity to learn, judgement and motivation,

supervisors were first asked to give one or more examples of the highest

level of job which each employee had the potential ability to achieve.

Next, supervisors were requested to consider whether such factors as an

employee's preference for a particular type of work or an employee's

health would hold the employee back, have no effect, or help the employee

achieve full potential.   Finally, having considered both of the above sets
                                                                 24

of factors, supervisors were asked to record the grade of the highest level

of job which each employee could realistically be expected to achieve during

the course of his career.
                                                                        25



III.    Basic Results and Responses to Criticisms

       In analyzing the Company C personnel data, our first question was,

controlling for level of educational attainment and region, how large are the

earnings differentials between managers and professionals with different

amounts of labor force experience?    The first regression in Table 1

indicates that at the mean of the relevant variables, an additional year

of pre-company experience is associated with a small but significant positive

increment to earnings and an additional year of company service is associated

with somewhat more than a 1 percent increment to earnings.      The regression

coefficients imply that, all else equal, a person with one standard

deviation more than the mean number of years of pre-company experience

would earn 3 percent more than a person with no pre-company experience

and that a person with one standard deviation more than the mean number

of years of company service would earn 29 percent more than a person with

one standard deviation less.

       Next we asked whether a substantial fraction of the higher earnings

associated with additional labor force experience occurred within, grade

leveJs rather than as a result of more experienced managers and professionals

holding jobs in grade levels with higher than   averag~   salaries.    To answer

this question, we added grade level dummies to the controls present in

the first model to get model 2 and calculated the fraction of the total

return to experience they captured.    The results of this procedure imply that

all of the return at the mean to an additional year of pre-conpany experience

occurs within grade level and that 42 percent of the return at the mean

to an additional year of company service occurs within grade;         a person

with one standard deviation more than the mean number of years of pre-

company experience would earn 4 percent more than an otherwise comparable
                                                                                     26
           Table 1:   Influence of Education, Experience and Performance

                      on Managerial and Professional Earnings/~

           Dependent Variable:    In (Annual Salary as of December 1976/£

                                       (N    = 8,238)


                             Mean
                            [S .D. ]          (1)          (2)      (3)       (4)           (5)

Less than High School        .021           -.281       -.056     -.066     -.069         -.070
  Diploma (yes = 1)         [.143]          (.017)      (.006)    ( .006)   (.006)        ( .006)

High School Diploma          .343           -.204       -.015'    -.025     -.030         -.030
  (yes = 1)                 [.475]          (.006)      (.002)    (.002)    (.002)        (.002)

Masters Degree               .145             .104       .025       .025     .026          .025
 (yes = 1)                  [.352 ]         ( .007)     (.003)    ( .003)   (.002)        (.002)

Doctorate (yes    = 1)       .043            .238        .052      .055      .057        .056
                            [.203 ]         (.012)      (.004)    (.004)    (.004)    . (.004)

Years of Pre-Company         .521       -.019            .035      .047      .054          .052
  Experience/10             [.532)      (.010)          (.004)    (.004)    (.004)        (.004)

(Years of Pre-Company        .554            .030         .003     .002      .002          .002
  Experience)2/100         [1.247]          (.004)      ( .002)   (.001)    (.001)        (.001)

Years of Company           1.946             .323        .110      .115      .119          .117
  Service/10              [1.125)           (.008)      (.003)    (.003)    (.003)        (.003)

(Years of Company          5.053        -.050           -.014     -.014     -.013     -.013
  Service) 2/100          [4.504]       (.002)          (.001)    (.001)    (.001)    (.001)

Performance Rating 1         .011                                           -.116
  (Worst; yes = 1)          [.102 ]                                         (.008)

Performance Rating 2        .137                                            -.083
  (yes = 1)                [.344]                                           (.003)
Performance Rating 3        .253                                            -.045
  (yes = 1)                [.435 ]                                          (.002)

Performance Rating 4        .258                                            -.027
  (yes = 1)                [.437 ]                                          (.002)

Performance Rating 6        .092                                             .032
  (Best; yes = 1)          [.289]                                           (.003)

Performance Rating          .400                                  -.050
  1-3 (yes = 1)            [.490]                                 (.002)

(No. Ranked - Rank +        .504                                                           .109
  1/2)/No. Ranked          [.289 ]                                                        (.003)

Constant                                      yes         yes       yes       yes           yes

Region Dummies (3)                            yes         yes       yes       yes           yes

Grade Dummies (11)                            no          yes       yes       yes           yes
°R 2                                         .376        .913     .921       .926          .925
SEE                                          .204        .076      .073      .070          .071

Notes:     /a- Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
           Ib- Mean [S.D.] = 10.156 [.258].
                                                                     27


individual in the same grade level with no pre-company experience and a

person with one standard deviation more than the mean number of years of

company service would earn 12 percent more than an otherwise comparable
                                                                     lS
individual in the same grade level with one standard deviation less.

     Having established the existence of substantial within-grade returns

to pre-company experience and to company service among managers and

professionals at Company C, our third question was whether the higher

within-grade earnings of more experienced employees were justified

in terms of their higher relative within-grade productivity.       If more

experienced employees in a grade level in fact tended to receive higher

salaries because they were typically more productive, one would expect

the introduction of variables capturing relative within-grade performance

into the In(annual salary) regression to move the estimated within-grade

returns to experience towards zero.

     Formally, suppose that experience were one of the things having a

positive impact on relative within-grade productivity:



where P represents relative within-grade productivity, Xl represents

experience,   ~2   represents a vector containing educational attainment

dummies, region dummies and grade level dummies,     ~3   represents additional

factors which affect productivity, the S's represent parameters, and E

represents the equation error.      In a standard earnings function:



where Y represents annual salary, the S's represent parameters and        ~


represents the equation error, the experience variable typically has a

significant positive coefficient.      If, however, more experienced persons

within a grade earn more solely because they are more productive, when
                                                                          28



a measure of relative within-grade productivity is introduced into the

earnings function:



where the a's represent parameters and Y is the error term, the estimated

coefficient on the experience variable should fall to zero.        According

to this model, the expected value of the estimated coefficient on experience

in equation (3) should be:

     5)           b pX .X (1,3'
                      1 _2 .

where b pX .x represents the coefficient on experience obtained from the
          1 _1-
auxiliary repression of relative within-grade productivity on experience

and the   ~2   variables.     Once productivity is controlled for, experience

should have no independent effect on In(annual salary), hence a           in
                                                                      l
                                     16
equation (4) should equal zero.

     Regression 3 contains a performance dummy which is equal to 1 if

the employee received anyone of the top three performance ratings in

1976 and equal to 0 .otherwise; introducing this dummy should capture

relative performance with a degree of precision close to that obtained

in the comparable experiments reported in Medoff and in Medoff and Abraham,

since at each of the three companies whose data were analyzed in those

studies between 85 and 95 percent of the sample members received one of

only two ratings.       Contrary to what would be predicted by the human

capital model of experience-earnings differentials, controlling for whether

a manager or professional did or did not receive one of the top three

performance ratings actually increases the estimated within-grade return

to both pre-company experience and company service (although not by a

statistically significant amount).

     This finding is susceptible to the criticism that the higher
                                                                   29




within-grade earnings of more experienced employees could still be

explicable on the basis of their higher relative within-grade productivity

since it could be the case that within each of the two large performance

categories captured by the crude performance dummies the more experienced

employees were the best performers.   However, the introduction of finer

controls for relative within-grade productivity, five performance rating

dummies in regression 4 and percentile rank in regression 5, produces

results which strongly suggest that this criticism has little validity;

rather than moving the estimated return to experience towards zero,

replacement of the crude performance dummy with either of the more precise

measures of relative within-grade performance actually moves the

estimated return to both pre-company experience and company service even
                                                                            17 18
further away from zero (although not by a statistically significant amount). '


An Alternative Experimental Design

     Table 2 offers an alternative approach to untangling the inter-

relationship of experience, relative within-grade performance and relative

within-grade earnings among managers and professionals at Company C.    Three

measures of each employee's 1976 within-grade performance (columns 1, 3 and 5)

and three comparable measures of each employee's 1976 within-grade salary

percentile position (columns 2, 4 and 6) are regressed on a right hand

side vector which contains educational attainment dummies, pre-company

experience and its square, company service and its square, region dummies,

and grade level dummies.   Provided that all employees in each grade

level had borne the same proportiQnof the costs of their on-the-job

training, standard human capital theory implies that the within-grade    orderin~

of employees by performance as of any point in time should be the same

as the within-grade rank ordering of employees by salary as of the same
            Table 2:   Influence of Education and Experience on the Within-Grade Performance   Pe~centile   and

                             Salary Percentile Position of Managers and Professionals -
                                                                                         /a

                                                       (N   = 8,238)

                            Dependent   Dependent Variable   Dependent   Dependent Variable    Dependent      Dependent Va-
                            Variable .. 2 1976 Salary Vari- Variable '" .. 1976 Salary Vari-   Variable '"    riable .. 1976
                            1976 Two-   able Corresponding   1976 Six-   able Corresponding       1976        Salary Variable
                           Category Ra-   to Two-Category   Category Ra-   to Six-Category      Ranking        Corresponding
                           ting Percen-/ Rating perce?tile ting Percen-/bRating Perce?t ile      Decile/!!.     to Ranking    /
                          tile Variable ~    Variable ~    tile Variable -    Variable _       Variable       Decile Variable !!.
                               (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)              (6)
Mean [Standard                 .501           .548                 .501         .502              .502             .502
  Deviation] of               [.243 ]        [.235]               [.281]       [.280 ]           [.287]           [.287]
  Dependent Variable
Less than High School          .100          -.108                 .120        -.179              .136            -.189
  Diploma (yes '" 1)          (.019)         (.016)               (.021)       (.019)            (.022)           (.020)
High School Diploma            .104          -.033                 .128        -.058              .135            -.059
  (yes .. 1)                  (.007)         (.006)               (.008)       (.007)            (.008)           (.007)
Masters Degree               -.003            .050                -.006         .057              .001             .056
 (yes'" 1)                   (.008)          (.007)               (.009)       (.008)            (.009)           (.008)
Doctorate (yes '" 1)         -.025            .116                -.036         .147            -.031              .148
                             (.013)          (.011)               (.015)       (.014)           (.015)            (.014)
Years of Pre-Company         -.123            .072                -.160         .103            -.158              .107
  Experience/10              (.011)          (. 010)              (.013)       (.012)           (.013)            (.013)
(Years of Pre-Company          .011           .006                 .015         .009              .016             .009
  Experience)2/10q            (.005)         (.004)               (.005)       (.005)            (.005)           (.005)
Years of Company             -.051            .229                -.076         .258            -.063              .268
  Service/10                 (.010)          (.008)               (.011)       (.010)           (.011)            (.010)
(Years of 20mpany            -.009          -.031                 -.009       -.027             ~.012             -.028
  Service) 1100              (.002)         (.002)                (.003)      (.002)             (.003)           (.002)
Constant                       yes             yes                     yes      yes               yes               yes
Region Dummies (3)             yes             yes                     yes      yes               yes               yes             w
                                                                                                                                    o
Grade Dummies (11)              yes            yes                     yes       yes               yes              yes
R2                             .123           .333                 .158         .302              .160             .314

5F.E                           .228           .192                 .258         .235              .264             .238

           /s
Notes:     - Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
           1£ The procedure used to construct the dependent variables is detailed in Section II of the text.
                                                                                      31



date.        Hence, the estimated pre-company experience and company service

coefficients in each Table Z performance equation should equal the

estimated pre-company experience and company service coefficients in

the corresponding Table Z salary equation.

        This argument holds even if important factors are omitted from the

list of explanatory variables included in the Table Z regressions.                         Suppose,

for example, that innate ability exerts an important influence on a manager

or professional's relative within-grade productivity:

        6)     P = B0   + B1Xl +   ~ Z~Z   + B3A +   £,


where P represents within-grade performance percentile, Xl represents

experience, lC         represents a vector cont;:i.~ning educational attainment
                   z
dummies. region dummies and grade level dummies, A represents uncaptured

individual-specific differences, say in innate ability, which do not change

over time, the B's represent coefficients to be estimated and                     £   represents

the equation error.           Let relative earnings be a function of the same variables:

        7)     S


where S represents within-grade percentile earnings position, the 8's

represent coefficients to be estimated,                   ~'   represents the equation error,

and Xl'       ~Z   and A are as in equation 6.            If no measure of ability is

available so that A is omitted both from the performance equation and

from the salary equation, the estimated experience coefficients will

have expected values:

        8)


and




where bAX Y. represents the coefficient on experience from an auxiliary
         1·~2
regression of ability on experience and the ~2 variables. If the rank
                                                                                          32


ordering of employees by performance within each grade level were in

fact equal to the rank ordering of employees by salary within each

grade level, Sl would equal 8
                                     1
                                         and S3 would equal 8 , so that
                                                             3
                                                                                 al
                                                                                 "-


                'A
would equal 8 .          Furthermore, if unobserved ability were to affect
                     1
performance position and salary position in the same way(S3 equal to

8 ) but experience were to have a different effect on relative perform-
 3
                                                                                      A

ance than on relative salary (Sl not equal to 8 ), even though Sl and
                                                           1
A                                                      A       A
8       would be biased estimators of Sl and 8 , Sl - 8                would be an unbiased
    1                                              1               1
    .                19 20
est1mator of Sl - 8 . '
                           1
          Examination of the Table 2 regressions quickly reveals that the

experience coefficients in the performance regressions differ greatly from

the experience coefficients in the corresponding'earnings regressions.

Regressions 1 and 2 imply that, at the mean of the relevant variables,

an additional year of pre-company experience is associated with a 1 point

reduction in within-grade performance percentile but with a 1 point

increase in within-grape salary percentile (a divergence of 2 points) and

that an additional year of          company service is also associated with a

1 point reduction in within-grade performance percentile and a 1 point

increase in within-grade salary percentile (a divergence of 2 points).

          One might argue that the use of dependent variables constructed by

making one cut in each within-grade performance distribution and in each

within-grade salary distribution as is done in regressions 1 and 2

could produce misleading results; if more experienced employees in each

grade level tended to be towards the top within either or both of the two

performance categories and/or towards the bottom within either or both

of the two salary categories on which the regression 1 and regression 2

percentile variables were based, the divergence between performance and

salary estimated to be associated with additional years of both pre-
                                                                    33
company experience and company sarvice could be seriously overstated.

However, the results of comparable regressions with dependent variables

based on six cuts (regressions 3 and 4) and ten cuts (regressions 5 arid

6) in each within-grade performance distribution and in each within-grade

salary distribution indicate that using more than two cuts in each

relevant distribution actually enhances both the estimated negative effect

of experience on within-grade performance percentile and the estimated

positive effect of experience on within-grade salary percentile.

Regressions 3 and 4 imply that for an employee with the mean amount of

both pre-company experience and    company service, an additional year

of either pre-company experience or company service is associated with

a 3 point divergence between performance percentile and salary percentile;

regressions 5 and 6 imply a 3 point divergence associated with an

additional year of pre-company experience at the mean and a 2 point

divergence associated with an additional year of company service at

the mean.   It appears unarguable that the cross sectional relationship

between labor force experience and relative within-grade performance

differs substantially from the cross sectional relationship between labor
                                                .
force experience and relative within-grade earn1ngs.'
                                                       21 22


On the Nature of Performance Ratings

     The finding that experience bears a different partial re1ationsip

to performance percentile than to salary percentile could conceivably be

 the result of the performance measures not accurately capturing true

 relative productivity in the year of appraisal.    Possible problems with

 performance measures which might lead to distorted representation of the

 relative productivity of employees in a grade level include leniency in

 evaluations, divergent standards of evaluation on the part of different

 supervisors and age discrimination in awarding evaluations.    These potentially

 worrisome flaws were discussed in Section I and dismissed as unlikely to be
                                                                  34



the cause of any significant experience-related bias in the performance

ratings and rankings used in this paper.

     It seems probable that, all else equal, those managers and professionals

who are relatively more productive in their current jobs should typically

be viewed as more likely to succeed in a higher level job than those who

are relatively less productive in their current jobs; additionally,

among the group of employees in any grade level who are perceived by

their supervisors as likely ultimately to reach any given higher grade

level those with the highest productivity at a given point in time would

typically be the most likely to be promoted at that point in time or in

the near future.   Thus, high productivity employees in any grade level

should have a higher probability of receiving a promotion than otherwise

comparable low productivity employees in the same grade.   Similarly, it

seems probable that, controlling for a list of other factors including

current rate of compensation, those employees in any grade level who are

most productive would receive larger salary increases than employees in

the same grade level who are less productive.

     One method of assessing whether the Company C performance ratings

and rankings really reflect employees' relative within-grade productivity

is first to assume that, controlling for other factors, in particular

seniority, the company is indeed more likely to promote and give larger raises

to more productive employees in a given grade level, and subsequently to interpret

strong positive partial relationships between measured performance and probability

of promotion and between measured performance and size of raise as good evidence

that the Company C performance measures are significantly correlated with

true relative within-grade current productivity.   Table 3 presents results

which indicate that Company C employees with high performance ratings are in

fact more likely to be promoted and do tend to receive larger salary
                                                                     35

                                                            23
increases than those receiving lower performance ratings.        Equation 1

indicates that, holding education, pre-company experience, company service,

region, and grade level constant, employees who received either of the top

two performance ratings in 1973 were significantly and substantially more

likely to have been promoted between year-end 1973 and year-end 1974 than

those who received any of the lower performance ratings while those who

received any of the bottom five performance ratings in 1973 were significantly

and substantially less likely to have been promoted between year-end 1973

and year-end 1974 than those who received any of the higher performance

ratings.   A similar statement based on equation 2 can be made regarding

the partial relationship between 1973 performance rating and likelihood

of having been promoted between year-end 1974 and year-end 1977.

     Equation 3 demonstrates the existence of an almost perfectly-monotonic

partial relationship between 1973 performance rating and size of percentage

increase in salary received during calendar year 1974.   The point estimates

of the coefficients imply that (with the exception of the difference

between the percentage salary increase associated wrth receiving the second

lowest performance rating and the percentage salary increase associated

with receiving the bottom performance rating), holding constant education,

pre-company experience, company service, region, grade level and In(annual

salary) as of the end of 1973, receiving any given rating rather than the

next lower rating was associated with roughly a two point increment to

an employee's percentage increase in sa1ary.24 According to the equation

4 results, persons who received either of the top two performance ratings

in 1973 tended to receive larger cumulative percentage increases in salary

between year-end 1974 and year-end 1977 than those who received any of

the lower performance ratings, while those who received any of the bottom

five performance ratings in 1973 tended to receive smaller cumulative
           Table 3:     Estimates of the Effect of Schooling, Experience and         36
            Performance Rating on the Probability of Being Promoted and

                            on Percentage Salary lncreases/~

                                                                   (Percent     (Percent
                      Dependent Variable     Dependent Variable   SaI;ny In-     Salar: In-
                        .. 1 i f Promoted      = 1 if Promoted    crease)/II)O; crease)/l,)');
                       Between Year-end       Between Year-end    Year-end 1973 Year-end 1'17/0
                       1973 and Year-end      1974 and Year-end        to             to
                       1974, 0 Othe1wise      1977, OOthe1wise    Year-end 1974 Year-enri ](\77
                        (N = 5,575) ~          (N .. 5,606) ~     (N   = 5,606)/.£   (N   = 5,606)/12.
                                (1)                   (2)                (3)                 (4)
Mean [Standard Devia-          .182                  .364                .194               .243
  tion] of Dependent                                                   [ .057]            [ .091]
  Variable
Less than High School       -1. 389                 .025               -.006               .017
  Diploma (yes = 1)          (.484)                (.244)              (.005)             (.008)

High School Diploma            -.543               -.225               -.007               .003
  (yes = 1)                    (.108)              (.084)              (.002)             (.003)

Masters Degree                   .264               .180                .007              -.003
  (yes = 1)                    ( .113)             (.099)              (.002)             (.004)

Doctorate (yes   = 1)           .459                .360                .015              -.011
                               (.192)              (.172)              (.004)             (.006)

Years of Pre-Company           -.430               -.440                .014              -.015
  Experience/IO                (.183)              (.150)              (.003)             (.005)
(Years of Pre-Company           .145                .028               -.001              -.002
  Experience) 2/ 100           (.087)              (.072)              (.001)             (.003)
Years of Company               -.510               -.926                .006              -.061
  Service/IO                   ( .168)             (.139)              (.003)             ( .005)

(Years of Company               .065                 .114                .002              .010
  Service)2/100                (.047)              ( .037)             ( .001)            (.001)

In (Annual Salary)                                                     -.356              -.169
                                                                       (.008)             (.013)

Performance Rating/I                                                   -.084              -.038
  (Worst; yes = 1) £                                                   (.045)             (.079)

Performance Rating 2                                                   -.092              -.041
  (yes = 1)                                                            (.006)             (.011)

Performance Rating/            -.866               -.594
  1 or 2 (yes = 1) i           (.424)              (.320)

Performance Rating 3          -1.449               -.850               -.069              -.044
  (yes = 1)                    (.174)              (.119)              (.002)             (.004)
Performance Rating 4          -1.078               -.462               -.036              -.042
  (yes = 1)                    (.122)              (.092)              (.002)             .( .003).
Performance Rating 5           -.587               -.345               -.026              -.018
  (yes = 1)                    (.095)              (.080)              (.002)             (..003)
Performance Rating 7            .516                .159                .025               .007
  (yes = 1)                    (.118)              (.112)              (.002)             (.004)
Performance Rating 8           1.018                .746                .042               .041
  (Best; yes = 1)              (.398)              (.406)              (.008)             (.014)
Region Dummies (3)               yes                 yes                 yes                yes
Grade Dummies (11/~              yes                 yes                 yes                yes

l                              709.60              878.77
d. f.                            27                  28
R2                                                                      .375               .239
SEE                                                                     .045               .079
                                                                           37


                                 Table 3:   Notes




/~ Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
/l   Equations 1 and 2 were estimated using a maximum likelihood logit procedure,
     equations 3 and 4 using OLS. All the values of the independent variables
     in all four equations are as of December 1973.

/~ No one who received the lowest of the nine possible ratings in 1973 was
     still with the company at the end of 1977; thus performance rating 1 is
     actually the second lowest possible rating.

/A Since no one who received performance rating 1 in 1973 was promoted between
     year-end 1973 and year-end 1977, the performance rating 1 and performance
     rating 2 groups were merged in estimating the logit equations.

/~ Individuals in one grade where no one received a promotion between year-end
     1973 and year-end 1974 were excluded from the equation 1 sample.
                                                                     38



percentage increases in salary between year-end 1974 and year-end 1977

than those receiving any of the higher ratings.


Current Productivity or Potential?

     Doubters might still argue that, rather than measuring just a manager

or professional's current productivity, performance ratings could also be

partially dependent upon a person's potential for advancement with the

company.    As the results discussed previously imply, holding schooling, region

and grade level constant, employees with more seniority and pre-company

experience generally have a lower probability of advancing in the corporate

hierarchy than employees with less; this reflects within-grade heterogeneity

in innate ability to handle a higher level job, "state dependence", and

other factors which cause the probability of promotion in period t to

be positively related to the frequency with which that event has occurred
                  .   25
in previous per10ds.       For whatever reason, the fact that more experienced

(older) employees in any given grade level typically are less likely to

be promoted than less experienced (younger) employees in the same grade

level     implies that if performance ratings were a function of both like-

lihood of advancement and current productivity, the performance ratings

of more experienced (older) employees might typically provide a downward

biased mnasure of their true relative productivity in the year of appraisal.

        Given that at Company C supervisors are asked to provide separate

assessments of each employee's current performance and potential for

advancement, and given that, as stated above, they are told in

doing their performance evaluations that "career potential and promota-

bility should not enter into ratings of an individual's performance,"

it seems implausible that supervisors' performance assessments would be

reflecting promotability.       If a supervisor wished to communicate to
                                                                  39


higher management .that a particular employee would do well in a higher

level job, the message would not have to be conveyed indirectly by

awarding the employee a higher-than-deserved performance rating but

could be conveyed directly by giving him a high potential score, which

is most certainly the way Company C seems to want this information trans-

mitted.   The equation estimates presented in Table 4 lend strong support

to the belief that the performance ratings and the potential measure

mirror very different things, with the former reflecting the level of an

employee's relative productivity in his current assignment and the latter

the extent to which the employee is likely to advance in the Company C

hierarchy.
     Equations 1 through 3 allow us to examine the partial effects (holding

education, pre-company experience, company service and grade-level

constant) of 1976 performance (equation 1), 1976 potential (equation 2)

and 1976 performance plus 1976 potential (equation 3) on the probability
                                                                          26
of an employee being promoted between year-end 1976 and year-end 1977.

The results obtained indicate that performance makes a significant contri-

bution to explaining probability of promotion when added to the promotion

equation with potential already present and that potential makes a significant

contribution to explaining probability of promotion when added to the

promotion equation with performance already present.   By using the

logit analogue to the multiple-correlation coefficient in the linear

statistical model (p2) presented and discussed in McFadden, we. can

ascertain the relative explanatory contributions of the potential and
                    27                             2
performance measures. It turns out the change in p associated with

the potential variable is more than twice as large as the change in p2

associated with the performance dummies.   Thus, as would most likely be

expected if the potential variable were directly capturing. likely future

success while the performance ratings were capturing current level of
                    Table 4:     Current Performance versus PotentiaI/~              40
                          Dependent Variable = 1 if Pro-      Dependent Variable = In Annual
                            moted Between Year-end 1976         Salary as of December 1976)
                          and Year-end 1977, 0 Otherwise
                                   (N = 7,567) /E..                      (N   = 8,235/E..
                           (1)         (2)           (3)         (4)               (5)        (6)
Less than High           -.475       -.135         -.315       -.069             -.054      -.069
  School Diploma         (.368)      (.365)         (.368)     (.006)            (.006)     (.006)
  (yes = 1)
High School Diploma      -.325          .115      -.097        -.030             -.011      -.029
  (yes = 1)              (.103)        (.104)     ( .107)      (.002)            (.002)     (.002)

Masters Degree            .063        -.097       -.055          .026             .021       .026
 (yes = 1)               (.097)       (.101)      (.101)        (.002)           ( .003)    (.002)

Doctorate (yes = 1)       .222          .219        .248         .057             .052       .057
                         (.158)        (.159)      (.161)       (.004)           (.004)     (.004)
Years of Pre-Company     -.177        -.006         .078         .054             .045       .054
  Experience/10          (.164)       (.002)       (.168)       (.004)           (.004)     (.004)
(Years of Pre-Compa- -.030            -.001       -.019          .002             .003       .002
  ny Experience)2/ l0Q (.072)          (.074 )     (.073)       (.001)           (.002)     (.001)

Years of Company         -.673          .427        .222         .119             .137       .122
  Service/IO             (.141)        (.162)      (.164 )      (.003)           (.004)     (.003)

(Years of Company         .085        -.120       -.062        -.013             -.018      -.014
  Service) 2/100         (.037)       (.040)      (.041)       ( .000)           (.001)     (.001)

Performance Rating  -1. 664                      ..:.1. 342    -.116                        -.114
  1 (Worst; yes = 1) (.729)                        (.732)      (.008)                       (.008)

Performance Rating      -1.470                   -1.044        -.083                        -.082
  2 (yes = 1)            (.171)                   (.176)       (.003)                       (.003)

Performance Rating      -1.078                    -.707        -.045                        -.044
  3 (yes = 1)            (.107)                   (.112)       (.002)                       (.002)

Performance Rating       -.591                    -.361        -.027                        -.026
  4 (yes = 1)            (.090)                   (.093)       (.002)                       (.002)

Performance Rating        .656                      .354         .032                        .031
  6 (Best; yes = 1)      (.100)                    (.107)       (.003)                      (.003)

In(Mean Annual Salary                 3.935       2.938                           .098       .011
  as of December 1976                 (.219)      (.242)                         (.006)     (.006)
  in Potential Grade)/£

Constant                   yes          yes           yes        yes               yes        yes

Region Dummies (3)         yes          yes          yes         yes               yes       yes

Grade Dummies (11)         yes          yes          yes         yes               yes       'yes
 2
R                                                               .926              .916       .926

SEE                                                             .070              .075       .070

l                        877 .16      944.15
d.y.                       27           23           28


Notes:     /~ Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below coefficient estimates.
           /E.. Equations 1, 2 and 3 were estimated using a maximum likelihood logit pro-
             cedure; equations 4, 5 and 6 usi.ng OLS. The mean of the dependent variable
             in the logit equotions is .151; the mean [standard deviation] of the de-
             pendent variable in the OL5 equations is 10.156 [.258]. All values    of
             the independent variables in all six equations are as of December 1976.
           /c
            - Mean [S.D.] = 10.320 [.318].
                                                                         41

relative productivity, the potential variable plays a much more important

role in explaining promotions than do the performance rating dummies.

     The coefficient estimates obtained in equations 4 through 6 reveal

the partial effects (holding education, pre-company experience, company

service and grade level and region constant) of 1976 performance (equation 4),

1976 potential (equation 5 ) and 1976 performance plus 1976 potential

(equation 6) on In(annual salary as of December 1976).          While the performance
                                                                      2
rating dummies make a highly significant incremental contribution to R

when added to the equation with the potential variable already present, the

potential variable does not make a significant incremental contribution to
 ?
R- when added to the equation with the performance rating dummies already
present.   This is exactly what would be expected if the performance ratings

were reflecting current productivity and the potential variable were re-

flecting likely future value to       th~,company   and if., holding demographic

characteristics, in particular company service, constant, salary decisions were

influenced by employees' current productivity much more than by their
                         · i ty. 28
I ikely f uture pro ductIV


Longitudinal Evidence

     It must be conceded that the cross-sectional results presented above

and in Medoff and Medoff and Abraham could be arguably consistent with

the tenets of human capital theory.       While many economists might initially

be surprised by the finding that more experienced managers and professionals

tend to earn relatively more and perform relatively worse than less

experienced managers and professionals in the same grade level, the alert

human capital theorist would undoubtedly be able to respond with a quick

defensive parry.     In particular, if the share of on-the-job training

costs borne by longer tenure employees in any grade level were significantly

above the share of on-the-job training costs borne by shorter tenure

employees in the same grade level, the observed cross-sectional pattern
                                                                                    42



might be produced even though each individual employee were being compensated

in accordance with what human capital theory would predict.

     More formally, suppose that all employees were paid an amount

which depended on the value of their marginal productivity and on the

share of their on-the-job-training which they had financed:

     10)   Y   =   [1 - f(Xl)]P,

where Y represents an employee's wage, P represents the value of the

employee's marginal product, Xl represents experience, and f is a function

of Xl such that 0          ~   f(X )   ~   1 and f'(X ) < O.     The stated condition on
                                  l                  l
the sign of the derivative of f is hypothesized to result from older

employees having financed a larger proportion of their -

on-the-job training than younger employees.                    Taking the logarithm of both

sides of equation 10 and assuming that f(X ) is small enough such that
                                          l
In[l + f(X )]      ~   f(X ) we get:
          1               l
     11)   In(Y)       ~   -f(X ) + In(P) ,
                               l
which implies that, holding productivity constant, older employees should

be paid more than younger employees.

     While the preceding story provides a possible (although somewhat

implausible) explanation of the cross sectional results presented in

Medoff, in Medoff and Abraham, and thus far in this paper,29 it could not

explain a finding that over time the relative earnings of individual

managers and professionals tended to rise while the relative performance

of those same managers and professionals failed to keep pace or even

tended to fall.            We have been able to devise no reasonable human capital

explanation for the findings presented in Table 5.

     The Table 5 results were generated under the assumption that both

within-grade performance percentile in any· year and within-grade salary
                                                                                                                 la
   Table 5:    Movement in Performance Ratings and Rllnkin?,s Over Time for Individuals Staying in the Same Grade -


                      Fraction of Those  Change in Within-     Change in Salary    Change in Ranking  Change in Salary
                       Active 1972 to    Grade Performance     Variable Corres-     Decile Variab1e   Variable Corres-
                      Relevant End Year  Rating Percentile    ponding to Perform-                  /c
                                                                                      for Stayers - ponding to Ranking
                     Not Changing Gr,de    Variable for        atice Rating Per-                       Decile variab1~c
                       During Period ~ _     Stayers    ,c
                                                         -                                              for Stayers    -
                                                               centi1e variab1e/ c
Period                                                             for Stayers -

1972-1973                   .789                 .008                .059               -.005                 .061
                                                (.005)              (.005)              (.006)               (.005)

1972-1974                   .608                 .005                .108               -.012                 .108
                                                (.009)              (.009)               (.I:no)             (.008)

1972-1975                   .513               -.004                 .130               -.024                 .137
                                               (.012)               (.012)              (.013)               (.012)

1972-1976                   .393·              -.019                 .156               -.041                 .157
                                               (.016)               (.016)              (.017)               (.015)


                      Fraction of Those. Change in Within-     Change in Salary   Change in Ranking Chan~e in Salary
                       Active 1972 to     Grade Performance    Variable Corres-    Decile Variab1,c Variable Corres-
                      1976 Not Changing/ Rating Percentile    ponding to Perform-    for Stayers - ponding to Ranking
                                        b
                     Grade 1972 to 1976 -   Variable for/ c   ance Rating Percen-                    Decile Variable/
                                              Stayers    -    tile variable/for                       for Stayers    ~
Period                                                             Stayers ~

1972-1973                   .393                -.005                .044               -.021                 .045
                                                COlO)               (.011)              (.012)               (.009)

1972-1974                   .393                -.012                .088               -.030                 .087
                                                (.013)              (.012)              (.015)               (.012)

1972-1975                   .393                -.018                .112               -.')32                .115
                                                (.015)              (.014)              (.016)               (.014)

.1972-1976                  .393                -.019                .156                -.041                .157
                                                (.016)              (.016)               (.017)              (.015)


Notes:   /~ Standard errors are enclosed in parentheses below change estimates.                                            ~
                                                                                                                           W

         I~ The number of population members active throughout the relevant period was 7.547 for 1972-1973. 6.603
            for 1972-1974. 6.170 for 1972-1975 and 5.689 for 1972-1976.

         I~ The procedure used to construct the performance rating percentile variables. ranking decile variables
              and two sets of corresponding salary variables on which the change estimates are based is detailed in
              Section II. The reported change estimates were obtained by regressing the change in the relevant va-
              riable for each stayer on a constant. change in the square of company service and change in the square
              of time in grade. then calculating the predicted change for a person with mean stayer characteristics.
                                                                          44



percentile in any year could be written as functions of observable and

unobservable characteristics of each managerial and professional employee:
                                           2
      12)      Pt   =   So + SlX lt + S2 Xlt + ~3~2t + S4A + Et

and

      13)

where P       represents within-grade performance percentile as of time t,
          t
St represents within-grade salary percentile as of time t, X represents
                                                            lt
length of company service as of time t, X represents a vector containing
                                        ~ 2t


pre-company experience and its square, educational attainment dummies,

region dummies and grade level dummies for period t, A represent un-

captured individual differences in factors such as innate ability which

affect relative performance and relative earnings, and the S's and e's

represent parameters to be estimated.            Given the assumed model, both

within-grade performance percentile and within-grade salary percentile

should move in a predictable fashion with the passage of time:




and



for those individuals not changing their educational status, region or grade

level.        Note that differencing eliminates A, so that estimation of equations

14 and 15 should yield estimates (applicable to the population not changing

educational status, region or grade level over the relevant time period)

of the effect of the passage of time on both within-grade performance per-

centile and within-grade salary percentile which are not biased by uncaptured
                                                                                 30
individual-specific differences that affect performance and earnings.

The results presented in Table 5 were derived from regressions of change
                                                                   45


in within-grade performance percentile and change in within-grade salary

percentile on a constant term plus change in the square of company service.

    The major conclusion which emerges .from the Table 5 analysis is that
the passage of time affects within-grade performance percentile much

differently than it affects within-grade salary percentile.   Both the

results at the top of the page (based on four different samples including

everyone in the original populations not changing grade between 1972 and

1973, 1972 and 1974, 1972 and 1975, and 1972 and 1976, respectively) and

the results at the bottom of the page (based on one sample including

everyone in the original populations not changing grade between 1972 and

1976) imply that (for those satisfying the relevant sample selection

criteria and with the appropriate sample mean company tenure) within-grade

rating percentile does not change significantly with the passage of from

one to four years' time.    For both sample selection alternatives, the

predicted changes at the mean level of company service in within-grade

ranking percentile were insignificantly negative for the one and two year

periods, more substantially and significantly negative for the three and

four year periods.   It is interesting that for sample members with mean

company tenure the predicted change over time in within-grade rating

percentile is indistinguishable from zero while the predicted change over

time in within-grade ranking percentile (at least for the three and four

year periods) is substantially and significantly negative; this is the

opposite of what an argument that managers and professionals might become

more productive over time without moving into higher rating categories

would lead one to expect.

     The salary percentile results contrast sharply with the performance

percentile results; for both sample selection alternatives, and for both

salary percentile variables (one ana1agous to the rating percentile variable

and the other analogous to the ranking percentile variable) at the mean level of
                                                                  46


company service, the passage of one, two, three or four years time is

associated with a substantial and significant upward movement in relative

within-grade salary position.   With time, then, for those persons not

changing grade, relative within-grade performance appears to remain

stable or deteriorate while relative within-grade salary rises substantially.

     Thus, the Table 5 results imply that for many employees in our

economy, the growth in relative earnings with the passage of time cannot

be explained by the growth of relative performance, contrary to the human

capital explanation of the experience earnings profile.   Moreover,

they suggest that with additional labor force experience the relative
                                                                          3l
performance of a substantial number of employees actually deteriorates.
                                                                   47


IV   Conclusions and Directions

      This study has presented the results of an experiment designed to

test whether or not all but a small fraction of experience-earnings

differentials can be explained by experience-productivity differentials.

Under our assumption that supervisors' ratings of their subordinates

adequately reflect the subordinates' true relative productivity in the year

of appraisal, the answer is clearly no, at least for white male managerial

and professional employees in the four major corporations we have studied.

     Our primary finding is based on both cross-sectional and longitudinal

personnel data files, which include performance ratings done under a number

of different procedures, and in one case, a ranking by current performance

of similarly-situated employees done collectively by all supervisors who

have observed the employees' work during the relevant year.    Our key

assumption concerning performance ratings is supported by a seemingly

substantial amount of institutional and econometric evidence presented

above and in Medoff and Medoff and Abraham.

      If our experimental design is taken as sound and our data as adequate

for their task, we must begin to formalize theories of experience-earnings

differentials that do not have experience-productivity differentials at

their heart, design experiments under which those theories might be falsified,

and gather the data required for this experimentation.    It is our belief

that major steps in these directions can be taken through interaction

with those who formulate company compensation policies

and with those affected by these policies.    In particular,

interviews with the members of top management who are responsible for

the outlines of a company's pay practices should be conducted; discussions

with supervisors about how they determine the proper salaries for their
                                                                   48


subordinates should be initiated; and the attitudes of employees toward

different compensation schemes (e.g., relative earnings reflect relative

productivity versus relative service) should be assessed.   Moreover,

we should seek data which would permit analysis of the impact of changes

in the nature of firms' compensation practices on things such as productivity,

quits, ability to attract new hires, absenteeism, and job satisfaction.

     Unlike physical scientists, economists typically are not involved

in the collection of the data they use, and unlike other social scientists,

economists generally avoid having contact with their units of observation.

As a result, the proper data for testing numerous important beliefs

that many economists hold have not been gathered and the knowledge of those

who are likely to really know what is going on has been ignored.    We

feel that this most certainly has been true in the case of the belief

that experience-earnings differentials can be explained by experience-

productivity differentials.   Thus, we contend that our evidence stands at

odds both with this belief and the way in which it has been uncritically

accepted.
                                                                          49

                                       Footnotes

1
    By rated performance we mean an overall evaluation of how well an employee

    is currently fulfilling the requirements of his job, where this evaluation

    takes the form of a performance rating assigned by the employee's

    immediate supervisor.        We have assumed that the relative rated performance

    of employees performing comparable work conveys information regarding

    the relative current productivity of those same employees.        This key

    assumption is defended in Medoff, in Medoff and Abraham and later in

    this study.

    2The human capital model of investment in on-the-job training is laid

    out in detail in Becker, pp. 16-37.


    3Mincer has seniority provisions under collective baragining agreements

     in mind when he makes this statement, but his logic applies equally

     well to other institutional settings.

    4For good general discussions of performance ratings and further references,

     see Barrett, Bass and Barrett, Landy and Trumbo, and McCormick and Tiffin.

    5Research assessing cross-rater variation in performance ratings includes

     Borman and Whitlock.        Lawler refers to Whitlock's work and asserts that

     "other studies have shown that raters tend to agree upon the weight to

     be assigned to •••• different behavior specimens; thus inter-rater

     reliability is possible" (p. 371) but unfortunately does not specify

     what other studies he has in mind.

    6The existence of variation in supervisor's rating standards would imply

     that performance ratings captured true performance with some measurement

     error:
          1)   P   = p*   + v,
                                                                                 50


where P represents rated performance, p* represents true performance and

v represents the measurement error.              If employees with different observed

characteristics were not systematically paired with supervisors applying

different sets of rating standards, the measurement error would be of the

classical variety            (E(v/observed characteristics) = 0).    Our semilog

earnings function with grade level controls and performance controls can

be represented:

          2)       In(y) = a + SX + yG + oP +   ~,

where y represents annual salary, the vector X captures educational

attainment, pre-company experience, and company service, G is a vector

of grade level dummies, a,           S,   y and 0 represent parameters to be estimated,

and   €    represents the equation error. The presence of classical measurement
                                                                            A

error in our performance variable would cause downward bias in 0 and also

downward bias in the estimated return to both pre-company experience and

company service resulting from the negative partial correlation between

observed performance and each of those labor force experience variables.

Hence, if the measurement error in the performance variable             v·~ere   re(1UCe0
               A

causing 0 to increase, the estimated pre-company experience and company

service coefficients would also increase.              For measurement error in the

performance variable to be a plausible explanation of why the experience

coefficients in our In(earnings) regressions did not move towards zero

when performance controls were introduced, the arguable bias in the

experieace coefficients would have had to have been in the opposite

direction.

          Classical measurement error in an ordinary least squares dependent

variable would cause no bias in estimated ordinary least squares

coefficients.            It thus seems highly unlikely that measurement error in

the performance variable used to create the categories employed on the

left hand side of our multinomial logit performance equation could
                                                                     51


have caused any substantial bias in our multinomial 10git coefficient

estimates.

7Two studies of blue collar workers, one by Rothe and one by Rundquist

and Bittner, contain some evidence that the ratings of long service
laundry workers and container inspectors tend to be inflated.     A study

by Ferguson of ratings given to assistant life insurance sales managers

and another study by Stockford and Bisse1 of ratings given to first line

supervisors at a manufacturing plant suggest that superiors tend to be

more lenient in rating those whom they have known for a longer period

of time.

8One might be tempted to look at the change over time in the hourly

production of individual piece rate workers as a source of direct

evidence regarding the shape of the experience-productivity profile

among such workers.   To the extent that factors other than a worker's

experience which might affect productivity change with the passage of time

 (for example, workers might typically be given first claim on materials during

 periods of shortage or be allowed to choose better machines as they accrued

more seniority) such an experiment would produce misleading results.

9promotion equations with education dummies, pre-company experience

and its square, company service   ~nd   its square, region dummies and

grade level dummies on the right hand side were estimated using data

 from one of the company files analyzed in Medoff and Abraham.     The

 results implied that, for a person with sample mean characteristics

 as of July 1, 1974, an additional year of either pre-company experience

 or company service was associated with a 5 percent higher probability

 of receiving a promotion between July 1, 1975 and July 1, 1977, and that,

 for a person with sample mean characteristics as of July 1, 1976,
                                                                           52


 and additional year of either pre-company experience or company service

 was associated with a 6 percent. higher probability of receiving a promotion

 between July 1, 1976 and July 1, 1977.

10The only imputed 1972 information used in the analysis presented in

  Section III was grade level and salary.       The 1972 grade level imputation

  rested on the assumption that no Company C employee moved down in grade

  level or moved up more than one grade level between year-end 1972 and

  year-end 1973.     Fewer than 5 percent of those included in both our 1973

  and our 1974 populations moved down in grade level or moved up more than

  one grade level between year-end 1973 and year-end 1974.       The 1972 salary

  imputation rested on the assumption that the two salary increases recorded

  for each Company C employee as of year-end 1973 captured all salary

  changes made during calendar year 1973.       Beginning in 1975, as many as
                           . i

  six salary increases were recorded for each employee.       Fewer than        3 percent

  of those included in both our 1974 and our 1975 populations received more

     than two salary increases during calendar year 1975 and somewhat more than

     1 percent of those included in both our 1975 and our 1976 populations

     received more than two salary increases during calendar year 1975.         Thus,

     the assumptions made in order to construct the required fix on each employee's

     year-end 1972 status do not appear to have been unreasonable.

11
     It should be noted that grade level was not adjusted for those employees

  who changed grade level between year-end 1972 and year-end 1973 and

     also between June 30, 1972 and year-end 1972.    Just over 1 percent

     of those included in both our 1973 arid our 1974 populations changed grade

     level between year-end 1973 and year-end 1974 and also changed grade level

     between June 30, 1973 and year-end 1973.    Adjusting the recorded grade

     level of those who changed grade during the last six months of a year by
                                                                     53


  subtracting one from end-of-year grade level seemed reasonable in light

  of the previously mentioned fact that very few employees moved down in

  grade level or up more than one grade level during a typical year.

l2Complete performance information consisted of the employee's performance

  rating, the employee's rank among a group of his peers and the number

 of people in the group the employee was included in for ranking purposes.

 Employees with a rank group size of one were excluded from our populations;

  in 1976, this exclusion reduced the size of our population by approximately

 one tenth of 1 percent.    The median rank group size in the 1976 population

 we used for analysis was 46.

~3The   Northeast region comprises Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New

 Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island and Vermont;

 the North Central region Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan,

 Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and

 Wisconsin; the South region Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, District of

 Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi,

 North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia

 and West Virginia; and the West region Arizona, California, Colorado,

 Idaho, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, Oregon, Utah and Washington.

l4The list of employees normally includes only persons in the same grade

 level, but may include persons in several adjacent grade levels if such

 broader coverage is needed in order to obtain a reasonably sized comparison

 group within any division.

l5Straightforward calculations show    that for a person with the mean number

 of years of pre-company experience, the within-grade return to an additional

 year of pre-company experience is roughly three times as large as the

 total return to that same year of pre-company experience. This implies that,

 all else'equal, the additional year of pre-company experience tends to be
                                                                        54

  associated with holding a job in a lower grade level than would otherwise

  be predicted.


l6For an excellent discussion of omitted variable bias, see Appendix C in

  Griliches and Ringstad.

17                   .
  The Table 1 results imply the existence of a substantial and significant

 total rettivn to education among managers and professionals at Company C,

 most of which is captured by the introduction of grade level dummies into

 the In(earnings) regression; only 20 percent of the earnings differential

 between non-high school graduates and bachelors degree holders, 7

 percent of the differential between high school graduates and bachelors

 degree holders, 24 perdent of the differential between masters degree

 holders and bachelors degree holders, and 22 percent of the differential

 between doctorates and     bachelor~   degree holders remains uncaptured by

  the grade level dummies.     The estimated return to education in the equation

  with grade level controls does not move towards zero when first crude
                                             u



  and then finer performance controls are introduced which suggests that

  this return cannot be explained by within-grade differences in rated

  performance.


l~he results presented in equations 2 through 5 of Table 1 are not true
  within-grade results since the specification used permits only the

  regression intercept and not the coefficients on the education,

  experience, performance and region variables to vary across grades.

  True within-grade equations comparable to regressions 2 through 5

  were estimated separately for each of the twelve grade levels represented

  in our population.   In all twelve cases, having either an additional

  year of pre-company experience or an additional year of company service

  beyond the overall mean amount for the relevant variable was associated'

  with a reasonably sized positive increment to earnings; in ,no case did
                                                                               55


     the estimated within-grade return to experience move towards zero when

     performance controls were introduced.


19Appendix C to Griliches and Ringstad discusses omitted variable bias.

20                    A   A
     The difference   Sl~0l   is a biased estimator of Sl-0       if it is not true that
                                                              l
     unobserved ability affects relative performance in the same way as it affects

     relative salary so thatS
                           and 03 are not equal. While the existence of
                         3
 a divergence between Sl and 01 thus does not necessarily imply that

 experience affects performance differently than it affects salary,

 it does imply that either experience or ability affects relative performance

 differently than relative salary and hence calls into question theories which

 explain all earnings differentials in terms of productivity differentials.

2lControlling for labor force experience and grade level, education has a

 pronounced positive effect on within-grade salary percentile and a

 pronounced negative effect on within-grade performance percentile.

 Both the estimated positive effect of education on salary percentile

 and the estimated negative effect of education on performance percentile

 are stronger when finer measures of the dependent variables are employed.

22The equations presented in Table 2 are not really within-grade regressions

     since the inclusion of a set of grade dummies among the independent

 variables only permits a different intercept and not different effects

     of education, experience and region across grade levels.           Separate

 within-grade equations comparable to the six regressions in Table 2

 were estimated for each of the twelve grade levels represented in 0ur

 population.      In each of the twelve cases, the regression coefficients

     implied that, using any of the three sets of dependent variables, for a

     person with the overall mean number of years of both pre-company experience

     and company service, an additional year of either pre-company experience
                                                                     56

 or company service was associated with lower relative within-grade

 performance but higher relative within-grade salary.

23The promotion probability results were obtained using a maximum likelihood

  logit procedure.   The logit model is discussed in Ner10ve and Press.


24 The high mean percentage salary increase observed daring calendar year

 1974 (roughly 19 percent) resulted from the granting of two across-the-

 board cost-of-1iving increases totalling approximately 12 percent during

  that year.   Very similar results were obtained when percentage salary

  increase during calendar year 1975 (having a mean of 9 points) was regressed

  on year-end 1974 independent variables.


25Resu1ts based on one of the data sets analyzed in Medoff and Abraham

  indicating that more experienced employees in any grade level were likely

  to be promoted than similarly-educated less-experienced employees in the

  same grade level are discussed in footnote 8.    Given the zero or negative

  partial correlation between rated performance and labor force experience

  at Company C, the promotion equation results presented in Table 3 imply

  that, controlling for education, region, and grade level but not for

  rated performance, more experienced Company C employees are significantly

  less likely to be promoted than similarly educated but less experienced

  CompanyC employees.    The coefficient estimates obtained from equations

  of the same form as those in Table 3 but without performance rating

  controls implied that, for a person with the appropriate sample mean

  characteristics as of year-end 1973, an additional year of pre-company

  experience was associated with a 5    percent lower   probability of receiving

  a promotion between year-end 1973 and year-end 1974 and with a     4 percent

  lower   probability of receiving a promotion between year-end 1974 and

  year-end 1977; an additional year of company service was associated with

  a   4 percent lower probability of receiving a promotion between year-end

  1973 and year-end 1974 and with a    4 percent   lower probability of
                                                                        57



     receiving a promotion between year-end 1974 and year-end 1977.


26Equations 1 through 3 were estimated using the same maximum likelihood

     logit procedure as was used to estimate the promotion equations presented

     in Table 3.


27 The formula for p2 is given on page 121 of the McFadden article:
                          A


          (1)

         A                                                        AH
 where L(0) is the log likelihood of the unrestricted model and L(0 ) is

     the log likelihood of the restricted model.

28
     Other promotion and 1n(earnings equations were estimated using a set of

     dummy variables capturing each employee's potential grade level rather

     than 1n(mean annual salary as of December 1976 in employee's potential

     grade level) as in the equations reported.    Results very similar to those

     included in Table 4 were obtained.   The results actually presented were

     chosen for expositional reasons.

29 Very large decreases over time in the share of on-the-job training costs

     borne by employees would be required if the explanation just offered

     were to account for the cross sectional results we obtained.     There

     seems to be no good reason to believe that changes in the necessary

     direction and of the necessary magnitude have occurred.


300ne cannot draw inferences regarding absolute change over time in either

     performance or earnings based on observed change over time in either

     within-grade performance percentile or within-grade salary percentile,

     since there are likely to be shifts over time in the underlying within-grade

     productivity and earnings distributions on which the performance and

     salary percentile measures are based.   However, it seems likely that any
                                                                   58



  major shifts in the underlying within-grade productivity and earnings

  distributions would occur slowly.

3lAs explained in the text, the change in performance percentile and the

 change in salary percentile figures presented in Table 5 were predicted

 values derived from equations estimated with change in percentile position

 as the dependent variable and a constant term plus change in the square

 of company service on the right hand side.   Change in educational status

 dummies and change in region dummies were not included in the prediction

 equation because we did not really know educational status and region

 as of year-end 1972.   Equations based on 1973 through 1976 data with

 change in education dummies and change in region dummies included as

 explanatory variables produced results very similar to those reported

 in Table 5.
                                                                         59


                                Bibliography

Barrett, Richard S.     Performance Rating.     Chicago:   Science Research

     Associates, Inc. 1966.

Bass, Bernard M•.and Gerald V. Barrett.        Man, Work and Organizations:

     An Introduction to Industrial and Organizational Psychology.

     Boston:   Allyn and Bacon, Inc., 1972.

Becker, Gary S.     Human Capital:   A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with

     Special Reference to Education.        New York:   National Bureau of

     Economic Research, 1964.

Borman, Walter C.     "Effect of Instructions to Avoid Halo Error on Reliability
     and Validity of Performance Evaluation Ratings," Jou'rnal of Applied

     Psychology, Vol. 60, No.5, 1975.

Dalton, Gene W. and Paul H. Thompson.       "Accumulating Obsolescence of Older

     Engineers," Harvard Business Review, September-October 1971.

Ferguson, Leonard W.     "The Value of Acquaintance Ratings in Criterion

     Research," Personnel Psychology, Vol. 2, No.1, 1949.

Griliches, Zvi and V. Ringstad.      Economics of Scale and the Form of the

     Production Function.      Amsterdam:     North Holland, 1971.

Landy, Frank J. and Don A. Trumbo.       Psychology of Work Behavior. Homewood,

     Illinois:      The Dorsey Press, 1976.

Lawler, Edward E.      "The Multitrait-Multirater Approach to Measuring Managerial

     Job Performance," Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 51, No.5, 1967.

McCormick, Ernest J. and Joseph Tiffin.         Industrial Psychology.    Englewood

      Cliffs, New Jersey:     Prentice-Hall, Inc •. , 1974.
Medoff. Ja.mCG L.     "Thc Earnings Function:     A Glimpse Inside the Black

      Box," mimeo, 1977.

Medoff, James L. and Katharine G. Abraham.        "Experience, Performance,

      and Earnings," mimeo, 1978.
60
