                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          WHY IS THERE A YOUTH LABOR MARKET PROBLEM?




                     Richard B.   Freeman




                  Working   Paper No. 365




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                     Cambridge MA 02138

                          June 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in labor economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                      NBER Working Paper 365
                                                                   June 1979


                  Why Is There a Youth Labor Market Problem?

                                    SUMMARY


     This paper examines what is known about the causes of the high and increasing

levels of youth joblessness and related problems in the youth labor market.

Partly because of inconsistencies in reported rates of youth employment across

surveys and partly because of problems in measuring key social variables,

it is difficult to reach firm conclusions. As far as can be told, much of

the relatively high rate of youth joblessness can be attributed to turnover

and mobility patterns that are normal in the U.S. economy, but much is also

directly related to a dearth of jobs. Demand forces, which have come to be

neglected in favor of supply in much popular discussion of youth joblessness,

are major determinants of variation in youth employment over time and among

areas. For groups facing the most severe joblessness problems, however, the

difficulty due to lack of jobs appears to be compounded by problems of

employability related to deleterious social patterns. Surprisingly, perhaps,

the factors that determine the probability that young persons end up employed

or jobless differ substantively from those that determine wages.

     The paper explains the decline in the earnings of young workers relative

to old workers in terms of the increased number of young persons. It speculates

that the decline in relative wages may have contributed significantly to the

stable ratio of employment to population among young whites. The causes of the

downward trend in youth employment for nonwhites —— which constitute one of

the major developments of the period —— remain   a conundrum.



Richard B. Freeman
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 868—3915
    Jobless youths have replaced the unemployed breadwinner as the focus

of concern about unemployment in the United States. Rates of unemployment

are higher and ratios of employment to population lower for young persons,

including those out of school, than for older persons. Why? Youth

unemployment rates have risen relative to adult unemployment rates while

youth employment to population rates have fallen for some groups. Why?

What are the underlying causes of the youth joblessness problem?

     There are two basic views about the causes of high youth joblessness.

According to the demand view, the principal reason for high and increased

joblessness is the lack of adequate demand for young workers due

to such factors as slow economic growth, cyclical weaknesses in the

economy, changes in the mix of jobs which alter the level of demand,

and minimum wages which reduce employment due to high costs of labor.

According to the supply view, the principal reason for high and increased

youth joblessness is a lack of skills, incentives and/or aspirations on

the part of the young. The two views, while not antithetical, stress

different economic forces and lead to different policy recommendations.

If the problem is lack of demand, policies to stimulate demand are needed.

If the problem lies on the supply side, policies to influence the behavior

of youth are needed.

     This chapter reviews briefly the patterns and changes in the youth labor

market which define the problems to be explained, enumerates the supply and

demand factors alleged to underly the problems, and then examines evidence

rigarding the quantitative importance of the factors.
                                                                    2



     The principal results of the analysis can be summarized in five

basic propositions:

     1. Youth joblessness is concentrated among minority youth and a

small segment of white youth and has increased most among minorities,

making the problem of causality largely one of explaining the reduced

employment of minority youth.

     2. Alternative surveys report strikingly different levels of

youth work activity, raising major questions about our understanding

of the magnitude, much less the nature of the problem,and hampering

explanations of causality.

     3. Much of the high level of unemployment and nonemployment among

young persons can be attributed to normal 'life—cycle' patterns of work

activity, in which young persons "shop" for appropriate jobs at the outset

of working careers, and to institutions which place the burden of adjustment

to economic declines on new entrants and persons with low tenure in firms.

     4. Because trends in youth joblessness vary by measure and group,

it is difficult to determine the causes of the changes in the youth market

in the l970s. On the demand side, employment of youth appears to be

highly sensitive to aggregate economic swings, the industrial composition

of employment, and somewhat sensitive to the minimum wage, but changes in these

forces fail to account for much of observed developments. On the supply side,

increased numbers of young persons relative to older persons tend to

create problems in the youth market, which show up largely in reductions

in the wages of younger as opposed to older workers.

     5. While problems with available data leave some issues in doubt,

youth joblessness appears to be due more to lack of jobs than to poor

work attitudes or unrealistic wage expectations.
                                                                 3



Dimensions of the problem

     Young workers have traditionally exhibited lower levels of work

activity than older workers. Labor force participation and employment to

population rates are lower for youths than for those 25 and over, while

rates of unemployment are higher. The earnings and occupational position

of the young fall short of the earnings and occupational attainment of

older workers. While some of the youth differential is attributable

to enrollments in school, out—of—school youth also tend to evince lower

propensities to work than adults.

     Several important changes in the traditional pattern of youth/adult

labor market differentials in the l970s have brought the problem of youth

joblessness to the center of national attention. Before seeking to

explain the causes of the hi and/or increasing rate of joblessness

among youth, it is important to delineate briefly the principal changes

of concern.

     Table 1 summarizes developments in the youth labor market in terms

of several measures of activity: the percentage of persons with a job

(i.e. the employment/population ratio) and the percentage of persons unemployed,

disaggregated by age, school status, and race; the ratio of the median

weekly earnings of full—time young workers to comparable white male

workers 25 and over; and the percent of young workers obtaining white

collar jobs. For comparative purposes, the employment/population rate and

unemployment rate for older workers are also shown in the table. The

table reveals three important aspects about the changing labor market

for youth:
                                  Table 1: Dimensions of the Youth Labor Market Problem, 195i--1977

                                                               ite or total Male'                   Black and Otner Male
                                                         1954      1964     1969      1977     1954      1964    1969
  1. Percent with Job, by age and education
           16—17
                                                        40.6       36.5     42.7     44.3     40.4      27.6     28.4
           18—19
                                                        61.3       57.7     61.0     65.2                                  iSA
           20—24                                                                              66.5      51.8    51.1       36A
                                                        77.9       79.3     78.8     80.5     75.9
              High school graduates 16—24               ——
                                                                   86.5
                                                                                                        78.1    77.3       6l.
                                                                            88.1     87.0     ——        75.8    81.6
              High school dropouts 16—24                ——
                                                                   76.1     74.7              ——                           67.)
                                                                                     71.1               70.3    72.7       59.4
              25—54                                     93.8      94.4      95.1     91.3     86.4      87.8    89.7       8i.
  2. Percent       of Labor Force Unemployed, by age
       and   education
              16—17
              18—19
                                                        14.0      16.1      12.5     17.6     13.4      25.9    24.7
                                                        13.0                                                               38.:
              20—24
                                                                  13.4       7.9     13.0     14.7      23.1    19.0
                                                         9.8       7.4      4.6       9.3     16.9      12.6     8.4
                                                                                                                           36.
                                                                                                                           21.:
              High school graduates 16—24               ——
                                                                   8.9
              High school dropouts 16—24
                                                                            6.0       8.9     ——
                                                                                                        18.8    11.3       22.
                                                        ——
                                                                  13.6     10.8      19.7     ——
                                                                                                        18.1    12.4
              25—54
                                                                                                                           3l.
                                                         3.9       2.8      1.5       3.9      9.5       6.6     2.8        7.8
  3. Ratio of Weekly Earnings of Full—tine
      Young Men to Weekly Earnings of
      White Men 25 and Over
           18                                                             (1967)
                                                        ——
           20
                                                                  ——
                                                                            .54       .49    ——        ——
                                                                                                                 .44        .44
                                                       ——
              22                                       ——
                                                                  ——
                                                                            .66       .58    ——        ——
                                                                                                                 .63       .52
              24
                                                                  ——
                                                                            . 79      .63    ——
                                                                                                                 .59       .51
                                                       ——         —         .87       .75    ——        ——
                                                                                                                 .60       .63
 4.   Percent of Employed High School
      Graduates Not in Co1legeo               D'o.J
      in White Collar Jobs, by year of
      school leaving, 16—24 years old                                     (j9 67)
           graduate                                    ——        ——
                                                                          20.2      13.2
           dropout                                     ——        ——
                                                                          17.2       7.9
                                                         White or Total Female                 Black and Other Female
                                                       1954    1964   1969    1977           1954      1964    1969     1977
 5. Percent with Job, by age
          16—17
          18—19
                                                       25.8      25.3     30.3      37.5     19.8      12.5    16.9     12.5
          20—24
                                                       47.2      43.0     49.2      54.3     29.9      32.9    33.7     28.0
                                                       41.6      45.3     53.3      61.4     43.1      43.7    51.5
          25—54                                        40.1                                                             45.4
                                                                 41.0     46.2      54.1     49.0      52.7    56.3     57.4

6. Percent of Labor Force
                                Unemployed, by age
             16—17
                                                       12.0      17.1     13.8      18.2     19.1
             18—19
                                                       9.4       13.2
                                                                                                      36.5     31.2     44.7
             20—24                                                        10.0      14.2     21.6     29.2     25.7
                                                       6.4        7.1      5.5       9.3     13.2
                                                                                                                        37.4
                                                                                                      18.3     12.0     23.6

                                                         5.0       4.3       3.2      5.8      8.3       8.4     5.0        9.8

                                                                          (167)
 7. ,.Percent of Employed High School                                      65.8
      Graduates Not in College in White                                              5j.0
      Collar Jobs, by year of
      school—leaving,     16—24 years


 Sources: Lines 1 and 5 from U.S. Department of
                                                  Labor, Employment and Training Report of the President, l97
           Tables A—3, A—4 and A—14 (pp. 183—185, pp. 186—188 and pp. 202—204);
           Line 6 from U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and
           A—20 and A—3 (pp. 213—214 and pp. 183—185);           Training Report _____________________
                                                                                 of the President, 1978, Tables
           Line 3 from U.S. Bureau of Census, May CPS
                                                      tapes unpublished tabulation;
           Lines 4 and 7, U.S. Dcjartment of Labor .'
              unpublished tabulations.                          HandbookThf Lábor      Statistics 1977, and
*White in all lines except lines 4 and 7
                                                                              5




    1. The divergent movement of employment/POpulation and unemployment

rates for whites. Line 1 shows that despite great concern with joblessness

the percent of white youth holding jobs did not decline absolutely or

relative to the percent of adults holding jobs in the 1970s. By contrast,

line 2 shows an upward trend in rates of unemployment among white

youth. Underlying the divergent patterns is an increase in the

participation of young whites, especially those in school, in the labor
                                                            is the concordance
force.     One of the principal phenomena to be explained
                                        ratios among white youth with an
of stability of employment/population

upward trend in unemployment rates.

     2. The racial dimension of joblessness.     For nonwhite youth both the

                                                                 1970s,
percent without jobs and the percent unemployed increased in the

while the rate of labor force participation dropped. The remarkable

 decline in the labor force activity of nonwhite youth constitutes the

 core of the youth joblessness problem.

         3. The earnings and occupation dimension.   While public attention

 has focused on the joblessness issue, there have also been major changes
                                             of the young. As line 3 shows,
 in the earnings and occupational position
                                        fallen sharply relative to the earnings
 the earnings of young white men have

 of older workers while those of young blacks have been roughly maintained

 relative to the earnings of older workers.    The drop in the relative earnings

 of the young constitutes a major shift in age—earnings profiles, with

                                    substitutability between older and younger
 major implications regarding the

 employees and the flexibility of the wage structure. By ccntra3t, it should bc

 noted that fcrialc e—carnir prof 11cc have not undergone much change,

 possibly because older and younger women are more likely to perform the

 same type of work.

         Finally, line 4 shows that the fraction of young persona obtaining

  white collar jobs has dropped in the 1970s, reversing a long upward trend

  in white collar employment.
                                                                     6




        What factors explain the higher rates of joblessness among the young

and the l970s changes in youth joblessness and earnings shown in Table 1?



Supply and demand factors

        The potential causes of high or increasing youth joblessness can be

fruitfully analyzed in terms of factors likely to affect
                                                            joblessness by
altering the supply of labor and those likely to affect joblessness by

altering the demand for labor. While moat measured variables affect both

sides of the market, the simple dthchotomizatjon provides a useful

framework for analysis.

        Figure 1 sets out the "demand" and supply views of the effect of

major economic variables on employment of youth.

     The essential theme of the demand view is that youth joblessness

results from a shortage of jobs either in total or of the "appropriate"

type.

        One reason for the lack of jobs Is that demand is depressed by

legislated minima and other noncompetitive forces which raise youth wages

above market clearing levels. The minimum Is alleged to have an especially

deleterious effect on the availability of "learning jobs," defined as those

providing on—the—job training, since youths cannot "purchase" training with

low wages.

     Another potential reason for a job shortage is the sluggish growth

of the aggregate economy which, given Institutions like seniority that

protect older workers from layoffs, takes an especially harsh toll of

employment of new, younger workers.

     Changes in the structure of demand, ranging from technological developments

to the declining share of agriculture, which traditionally employs

relatively many young men, are also likely causes of inadequate demand.
                                                                                /



                     Figure 1: Two Views of the Causes of Youth Joblessness

Youth joblessness is                     Demand View                      Supply View
 high because of:

Availability of jobs                  There is a shortage of       There are lots of Un—
                                      jobs for young persons       fillec low—level jobs.
                                      due to aggregate economic
                                      forces.

Wages                                 Minimum wages and other      Young persons have un-
                                      rigidities reduce the        realistic wage aspirations.
                                      number of low—level jobs.

urnover                               Short—term temporary jobs    Young workers are unstable
                                      underly high rates of        and highly mobile.
                                      joblessness.

Attitudes                             Youth desire jobs with       At current levels of
                                      a future.                    income, youth prefer
                                                                   leisure and lack the
                                      Employer discrimination
                                                                   work ethic.
                                      reduces demand for
                                      young workers.

Skills                                Skills are learned           Youth lacks education
                                      on the job.                  and skills.

The Baby Boom Cohort                  The labor market            Youth joblessness is due
                                      generates many new          partly to the enormous
                                      jobs for young persons,     increase in the size of
                                      as occurs each summer.      the youth population.

Alternative "work"                                     Youth have high
  activities                                           earnings from
                                                       illegal "under-
                                                       ground" economic
                                                       activity.
                                                           8




     With respect to types of jobs, the existence of many short—term but

temporary jobs, including those on short term work projects, Is alleged to

contribute to high youth unemployment rates. This Is because when short term jobs end
some employees become unemployed while searching for new positions.

     Finally, employer discrimination against youth, particularly

minority youth, is another potential cause of joblessness.

     The supply view stresses the attitudes and skills of youth in the job

market. It is not the lack of jobs but the unwillingness of the young

to accept those that are available for persons of their skills that is

the prime cause of the joblessness problem. Youths are alleged to have

excessive wage aspirations, high turnover, poor education and skill, and

to lack the work ethic.

     Excessive wage aspirations imply that young persons reject low—wage

jobs, preferring to be unemployed than to work, say as a $3.50/hr. dish-

washer or busboy, despite lack of skills. If youth have excessive wage

aspirations, increases in the minimum wage might increase youth participation

rates and possibly youth employment as well——contrary to the prediction

of the demand analysis.

     The "naturally" high turnover of young workers is a key element in

the supply analysis. On the one hand, the young are expected to exhibit

high rates of mobility as they "shop" for jobs in what some view as an

efficient way of searching for a rei,atively permanent career. On the

other, some of the high turnover is   alleged   to reflect unstable work

habits, partially induced by the nature of low—level labor markets.

     The supply analysis also puts great weight on the inadequate education,

skill, and motivation of the young. Some stress the quality of formal

education, in particular the often outmoded and weak vocational courses.
                                                                 9




Others focus on the failure of the educational system to provide adequate

counseling and placement. Others stress the poor cognitive

skills of the young and the absence of the work ethic.

    While by no means necessarily antithetical and indeed in some cases

complementary, the demand and supply views offer very different perspectives

on the youth labor market problem and on the policies that might improve the

situation. From the demand perspective, what is needed is to generate addi-

tional jobs for youth by stimulating the employer side of the market. From

the supply perspective, the need is to alter youth attitudes and skills

by activities that affect the youth themselves.

     One additional potential cause of high youth joblessness, which

could be classified as reflecting demand for youth services in other

markets or reduced supply in the labor market, also deserves attention.

This is the possibility that joblessness is high because youth

f ace atttactlve alternatives in illegal or "underground1' economic

activities.



Causes of increasing problems

     The evidence in Table 1 shows not only that youth have higher rates

of joblessness and lower pay than older workers but that their disadvantage

has increased in several respects: the percentage without jobs has grown

among black and white high school dropouts; the percentage unemployed has

risen modestly; while the relative earnings of the young have dropped sharply.

What might explain these trends?

     There arc three major explanatory hypotheses relating to demand forces:

     1. The demand for young workers has increased too slowly because of:
         slow economic growth, cyclical conditions, and structural changes
         in the mix of jobs by industry, occupation, and area.
                                                                     10




     2. Expanded coverage of the minimum wage and related increases
         in the cost of hiring labor have reduced the number of youth
         jobs along given demand curves.

     3. Increased supplies of competitive labor, notably adult
         women and illegal aliens, have reduced the demand for young
           workers.


     On the supply side, the trends in youth employment and joblessness

may be attributable to:


     4. The enormous increase in the relative number of young
         workers due to the "baby boom" cohort has required sizeable
         market adjustments, some of which are not attainable in the
         relevant period.

     5. Increased family incomes and welfare funds and greater
         willingness of parents and community to support not employed
         youth have induced the young to choose "leisure."

     6. Deleterious social developments——increased one parent/female
         homes, inner city community problems, deteriorated
         quality of schooling, drug usage and crime——have made
         the young less employable than in the past.


     To offer a valid explanation of youth market developments, these

hypotheses must explain the strikingly different levels and trends in

joblessness and relative earnings among young blacks and whites. As there

is probably some truth to each hypothesis, the problem is not one of

determining which is "right" or "wrong" but rather of evaluating their

quantitative contribution to the observed changes.



Evidence

     Several sources of data on the youth labor market can be used to

analyze the causes of high or increasing rates of joblessness:

     —   time   series evidence, published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics,

which shows how youth employment, wages, or unemployment and various

explanatory factors vary on an annual, quarterly, or monthly basis.
                                                                            11




    —    cross—sectional data on individuals from the major governmental

survey of households, the Current Population Survey, which provides the

basic economic intelligence used to evaluate youth joblessness but suffers

from being based on the responses of adults in the households rather than

on the responses of the young persons themselves.

     —
         longitudinal   data on individuals from panel surveys, which are

obtained from interviews with the youths and which follow the progress of

an individual over time. The longitudinal data has the advantage of

permitting the analyst to isolate the effect of social factors of concern

from 'unmeasuredt attributes of individuals by comparing the behavior

of the same individuals over time.

     —   cross—area evidence, which shows how differences in city or state

characteristics lead to bigger or smaller youth labor market problems.

A standard research strategy is to estimate the effect of explanatory factors

on a particular outcome using cross—area data and then to use the estimates

and evidence on changes in the explanatory factors to try to account for

changes over time in the dependent variables.

     —   evidence from firms, which provides information on the personnel

and employment practices of firms and thus on demand behavior, but which

is gathered only relatively infrequently, and used sparsely in analyses of

youth labor market problems.

     Comparisons of the picture of the youth labor market given by the

different sources of data have turned up one major problem that significantly

mars efforts to measure the magnitudes, much less the cause, of high

or rising joblessness. The problem is that the fraction of youths employed

differs greatly between the Current Population Survey
                                                                       12



and the longitudinal surveys. In particular, the percent of youth with jobs

is much higher in the longitudinal surveys than in the Current Population

Survey (Borus, Mott, Nestel). The National Longitudinal Survey, for example,

shows 46% of 16—17 year old men employed in 1966 compared to a 36% fi2ure for the

CPS. (Freeman and Medoff in Freeman and Wise) The longitudinal surveys also show

smaller black—white differences in the percent with jobs than are shown in the CPS.

    One reason for this divergence appears to be differences in who

responds to the survey. When young persons respond themselves, they are

more likely to report working than when their parent or other adults

tell an interviewer about youth activity. Another reason may be that

the longitudinal surveys contain a more stable group of young persons.

What is important to remember is that until the discrepancy in survey

results is resolved and the 'correct' rate of youth employment determined

there will be ambiguity about the causes of the problem as well.

    Given this proviso, what can be said about the reasons for

high rates of joblessness among youth and for increases in the severity of

the problem over time?




Why youth joblessness is high

    Annual rates of activity, such as the percentage of the labor force

that is rnemployed or the percentage of the population with a job, depend

on three factors: the fraction of persons in the state over a year; the

average number of spells or times each of those persons is in the state;

and the average length of spells measured as a percentage of time over the

year. When the fraction of persons in the state rises; or when the number

of times a person is in the state rises; or when the length of time in the

state rises, the annual rate rises. Algebraically this is stated as:

    Annual       percentage of         number of            average length
    Rate in = persons in          x    spells          x    of spells as
    State        state over            per person           fraction of year
                 year                  in state             (= average weeks/52)
                                                                     ii

   Analyses of the difference between the rates of unemployment of young

and older persons show that most of the differences in unemployment

rates is attributable to differences in the percentage of persons who

experience unemployment over the year rather than to differences in spells

per person or in the length of spells. In 1974, for example, 32% of

16—19 year olds out of school experienced some unemployment, averaging

19 weeks over the year compared to 13% of workers 20 years and over who

had some unemployment for an average of 16 weeks of unemployment over

the year (Clark & Summers). Understanding teenage unemployment requires

an explanation of: (a) why young persons are so much moie prone to being in

the state of unemployment and (b) why they do not spend that much more time

in unemployment than other workers.

     One major reason for teenagers having such a high probability

of being unemployed over the year Is that they are new entrants, to the

labor force (see table 2). In 1978 47% of unemployed white 16—17 year

old and 54% of unemployed black 16—17 year olds never worked before compared

to just 3% of unemployed men 20 years and over. An additional third of

unemployed 16—17 year olds were categorized as re—entrants——persons who were

reported to have left the labor force in one month, returning for work

in the next. Among 18—19 year olds, the proportion of entrants and re—

entrants among the unemployed was smaller but still sizeable. By contrast,

the rates of unemployment of teenagers due to having lost their job

via a layoff or having left a job via a quit are more moderately above

the rates for adult men. Part of the high unemployment rate is due to

the process by which young persons enter the world of work for the first

 time. In the U.S., but not in all countries, entry into the work force

often involves a period of unemployment while searching for work. In the

United Kingdom, by contrast, institutional factors——the Career Services

 system for young persons and apprenticeship programs——tend to produce

low entry rate unemployment.
                                                                                           14

                             Table 2: Direct Causes of Youth Unemploymenta
                                   White                      ________      Black
Age & Status          1969    1975    1978b        1978        1969    1975    1978h        1978
                     Rates of Unemployment                    Rates of Unemployment       Fraction
                                                  of un—                                   of un-
16—17
                                                 employment                               employment
Total Unemployment    12.5      19.7    19.7     100.0         24.6      39.2   46.4       100.0
  losers              1.6        3.4       3.2    16.2          2.1       4.8       4.5     9.7
  leavers             1.0        1.4       1.2     6.1         1.6        1.1       1.4      3.0

  total entrants      9.9       15.0    15.3      77.7        20.9       33.9   40.8       87.9

    re—entrants       4.3        5.9       6.1    31.0        10.2       15.3   15.7       33.8
    new entrants      5.6        9.0       9.2    46.7        10.7    18.5      25.1       54.1


18—19

Total Unemployment    7.9       17.1    13.4     100.0        18.8    32.9      33.5      100.0
  losers              2.0        8.1       5.4    40.3         5.9    13.0      10.2       30.4

  leavers             1.5        1.7       1.8    13.4         3.3       2.3        2.6     7.8

  total entrants      4.5        7.2       6.2    46.3        10.0    17.9      20.7       61.8

    re—entrants       3.0        4.3       3.7    27.6         7.0    10.1      10.6       32.5

    new entrants      1.5        3.0       2.5    18.7         3.0       7.5    10.2       30.4


20—24

Total Unemployment    4.6       13.0    10.7     100.0         8.4    23.0      22.8      100.0

  losers              1.8        8.6       6.2    57.9         3.9    14.9      11.4       50.0

  leavers             0.9        1.4       1.9    17.8         1.7       1.4        1.6     7.0

  total entrants      1.9        3.2       2.6    24.3         2.7       6.7        9.8    43.0

    re—entrants       1.7        2.7       2.2    20.6         1.8       4.8        7.3    32.0

   new entrants       0.3        0.5       0.4     3.7         0.9       1.9        2.5    11.0

Notes: aunemployment weighted counts are taken from unpublished data provided
         by BLS. Labor Force numbers are taken from Employment and Training Report
         of the President, 1977, Table A—8, (p. 139—143).

        b1978 percentages are unweighted averages of percentages for the first
         three months of 1973.
                                                                            15

      The reason why young persons have about as lengthy spells of
                                                                      unemploy-
 ment as older persons is, as Marston and Clark and Summers have pointed

 out, due to the fact that teenagers tend to drop out of the labor force,

 or be reported as dropping out, when they become unemployed. When spells

 out of the labor force and spells of unemployment are added together to

 obtain spells of nonemployment, young persons are found to be out of

 work for longer periods than adults.

      Decomposition of employment/population ratios for younger and older

workers show even greater differences in the lengths of employment

spells between young and older workers, with an average completed

spell of employment of teenagers (which may include changes in jobs

without moving into nonemployment) much below those for all workers
20 and over.                            -
                                            --




      An alternative way of demonstrating the
                                              way the short length of youth

jobs contributes t the age differential in unemployment is to decompose the

 rate of unemployment for persons in the work force into the probability of

 unemployment given a job change multiplied by the probability of a job change.

 The chances of being unemployed, given a change, are the same as for older

 workers. Differences in unemployment reflect differences in the proportion

 of persons whoare job changers: about one—fourth of men 18—24 change jobs

 in a year compared to less than one—tenth of 35—54 year olds (see Mincer, in Freeman
and Wise, table 3). The differential proportion of job changers by age is

itself largely attributable, according to Mincer's calculations, to differences

in seniority by age. Low—seniority workers, of necessity primarilyyoung

workers, change jobs frequently while high—seniority workers, of necessity

primarily older workers, change less frequently and are as a result less

likely to be unemployed.
                                                                   16



   We conclude that one of the key factors behind high youth joblessness

is the high mobility and short tenure of the young.



Incidence

    Joblessness is concentrated among certain groups of young persons and

is relatively infrequent among others. Studies of the effect of diverse

socioeconomic factors on the probability that a young persons will be

employed show that with diverse other factors held fixed:

     —   black youth have a lower probability of employment. Among teens
         this is largely due to problems in obtaining a first job upon entry
         into the market. Among 20—24 year olds higher chances of being
         laid off contribute to the lower probability.
     —
         youths from disadvantaged areas, notably those where relatively many
         families have incomes below the poverty level, also have lower
         probabilities of employment

     —   youths with less schooling, such as high school dropouts, tend to
         be markedly prone to joblessness

     — youths living in areas where there are relatively many young
       persons tend to suffer greater joblessness than other youths

     —   youths living in areas where the mix of industries is favorable
         to employment of the young (i.e. with many service and trade
         establishments); where economic growth is rapid; and where adult
         unemployment is relatively low tend to have higher rates of
         employment than other youths

     —   surprisingly, perhaps, with the exception of those from homes below the
         poverty level, youths from low income families do not have noticeably
         lower chances of holding a job than youths from high income families

     —   youths working in certain occupations, those with high initial
         wages but slow wage growth, and in industries in which the work
         force tends to be highly mobile, have higher rates of unemployment.

     As a result of the high concentration of youth joblessness among

blacks and selected groups of whites, much youth joblessness is attribut-

able to a small 'hard core' of young people who experience many

weeks without work. Over half of unemployment among male teenagers out of

school has been estimated as due to the unemployment of persons with more

than 6 months of unemployment. (Clark and Summers in Freeman and Wise)
                                                                   17



       The factors that are associated with youth joblessness are not, it is

 important to recognize, the same factors that determine the wages of young

workers. Being black in particular reduces the probability of holding a job

but does not substantially affect the wages of the young. The major economic

surveys of youth in the l970s, ranging from the Survey of Income and Education,

based on an expanded Current Population Survey sample, to the National

Longitudinal Survey of the High School Class of 1972 show that, conditional

on other factors, white and black youth have essentially the same wages:


                      Estimated Percentage Effect of
                       Being Black on Wages 1972—76

All young men, from
Survey of Income and Education, 1975

     16—17                                        .14
     18—19                                       —.06
     20—24                                       —.05

Young men in high school
Class of 1972, by year

     1972                                         .02
     1973                                         .02
     1974                                         .01
     1975                                         .05
     1976                                         .04

Source: from Freeman and Wise: Meyer and Wise
                               Freeman


     Other measures of family background which appear to reduce employment

probabilities——such as coming from homes on welfare——also have little impact on

wages. By contrast, parental income, which is only weakly associated with youth

unemployment, has a sizeable effect on youth wages, suggesting that the

wealthy are able to help their children obtain better jobs.
                                                                18


Jobs vs. people

     To what extent is youth joblessness due to lack of jobs as opposed to

lack of skills or motivation among people?

     Since employment and wages depend both on supply and demand farces the

job vs. people question, which dominates much popular discussion of youth

unemployment, is in one sense poorly posed. What can be examined is the

extent to which variation in some of the supply and demand factors listed

in figure 1 affect the level of joblessness, conditional on the level of the

other factors.

     With respect to jobs, a strong case can be made that lack of jobs i'

a major contributor to youth joblessness, in the sense that increased

demand for youth labor, at existing wages, or possibly even at lower wages,

will in fact greatly Increase youth employment. The evidence for this

claim is several fold.          -




     First,   virtually every study of youth employment show substantial

responsiveness of the number working to aggregate economic conditions.

Changes in the unemployment rate of prime age men are Invariably found to

have enormous effects on the employment/population ratio,
                                                            participation

rate, and unemployment rate of yeuth, especially nonwhite youth. As an

example of the magnitude of the response to cyclical changes, consider

the following estimates of the effect of a change in the total male un-

employment rate on youth male employment/population ratios:

        Effect of Percentage Point Increase in Total ale Unemployment
              on Youth Employment/Population Ratios, by Age
                            16—17 year olds   18—19 year olds        20—24 year olds

Based on time series                —2.1           —1.7                 —3.4

Based on cross—section              —2.4            2.3                 —1.5

Source: Freeman, in Freeman and Wise,. table 5.
                                                                    19


Estimates of the cyclic responsiveness of black youth employment/pLpuiation

ratios suggest responsiveness about 50 percent higher than the figures for

all youth. Such significant cyclic responsiveness would be unlikely in the

absence of a substantial shortfall of youth jobs when the economy is in a

downturn. Corroboratory evidence from comparisons of SMSAs shows a similar

pattern: the major determinant of employment/population differences across

SMSAs is the level of aggregate demand in the SMSA.

     Second, several studies of unemployed youth (as well as of other

unemployed workers) have found that virtually no unemployed young job seeker

reports having rejected a job offer during the period of search. If there

were not a shortage of jobs, we would expect the unemployed to be picking

and choosing, engaged in the process of searching for the best offer, but

in fact that does not appear to be the case: most get no job

offers at all. Similarly, comparisons of the 'reservation wage' of young

workers——the wage at which the young claim they would accept a job——with

actual wages received gives little indication that, were additional youth

jobs availab1e, there would be insufficient applicants.

     One frequent objection to the shortage of jobs hypothesis is that

newspapers, store windows, employment agencies and the like are often bursting

with help—wanted ads. A 1978 Fortune Magazine study of actual want—ads has

 effectively demolished this argument. The Fortune researchers found that of

 228 ads in the help—wanted section of a newspaper, only 142 represented

 real job offerings within commuting range of the city and, of those only 42

 did not require special skills. The employers offering those 42 jobs were

 'fairly swamped by a tidal wa':e of applicants'. While turnover of workers

 and jobs guarantees continual openings, the number of jobs falls far short

 of the number of plausible applicants.

      To what extent can the lack of jobs for youth be attributed to the

 minimum wage? With rare exception, studies of the effect of the minimum
                                                                           20



on youth employment suggest that existence of the minimum reduces youth employment

by moderate amounts but may have larger effects on black than white youth.

A 10% increase in the minimum relative to average wages is usually found to

reduce youth employment by somewhere between 1% to 4% (Gramlich, Mincer, Ragan).

This implies that recent increases may have reduced youth employment by perhaps

2% to 6%. Because reduction in the minimum would raise the labor force as well

as employment, however, the effects on youth unemployment rates are much less;

the recent increases may have increased the youth unemployment rate by no

more than 2—3 percentage points.

      The nature as well as the number of jobs available to youth also appears

to affect the rate of joblessness. Analysis of the effect of occupation on

youth unemployment shows that, with diverse personal characteristics fixed,

youths in what may reasonably be characterized as 'dead end' jobs tend to

have higher rates of unemployment than other youths(Brown, in Freeman and Wise).

Increasing the number of youth jobs with a future is likely to have a greater

impact on youth joblessness than increasing the number of dead end jobs.



      Finally, it is important to recognize that at least some of the lack

of jobs for youth may be attributed to explicit employer personnel policies.

Surveys of company hiring practices in the past have revealed definite employer

preferences against younger workers, which may or may not be economically

justifiable on the basis of differential productivity, wage, and turnover

costs. One study, for example, found that in 1970 about 80—90% of employers

preferred workers 22 years or older, compared to those under 22, even for

relatively low level jobs (Diamond and Bedrosian). While age

discrimination laws have induced some firms to drop age from application

forms, it is still likely that most enterprises prefer older employees.

At present we lack the detailed information on productivity, labor costs,

and turnover and training to determine whether these preferences are rational

or   discriminatory.
                                                                   21



     For black youths, of course, there is an additional problem: that,

despite the equal opportunity laws, at least some employers may be less willing

to hire black than white youth, possibly for reasons of communication across

cultural lines as well as prejudice. High levels of youth crime in some

inner cities could also lead to employers being fearful of hiring black youth.

   That there is a definite shortage of jobs for young persons does not

mean fhat there are no 'people' problems. Youth joblessness is, as noted

earlier, concentrated among a small group of persons, a large fraction of

whom are black. Expansion of aggregate demand would raise their

employment, but levels of joblessness are so high as to suggest other problems

as well. While definitive evidence is lacking, many believe that broad

socioeconomic community problems in inner cities——where poverty, poor schooling,

broken homes, drug and alcohol abuse, out—of—wedlock births and crime

are rampant——contribute significantly to the problem of youth employment.

On the one hand, many of these youths lack the affective and cognitive skills

required for jobs in the regular economy. On the other, various illegal

activities may offer a sizeable source of potential earnings. Even at

cyclical peaks, these youth tend to have relatively high joblessness and

unemployment rates.

     In sum, the empirical evidence suggests that while much of youth job-

lessness is associated with turnover and mobility, alternative institutional

arrangements could reduce unemployment due to initial job search, and that

while lack of jobs is critical, for the groups with the highest rate of

joblessness there are additional "people" problems.


Causes of change

     Because of the diverse developments in the youth labor market documented

in table 1, it is more difficult to explain changes over time. Some of the
                                                                        22


observed patterns of change appear to be explicable by the hypotheses outlined

earlier.     Others, however, remain a mystery.

    The change that seems to be the easiest to explain is the decline in the

wages of young workers relative to older workers. Estimates of the substitutability

of workers by age suggest that large increases in the relative number of young

men (but not young women) will reduce their wages compared to those of older workers.

On the basis of these estimates, much of the decline in the relative earnings bf the

young can be attributed to the enormous influx of the "baby boom"

generation onto the job market. If this interpretation is correct, the

relative wages of the young will rise in the l980s as their relative

supply declines.

    The decline in youth wages relative to adult wages (see line

3, table 1) may help explain one of the puzzles of the 1970s: the fact that despite

such adverse developments as a rise in the adult male unemployment rate, increased

relative numbers of some young age groups (20—24 year olds) and extended coverage

of the minimum rate, youth employment and employment/population rates

rose in the l970s.     From 1969 to 1977, for example,

the number of teenage employed workers increased by 28% while

the number of 20—24 year olds employed increased by 38%. One

possible explanation consistent with the observed wage patterns is that the

minimum nothwithstanding, the relative wages of youth fell sufficiently as to

generate a sizeable number of jobs. Because youth participation rose (for

reasons that have not been explored in detail), the rate of youth unemployment

increased despite the growth of employment.

           While analytically intriguing, the greater—than—expected l970s increase

in youth employment is not of course the reason for societal concern with youth

joblessness. The reason for concern is the increased relative
                                                                       23




joblessness among black youth. From 1969 to 1977, while white teeu employment

increased, black teenage employment actually fell by 3.1%. Which of the
hypotheses described earlier account for the reduction in the

ratio of the employment/population rate for black youths and for

the increase in the ratio of black to white youth unemployment

rates?

    No clear answer exists at present. Extant studies suggest that some

of the proposed factors aave contributed to the change                      -


but the studies fall far short of explaining the striking deterioration

in the position of black youth.

    On the demand side, sluggish aggregate conditions, as reflected

in the prime age male unemployment rate, have added to black youth

joblessness. Roughly, the 2.C' point increase in the prime age (35—44 year

old) male rate from 1969 to 1977 lowered the employment/population rate of

black youth by 12 points and by 7 points relative to its impact on the

comparable ratio for white youth. Similarly, the increased relative

number of black youth may have reduced their employment/population ratio in

the l97Os. The puzzle remains, however, as to why white youth employment

managed to rise despite these developments while black youth employment

did not.

     The hypothesis that some of the black youth employment reflects

suburbanization of jobs has some validity. High rates of joblessness

among black youth in suburbia, however, shows that this factor can only

be a minor contribution to the adverse trends. Only 24% of black teenagers

living in suburbs held jobs in 1975 compared to 47.2% of white teenagers.

Teenage unemployment rates for blacks outside of central cities, while

smaller than those in central cities, exceeded those of white teenagers in

central cities. If all blacks lived outside metropolitan areas, their
                                                                  24




unemployment rate would still be in the 30% range (Westcott).

    Reduction in the size of the military, which can be viewed as a

drop in demand for labor which makes extensive use of blacks, represents

another possible cause of the downward trend in the percent of black

youths with a job. Because the black share of the military rose sharply

after Vietnam, however, it is difficult to attribute more than a small fraction

of the seventies downward trend in black youth employment to the drop in

the size of the military.

     The possibility that black youth employment has been adversely

affected by wage developments deserves greater attention. As shown in

table 1, the decline in the relative wages of youth was concentrated among

whites. To the extent that the increased wage of blacks is due to the

minimum wage or increased antibias governmental activity which raises

wages along existing demand curves, some of the reduced black employment

could be attributed to the improved wages. What proportion is so attributable

has not yet been determined.

     While often cited as a possible cause of increased youth unemployment,

the influx of illegal aliens, who might be especially good substitutes

for less skilled minority youth, has also not been evaluated quantitatively.

Limited work on the effect of increased female participation on youth

employment shows little evidence that youths have been adversely affected

by the growth of the female work force. (Freeman in Freeman and Wise) This raises

doubts that increased numbers of aliens have reduced youth employment as well.

     Inability to explain the pattern of black youth joblessness in terms

of changes in labor demand has directed attention toward supply

side hypotheses.
                                                                        25




    The major supply side development ——     the   enormous increase in the

relative number of young workers due to the 'baby boom' cohort has been cited

by some as an important factor in the reduced employment chances of young

blacks, largely because of the greater increase in the number of black than of

white youth. If employers discriminate on the basis of race, the greater

increase in the number of young blacks could be expected to have an especially

adverse effect on their employment chances, particularly given the increase

in the wages of black relative to white youth. Calculations by Wachter (in

Freeman and Wise) show sizeable effects of the increased number of young persons

on black employment/population ratios. While the population trend appears to

contribute to explaining the observed drop in employment/population for blacks,

Wachter does not believe that it accounts for the bulk of the change.'

    Considerable attention has been given to the effect of the other more

sociological supply side forces. Unfortunately, however, quantitative

information about their impact is seriously lacking.

    With respect to parental and community support of jobless youth,

the evidence does not tell a clear story. On the one hand, while there

is some support for the argument that increased welfare funds have

reduced employment of inner city youth, and while families on welfare

have increased, the effect of being on welfare on youth employment is

not large enough to account for the trend in joblessness. Similarly, given

the rough stability in real family incomes —— as distinct from individual

earnings ——   it   is difficult to argue that increased affluence among the

poor accounts for reduced youth work.
                                                                               26




       On the other hand, part of the reduction in the black employment!

population ratio is related to the increase in the roportion of blacks

enrolled in school shown below:



                   Patterns of Enrollment Among Young Hales
            Percent Enrolled in School            Percent Enrolled in School
                      Black                                 White
            16—17    18—19       20—24            16—17     18—19      20—24

1964        84.3        39.9         8.3          90.4        52.4    25.6

1969        87.4        49.5        20.5          92.2        60.9    33.2

1977        92.5        50.6        26.1          89.5        47.7    25.7



       As a result of the increased enrollment of blacks, the employment!

population rate of 16—17 year old blacks would have fallen (assuming no

change in participation rates of enrolled and not enrolled youths) by

2 points from 1969 to 1977; the employment/population rate of 18—19 year

old blacks would have fallen by 1 point while the rates for 20—24 year

olds would have fallen by 2 points. Since the white enrollment ratios

fell over this period, the increased tendency for blacks to choose school

helps explain the differential pattern of change by race.


       Evidence on the effect of deleterious social developments on the

employability of inner city youth, while scattered, tends to suggest a

major problem. There is no doubt that drug abuse, alcoholism, youth

crime, and related activities which reduce employability plague inner

city youth. Limited time series data show marked upward trends in these

and other indicators of the status of youth. Similarly few would disagree

with the oft—expressed complaint that quality of education is often quite
                                                                             27



poor in inner cities, although whether quality has deteriorated in

recent years is open to question. Limited evidence on attitudes shows

that black youths from Northern urban backgrounds are less committed

to work than black youths from Southern backgrounds and that these

differences are a factor in labor market achievement.

     While it is difficult to differentiate cause from effect, there does

appear to be a significant employability problem among inner city youths

which contributes to the trend in joblessness.



Conclusion

     The preceding analysis of the causes of youth joblessness and related

labor market problems suggests that much remains to be learned. Partly

because of inconsistencies in reported rates of youth employment across

surveys and partly because of problems in measuring key social variables,

it is difficult to reach firm conclusions. As far as can be told, much

of the relatively high rate of youth joblessness can be attributed to

turnover and mobility patterns that are normal in the U.S. economy, but

much is also directly related to a dearth of jobs. Demand forces, which

have come to be neglected in favor of supply in much popular discussion

of youth joblessness, are major determinants of variation in youth

employment over time and among areas. For groups facing the most severe

joblessness problem, however, the difficulty due to lack of jobs appears

to be compounded by problems of employability related to deleterious

social patterns. Surprisingly, perhaps, the factors that determine the

probability that young persons end up employed or jobless differ

substantively from those that determine wages.
                                                                               28




     While we have been able to explain the decline in the earnings of

young workers relative to the earnings of older workers in the 1970s, the

causes of the divergent trend in youth employment between all young

persons and nonwhites remains a conundrum. For reasons that are unclear,

white youth employment/population ratios have stabilized or risen in the

period, despite adverse economic developments, while black youth employment!

population ratios have been dropping since the mid l950s. While these

trends are likely to have been influenced by the wage patterns, shifts

in demand, and various social developments, no definitive accounting

exists at present. The causes of the divergent trends have been

illuminated but not resolved by existing work.
                                                                   29


                              Bibliography


Adie, D.K., "The Lag in Effect of Minimum Wages on Teenage Unemployment,"

    Proceedings, Industrial Relations Research Association (December, 1971).

_________   and L. Galloway, "The Minimum Wage and Teenage Unemployment,"

    Western Economic Journal, 11 (December 1973).

 Barton, Paul E., "Youth Employment and Career Entry," Labor Market Information

     for Youths, Seymour L. Wolfbein (ed.), Temple University School of

     Business Administration (Philadelphia, 1975).
Borus, Michael E., Mott, Frank L. and Nestel, Gilbert.    "Counting Youth:

     A Comparison of Youth Labor Force Statistics in the Current Population

     Surveys," from Conference Report on Youth Unemployment: Its Measure—

     inent and Meaning, pp. 15—34.

 Coleman, James S., "The School to Work Transition," The Teenage Unemployment

     Problem: What are the Options?, Congressional Budget Office (October 14, 1976).

 Cotterhill, Philip G. and Walter J. Wadycki, "Teenagers and the Minimum

     Wage in Retail Trade," Journal of Human Resources, vol. II (winter, 1976).

 Diamond, Daniel E., and Bedrosian, Hrach, Industry Hiring Requirements and

     the Employment of Disadvantaged Groups, New York: New York University

     School of Commerce, 1970.

 Duncan, Beverly, "Dropouts and the Unemployed," Journal of Political Economy

     (April, 1965).

 Fearn, Robert N., "Labor Force and School Participation of Teenagers,"

     Ph.D. dissertation, University of Chicago, 1968.

 Folk, Hugh, "The Problem of Youth Unemployment," The Transition from

     School to Work, A Report Based on the Princeton Manpower Symposium

     (May 9—10, 1968), (Industrial Relations Section, Princeton University).

 Fortune Magazine Jobs and Uant Ads: A Look Behind the Words, by H. I.

     Meyer, 11/20/78.
                                                                              30


Freeman, Richard B., "Youth Employment Opportunities: Changes in the

   Relative Position of College and High School Graduates," Labor Market

   Information for Youths, Seymour L. Wolfbein (ed.), Temple University

    School of Business Administration (Philadelphia, 1975).


_________________      "Teenage Unemployment: Can Reallocating Educational

    Resources Help?" The Teenage Unemployment Problem: What Are the Options?

     Congressional Budget Office (October, 1976).

 Freeman, Richard B., "The Effect of Demographic Factors on Age—Earnings

     Profiles," Journal of Human Resources (spring 1979).

                       and D. Wise (eds.) National Bureau of Economic Research

     Conference on Youth Unemployment:

     Brown, Charles,"Dead—End Jobs and Youth Unemployment";

      Clark, Kim and Lawrence Summers,"The Dyanmics of Youth Unemployment";

      Corcoran, Nary, "Attitudes of Women and Changing Employment Patterns";

      Ellwood, David, "Teenage Unemployment: Permanent Scar or Temporary

           Blemish";

      Freeman, Richard and James Medoff, "Why Does the Rate of Youth Labor

           Force Activity Differ Across Surveys?";

      Hall, Robert, "The Minimum Wage and Job Turnover in Markets for Youth

           Workers";

      Layard, Richard, "Youth Unemployment in Britain and the U.S. Compared";

      Mincer, Jacob and Linda Leighton, "Turnover and Unemployment";

      Rees, Albert and Wayne Gray, "Family Effects in Youth Unemployment";

      Wachter, Michael and Chongsoo Kim, "Time Series Changes in Youth

           Joblessness";

      Wise, David and Robert Meyer, "High School Preparation and Early

           Labor Market Experience."
                                                                               31
Gass, Ronald, "Approaches to the Transition from School to Work," Labor

    Market Information for Youths, Seymour L. Wolfbein (ed.), Temple University

    School of Public Administration (Philadelphia, 1975).

Gavett, Thomas, et al., Youth Unemployment and the Minimum Wage, BLS

    (Bulletin 165), 1970.

Goldfarb, Robert S., "The Policy Content of Quantitative Minimum Wage Research," in

    Industrial Relations Research Association, Proceedings of the Twey—Seventh

    Annual Meeting (1974).

 Goldstein, Harold, "Youth in the Labor Market: Trends in Emp1oyirnit and

     Unemployment," The Transition from School to Work, A Report Basud on

      the Princeton Manpower Symposium (Industrial Relations Section,

     Princeton University), May, 1968.

  Gramlich, Edward N., "Impact of Minimum Wages on Other Wages, Employment,

      and Family Incomes," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2: 1976).

  Kalachek, Edward, "Determinants of Teen Age Employment," The Journal of

      Human Resources (winter, 1969).

  _______________, The Youth Labor Market, University of Michigan and

      National Manpower Task Force, 1969.

  Katz, Arnold, "Teenage Employment Effects of State Minimum Wages," Journal

      of Human Resources, vol. 8 (spring, 1973).

  King, Allan C., "Minimum Wages and the Secondary Labor Market," Southern

      Economic Journal, vol. 41 (October, 1974).

  Leigh, Duane E., "The Occupational Mobility of Young Men, 1965—1970,"

      Industrial and Labor Relations Review (October, 1976).

  Levitan, Sar A., "Coping with Teenage Unemployment," The Teenage Unemployment

      Problem: What Are the Options? Congressional Budget Office (October, 1976).

  Lovell, Michael C., "The Minimum Wage, Teenage Unemployment, and the Business

      Cycle," Western Economic Journal, vol. 10 (December 1972).

  Marston, Stephen, "Employment Instability and High Unemployment Rates,"

       Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 1976: 1, P. 169.
                                                                             32
Meyer, Herbert E., "Jobs and Want Ads: A Look Behind the Words," Fortune

    (November 20, 1978).

Miljus, Robert C. et al., "Some Correlates of the Labor Market Status of

    Male Youth," The Transition from School to Work, A Report Based on the

    Princeton Manpower Symposium (Industrial Relations Section, Princeton

    University), May, 1968.

Mincer, Jacob, "Unemployment Effects of Minimum   Wages,"   Journal of

    Political Economy vol. 84 (August 1972).

Moore, Thomas G., "The Effect of Minimum Wages on Teenage Unemployment

    Rates," Journal of Political Economy vol. 79 (July/August 1971).

National Child Labor Committee, Rite of Passage: The Crisis of Youth's

    Transition from School to Work, New York (1976).

Perrella, Vera C., "Employment of School Age Youth," BLS, Special Labor

    Force Report, No. 87.

Ragan, James J. Jr., "Minimum Wages and the Youth Labor Market," The

    Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 59 (May 1977).

Silberman, Charles, "What Hit the Teenagers," Fortune (April 1965).

Singell, Larry D., "Some Private and Social Aspects of the Labor Mobility

    of Young Workers," The Quarterly Review of Economics and Business,

    vol. 6, no. 1.

Smith, Ralph, "The Teenage Unemployment Problem: How Much Will Macro

    Policies Matter?" The Teenage Unemployment Problem: What Are the

    Options? Congressional Budget Office (October 1976).

Stevenson, Gelvin, "Determinants of the Occupational Employment of Black

    and White Male Teenagers," Ph.D. dissertation, Washington University

     (June, 1973).

Taggart, Robert, "Employment and Training Programs for Youth," (published

    ms., December 1975), From School to Work.

Westcott, D., "Youth In the Labor Force: An Area Study," Monthly Labor

    Review, July 1976, vol. 99, no. 7, pp. 3—9.
