                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE DETERMINATION OF LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES:
        I~LICATIONS FOR MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES


                     Benjamin M. Friedman




                     Working Paper No. 366




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge MA 02138

                           June 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                       NBER Working Paper 366
                                                                    June 1979



               THE DETERMINATION OF LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES:
               IMPLICATIONS FOR MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES


                            Benjamin M. Friedman



                                  Abstract


      This paper reports the implications, for the effectiveness of monetary

and fiscal policies, of treating the determination of long-term interest rates

by an explicit supply-demand approach instead of the more familiar unrestricted

reduced-form term-structure approach.     In particular, the new research tool

applied in this paper is an altered version of the MIT-Penn-SSRC econometric

model from which the usual single term-structure·equation has been deleted and

into which a supply-demand model of the bond market has been substituted in

its place.

      Since long-term asset yields and prices are a key part of the bearing of

financial market developments on nonfinancial economic activity, simulation

experiments based on the altered model suggest interesting implications for

monetary and fiscal policies.   Simulation results indicate that, in the short

to intermediate run, fiscal policy may have somewhat larger real-sector effects

and monetary policy somewhat smaller real-sector effects than conventional       u.s.
macroeconometric models have shown.     The results also indicate that these

differences (for both fiscal and monetary policies) are more pronounced when

the Federal Reserve System implements monetary policy by setting the monetary

growth rate than when it does so by setting interest rate levels.


                                               National Bureau of Economic
                                                 Research
                                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               (617) 868-3929
                                                                 Preliminary Draft
                                                                 April, 1979




                 THE DETERMINATION· OF .LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES:

                 IMPLICATIONS FOR MONETARY AND FISCAL POLICIES


                               Benjamin M. Friedman*
                               Harvard University


      The yields and prices of long-term assets play an important role in the

complex interrelationships that connect financial and nonfinancial behavior in

an economy like the United States.    Long-term interest rates are a major

component of the cost of financial capital to corporate borrowers and,

consequentl~ a   key determinant of physical capital formation through business

investment in new plant and equipment.    Long-term interest rates may also

affect other typically debt-financed physical investments like residential

construction, although the evidence there is less straightforward.      Equity

yields constitute another large component of the cost of corporate financial

capital, and hence another determinant of business investment.      Movements in

equity prices (and, to a lesser extent, bond prices) also account for much of

the variation in households' overall wealth positions and thereby importantly

influence consumer spending.    In sum, long-term asset yields and prices are a

large part of the story of how what happens in the financial markets

including monetary policy and the financial aspects of fiscal policy -- affects

the nonfinancial economy.

      In light of the importance of long-term asset yields and prices even in

a nonfinancial context, the meager treatment of the determination of these

yields and prices in most present-day macroeconometric models is both surprising
                                       -2-



and disconcerting.   Moreover, the skeleton-like treatment accorded long-term

assets in such models often contrasts sharply with the rich development of the

determination of short-term yields (via a market-clearing approach to the

demand for and supply of either money or bank reserves) or the effects of

long-term asset yields on investment (via the "putty-clay" neoclassical

investment function) and consumption (via the "life cycle" model).   Instead,

after carefully modeling   short-term interest rates, most such models determine

one long-term interest rate by a simple term-structure relation to short-term

rates and then determine other long-term yields (including equity yields, and

hence equity prices) by analogous single equations, before proceeding to use

these long-term asset yields and prices as inputs to the again more fully

modeled nonfinancial blocks.   Even in models that contain substantial quantity

detail relating to long-term asset markets, such detail is often merely

peripheral, and the actual determination of long-term yields and prices takes

place independently along roughly these lines.

      In principle, of course, simplicity is a virtue in economic modeling,

and there is nothing necessarily wrong with handling the key middle step

between short-term yields and nonfinancial behavior by a spare single-equation

approach.   The issue, instead, is whether the standard single term-structure

equation does or does not adequately represent the main features of long-term

interest rate determination.   In particular, while such equations could in

principle capture effects due to shifts in relative asset demands (say, because

of weak cash flows at major bond-buying institutions) or relative asset supplies

(say, because of strong business capital expenditures in comparison to profits),

in practice they do not.   Experience indicates that single term-structure

equations are simply incapable of representing such influences on long-term
                                             -3-


                               l
interest rate determination.       To   the extent that such influences matter,

therefore, these single equations inadequately represent long-term yield

behavior, and macro mOdels based on these equations may give a misleading

picture of important financial effects on nonfinancial economic behavior.

      The object of this paper is to bring to bear on financial-nonfinancial

interactions a richer approach to modeling the determination of long-term

interest rates.   In a series of previous papers,2 I have developed an alterna-

tive model based explicitly on the truism that any factor affecting long-term

bond yields does so by (and only by) influencing some borrower's supply of

bonds and/or some lender's demand for bonds.            Rather than model the bond yield

directly, as in the single-equation term-structure approach, this work instead

models the supply of and the demand for bonds, and determines the bond yield
                                                                             3
at the level necessary to equate resulting total supply and demand.              The

specific bond supplies and demands modeled in this work are those in the               u.s.
market for corporate bonds; this market is the primary source of long-term

external funds to finance business fixed investment, and the corporate bond

yield is also the long-term interest rate most frequently used in single-

equation models of term-structure relationships.4

      This paper reports the implications of this supply-demand model of long-

term interest rate determination for the effectiveness of monetary and fiscal

policies, as modeled in all other respects by the MIT-Penn-SSRC (henceforth MPS)

econometric model of the United States.            The new research tool applied in this

paper is therefore an altered MPS model from which the usual single term-

structure equation has been removed and into which a supply-demand model of

the bond market has been substituted in its place.            The only difference between

this altered MPS model and the familiar MPS model therefore lies in the
                                         -4-



determination of long-term asset yields and prices.     Since these long-term

yields and prices are such an important. part of the overall bearing of financial

market developments on nonfinancial behavior, however, the altered model

exhibits interesting implications for monetary and fiscal policies.

      Section I describes the supply-demand model of the bond market, contrasting

it to the standard single-equation term-structure approach, and notes some of

the key influences on long-term interest rate determination that the MPS model's

term-structure equation overlooks but that the    supply~demandmodel of   the bond

market incorporates.   Section II briefly recalls the important channels by

which long-term asset yields and prices (however determined) affect nonfinancial

behavior in the MPS model.     Sections III and IV focus on fiscal policy and

monetary policy, respectively, highlighting the differences that emerge in the

analysis of these policies according to the approach adopted for long-term

interest rate determination.    Section V offers some general conclusions drawn

from these results, and suggests some opportunities for further research along

these lines.
                                                     -5-



                                                                        5
I.   The Determination of            Long~Term    Interest Rates

      A. The Concept of the Demand-Supply MOdel

       Since the concept of price determination by the market-clearing inter-

section of demand and supply is so central to the analysis of economic behavior,

it seems at first only natural to approach the determination of financial asset

prices and yields from an explicit demand-supply perspective.                          The total market
                                            D
demand for any given asset, A , is presumably some function of the asset's

yield, r, and of other factors (such as yields on competing assets, variances

and covariances, etc.),
                  D                                       D'
              f       ( ...   ,r, ... ),              f        >   0                                 (1)

                                                                                           6
while the total market supply of the asset is an analogous function
                  S                                       S'
          =   f       ( •.•   ,r, ... ),              f        <   o.                                (2)

The requirement of market clearing,

          =                                                                                          (3)

closes the system and permits the model to determine not only the asset

quantity A (= AD = AS) but also the asset yield r.                          Any factor which influences

the demand for or supply of an asset will also, ceteris paribus, influence the

asset's yield (and price).                 Conversely, any factor which influences an asset's

yield does so, ceteris paribus, only by influencing the relevant market demand

or supply (or both).

       In addition to its appeal from the general standpoint of economic theory,

there are two further reasons why the explicit demand-supply perspective seems

particularly appropriate for modeling asset prices and yields.                          First, the

highly efficient markets for many actively traded financial assets should be

cases for which, in comparison with many product and factor markets, the

assumption of market clearing as in (3) requires relatively little sacrifice of
                                        -6-



realism.    Second, a long tradition of economic analysis of portfolio behavior

has provided a rich development of economic theory deriving the pertinent asset

demand and supply relations, qS in (1) and (2), from the constrained utility-

maximizing behavior of market participants under a variety of assumptions about

the specification of the utility function and the nature of the associated

constraints.

      At the empirical level, however, economists modeling the determination of

long-term interest rates -- that is, the yields on fixed-income assets of long

duration -- have traditionally avoided the explicit demand-supply apparatus and

instead related long-term interest rateS directly to short-term interest rates

and/or various other factors assumed to influence the demand for and/or the

supply of long-term bonds.    The dominant empirical methodology associated with

this approach has been a model consisting of a single unrestricted reduced-form

equation with the value of the (nominal) long-term interest rate as the dependent

variable.    Familiar explanatory variables used in such unrestricted reduced-form

long-term interest rate equations include proxy representations of expected

future short-term interest rates and expected future price inflation, a monetary

policy variable, a proxy for liquidity considerations, etc.    Indeed, the

literature of the subject has typically -- and properly -- considered any

variable which might influence the demand for and/or supply of bonds to be an

appropriate argument of the unrestricted reduced-form equation determining the

long-term interest rate.

      Since the explicit demand-supply model of (1)-(3) also implies an equation

for the long-term interest rate, this structural model constitutes a valid

alternative to the single-equation unrestricted reduced-form model.    The demand-

supply model's implied expression for r is itself a reduced-form equation
                                       -7-



(except for any nonlinearities introduced by functional forms fD and fS) which

is equivalent to the conventional equation except that it is restricted by the

underlying structural demand and supply equations.

      The two key advantages of the demand-supply model are its ability to use

the theory of portfolio behavior to restrict the implied equation for the long-

term interest rate, and the facility which it provides for directly investigat-

ing hypotheses about portfolio behavior.     In return, this structural approach

imposes upon the researcher the discipline of explicitly acknowledging that,

since financial asset yields (that is, asset prices) are proximately determined

in a market in which assets are bought and sold, any factor hypothesized to

influence the long-term interest rate can do so only by -- and only by --

influencing some issuer's supply of bonds or some investor's demand for bonds,

or both.   To the extent that expectations of future short-term yields are

relevant via substitution effects which enforce the familiar term-structure

relationship, or that less-than-infinite elasticities of substitution create

"preferred habitats" which render quantity variables relevant, or that less-

than-infinite adjustment speeds render quantity flow variables relevant as well

as quantity stock variables, all these factors affect the determination of

long-term interest rates by, and only by, influencing the portfolio behavior

of borrowers and lenders.


      B. Methodological Issues

      Several methodological aspects of the demand-supply approach to modeling

long-term interest rate determination merit explicit comment.

      First, since the long-term interest rate is clearly a jointly determined

variable in the structural model of   (1)~(3),   it is necessary to use an
                                       -8-



estimation technique which avoids the inconsistency to which the model's

simultaneity would subject ordinary least-squares procedures.   A variety of

instrumental-variables procedures is readily available for this purpose.

     Second, the demand-supply approach largely avoids the problem of spurious

correlations inherent in unrestricted estimation of interest rate relationships.

This point is especially relevant in the case of flexible distributed lags on

past interest rates, which are typically the heart of interest rate models

based on the expectations theory of the term structure.    In a structural model

any such distributed lags simply appear as arguments of the individual demand

and supply equations, where spurious correlation is both less likely and less

harmful.

     Third, it follows by construction of least-squares estimators that the

single-equation unrestricted reduced-form model of long-term interest rate

determination will always "fit" historical interest rate data at least as well

as the restricted expression estimated implicitly within any corresponding

explicit demand-supply model.   Hence it is possible that the structural model

may buy its key associated advantages -- its ability to use and test explicit

behavioral hypotheses -- at great cost in terms of performance as measured by

within-sample fit.   The key methodological finding documented in Friedman [17,19],

however, is that a fully dynamic simulation of the structural bond market model

tracks the historical long-term interest rate with a root-mean-square error no

larger (and sometimes smaller) than the comparable standard errors reported by

researchers using the unrestricted single-equation term-structure methodology.

Hence the portfolio-theoretic restrictions placed on the structural model's

demand and supply equations apparently "pay their freight" in terms of enriching

the model's ability to draw general behavioral implications without substantially

eroding even its within-sample "predictive" performance.
                                                    -9-



    C. The Equations in the Bond Market Model

     The demand side of the corporate bond market model consists of six

equations separately representing the net purchases of corporate bonds by life

insurance companies, other insurance companies, private pension funds, state

and local government retirement funds, mutual savings banks and households;

these investors together hold approximately 95% of all corporate bonds issued

in the united States.       The supply side of the model consists of two equations

separately representing the net new issues of corporate bonds by domestic non-

financial business corporations and finance companies, which together account

for over 90% of all corporate bonds issued in the United States.              A ninth

equation determines the net of the bond purchasing and bond issuing activity

of the remaining categories of market participants.

     The model's tenth, and final, equation is a market-clearing equilibrium

condition analogous to (3), that enables the structural model to determine the

nominal long-term interest rate (that is, the own-rate) which is an argument

of each structural bond demand or bond supply equation.             The particular long-

term interest rate used as the own-rate in this model is the observed new-issue

yield on long-term bonds issued by utility companies rated Aa by Moody's

Investors Service, Inc.

     The specification of the respective sectors' bond demand equations combines

the familiar linear homogeneous model of desired portfolio selection,

                        N                   M
                  =     ~   Sik   r~t   +   ~ Yih    x ht +   ~i'    i   1, ••• ,N,     (4)



with the optimal-marginal-adjustment model of portfolio adjustment in the

presence of transactions costs,


     ~it =                                                           i = 1, ••• ,N,     (5)
                                          -10-



where the a. are (percentage) portfolio shares, the A, are (dollar amount)
              1                                                1

asset holdings, W is total portfolio size, the r~ are expected yields, thex h

are other influences on portfolio selection (including variances and covariances),

the 6A. are net asset purchases, 6W is total investable cash flow, an asterisk
      1

indicates a desired value, and the Sik' Y ,       TI       and 8        are fixed behavioral
                                         ih            i           ik
parameters.       The specification of the respective sectors' bond supply equations

is analogous to that of the model's bond demand equations, combining the linear

homogeneous selection of desired liabilities to finance a given cumulated

external deficit and again the optimal-marginal-adjustment model.

     The primary rationale motivating the use of the linear homogeneous
                 ,
portfolio select10n                     .
                    model is,as usual, s1mply its convenience and tractab'l'
                                                                         1 1ty. 7

Some adjustment model is always necessary to render a desired portfolio

allocation model operational in the presence of transactions costs.                  The

principal advantage motivating the use of the optimal-marginal-adjustment model

is that it captures, in a tractable way, the effect of differential transactions

costs which render the allocation of the new investable cash flow more sensitive

to expected yields (and variances, etc.) than the reallocation of the asset

holdings already in the portfolio.

     The primary data source for the stock and flow quantities used in this

model is the Federal Reserve System's flow-of-funds accounts.                  The respective

bond demand and supply equations are estimated using the instrumental-variables

procedure of Bundy and Jorgenson [8 J.


     D. Influences on the Long-Term Interest Rate

     Since a key determinant of market participants' demands for and supplies

of bonds as modeled in (4) is the comparison of the expected yield on bonds

versus the yield on short-term assets, short-term yields playa large role in
                                        -11-



determining long-term yields in the   demand~supply   model just as they do in a

single-equation term-structure model.    Expectations of price inflation, proxied

by current and recent observed inflation, also play an analogous role here and

in the conventional term-structure equation.    If these variables were the only

arguments of the demand and supply equations, then the sole contribution of the

structural model would be the imposition of some restrictions on the estimation

of an otherwise standard long-term interest rate equation.

      In fact, however, the respective bond demand and supply equations as

modeled in (4) and (5) include a rich set of arguments other than just short-

term yields and price inflation, and the structural model's basic requirement

that total demand equal total supply likewise determines the long-term interest

rate in a way that depends on these additional market forces.      Allowing for

these additional factors changes the process determining long-term interest rates

(and long-term asset yields and prices more generally) and consequently alters

the way in which the financial markets affect nonfinancial economic behavior in

the overall macroeconometric model.

      Substituting the corporate bond market model for the MPS model's term-

structure equation therefore brings to bear on long-term interest rate

determination a host of aspects of financial market behavior that are already

modeled elsewhere in the MPS model but that are ordinarily excluded by the MPS

model's term-structure equation from affecting long-term yields.      Although the

interactions among these forces are sufficiently complex to preclude a full

enumeration, since the results presented in Sections III and IV below show that

their overall implications for the financial-nonfinancial behavioral linkage

are substantial, it is useful to highlight separately several of the more

important ones:
                                      -12-



1. business borrowing effects: The MPS model determines the business sector's
   after-tax profits and depreciation allowances, as well as key uses of funds
   such as capital expenditures, inventory accumulation and dividend payments.
   Hence the model also approximately determines the business sector's external
   borrowing requirements. In the bond market model, the external deficit of
   the business sector is a key determinant of the supply of bonds. 8 stronger
   fixed investment, or weaker profits (or both together) imply a larger
   external deficit, hence greater bond supply, hence a higher market-clearing
   long-term interest rate ceteris paribus.

2. investable cash flow effects: The MPS model determines the incomes and
   expenditures, and hence the net accumulations of financial assets, for most
   of the major categories of bond market investors. 9 In the bond market model,
   each investing sector's investable cash flow is a key determinant of its
   demand for bonds. Stronger personal income flows, or additional payments
   into pension funds, or stronger demand for life insurance products (or all
   three together) implies a larger investable cash flow, hence greater bond
   demand, hence a lower market-clearing long-term interest rate ceteris paribus.

3. disintermediation effects: The MPS model devotes particularly detailed
   attention to the determination of the cash flows of institutions that, at
   times of high short-term market yields, experience cash outflows because of
   deposit interest rate ceilings or an equivalent. The two such institutions
   also included explicitly in the bond market model are life insurance
   companies, which must meet policy loan demand at predetermined rates, and
   mutual savings banks, which face the familiar Regulation Q ceilings. In
   either case higher short-term market yields imply a smaller investable cash
   flow, hence smaller bond demand, hence a higher market-clearing long-term
   interest rate ceteris paribus.

4. portfolio diversification effects: The MPS model determines the movement of
   equity prices, and hence the value of the equity portion of investors'
   portfolios. In the. bond market model, each investing sector seeks to
   diversify its total portfolio in the context of changing asset values, of
   which the most volatile by far are equity prices. lO Higher equity prices
   imply a greater value of equities in investors' portfolios, hence greater
   bond demand, hence a lower market-clearing long-term interest rate citeris
   paribus.

5. perceived risk effects: The MPS model determines the yields on short-term
   financial assets like commerical paper and Treasury bills, as well as (here
   in conjunction with the bond market model) the yields and prices of long-
   term assets like bonds and equities. In the bond market model, each
   investing sector selects its portfolio on the basis of not only the expected
   yields on the available assets but also the variances associated with those
   yields. Greater variability of equity prices implies greater bond demand,
   hence a lower market-clearing long-term interest rate, while greater
   variability of bond prices implies smaller bond demand, hence a higher
   market-clearing long-term interest rate ceteris paribus. ll
                                         -13-



II.    Influences of the Long-Term Interest Rate on Nonfinancial Behavior in the
       MPS Model 12

         In the MPS model the long-term interest rate, once determined, exerts in

turn a variety of influences on nonfinancial economic behavior.

         Perhaps the most familiar of these influences, following Jorgenson [28]

and Bischoff [5], is the effect on business fixed investment via the role of

the long-term interest rate in determining the user cost of capital.      The cost

of capital in the model is a weighted average (appropriately adjusted for tax

factors) of the corporate bond yield and the dividend-price equity yield,

where the equity yield depends on the bond yield via a simple term-structure-

like relation.     The user cost of capital is in turn a principal determinant of

the unit rental rate on physical capital, which depends also on depreciation

factors, additional tax factors, and the price of capital goods.      The rental

rate     together with the price of business output   then determines the equilib-

riUffi capital-output ratio, the desired capital stock is a function of current

and lagged values of both output and the equilibrium capital-output ratio, and

investment expenditures finally follow from an adjustment process that gradually

brings the actual capital stock into alignment with the corresponding desired

level.

         The MPS model applies this causal chain, with the corporate bond yield

at its inception, to determine separately expenditures on producers' structures

and on producers' durable goods.     In addition, the MPS model applies an

analogous causal chain beginning from the mortgage yield (which, like the equity

yield, depends on the corporate bond yield via a simple relationship) to

determine separately expenditures on 1-2 family houses and on 3-and-more family

houses.     The motivation underlying the MPS model's determination of expenditures

of consumer durables is again analogous, although in this case the model
                                          -14-


actually uses a simplified function relating consumer durable expenditures

directly to the corporate bond yield.

      In addition to these direct influences, in the MPS model the corporate

bond yield also exerts one further important influence on nonfinancial behavior

at only one step removed.    The MPS model solves for the market value of

outstanding corporate equities as the quotient of dividend payments (determined

by a function in which the corporate bond yield is one direct argument among

several) and the dividend-price yield (determined by a function in which the

corporate bond yield is the principal direct argument).      Equities in turn

account for a large part of the average value of households' total wealth and,

given the relative volatility of equity prices, an even larger part of the

variation over time in households' total wealth.      Since households' wealth is

the primary determinant of nondurable consumption in the "life cycle" model

developed by Modigliani,    B~umberg   and Ando [29,31,32], the value of corporate

equity -- and hence its key determinant, the corporate bond yield -- emerges as

the major driving force behind consumption spending.

      In light of its direct influence on business fixed investment, residential

construction and durable consumption, and its only thinly indirect influence on

nondurable consumption, the corporate bond yield emerges as one of the most

important variables in the MPS model's relation of nonfinancial behavior to the

financial markets.   Moreover, within the model's representation of the financial

markets themselves, the corporate bond yield is a direct argument of the functions

determining numerous yield variables (including the yields on equities, mortgages,

municipal bonds, commercial loans, mutual savings bank deposits, and savings and

loan shares) as well as quantity variables (for example, corporate dividends,

commercial loan demand, new mortsage commitments, and thrift institution deposits);
                                       -15-


and these financial variables also exert diverse influences on nonfinancial
                                  13
economic behavior in the model.

      Changing the MPS model's method of determining the corporate bond yield,

by substituting the supply-demand model of the bond market outlined in Section I

in place of the MPS model's single term-structure equation, can therefore have

substantial implications for the model's overall behavior.   If the bond market

model successfully captures central features of long-term interest rate

determination omitted by the term-structure equation, then the description

provided by the combined MPS and bond market model will provide a better guide

to the working of the economy.
                                           -16-



III.   Analysis of Fiscal pOlicy Effects

       A. Fiscal Policy with NoIictccoIl1Itlodcttive Monetary policy

       The magnitude and timing of the economic effects of fiscal policy actions

constitute one of the most widely investigated phenomena in the literature of

empirical macroeconomics.      A "pure" fiscal action in this context has corne to

mean deficit spending (or tax reduction, or the reverse of either one)             with

the money stock held unchanged so that, in effect, the government finances its

deficit not by money creation but by selling interest-paying debt instruments
                 14
to the public.        A now familiar feature of such "bond-financed" fiscal actions

is that the stimulative effect on total economic activity is only temporary,

with the additional government spending "crowding out" some or all forms of

private spending after some time.

       Table I summarizes the results of two simulations of the MPS model designed

to investigate the economic effect of a sizeable increase in the federal

government's purchases of goods and services.        The first simulation uses the

conventional MPS model in which the key linkage determining the long-term

corporate bond yield (the Aaa seasoned bond index) is the standard single terrn-

structure equation.      The second simulation uses instead the altered MPS model,

in which the conventional model (less the term-structure equation) is combined

with the demand-supply model of the corporate bond market.             Since the

corporate bond market model determines the Aa new-issue utility yield, an

additional equation then determines the Aaa seasoned corporate yield via a

simple direct relationship, and the Aaa seasoned yield remains the yield variable
                                                                                          IS
used on the right-hand side of the many other MPS equations noted in Section II.

       In all respects other than the substitution of the demand-supply corporate

bond market model for the single term-structure equation as the means of
                                                            TABLE 1


                 COMPARISON OF SIMULATED FISCAL POLICY EFFECTS (NONACCOMMODATIVE MONETARY POLICY)



                      1967:I - 1969:II Mean Values                                  Values in 1968:I

Variable   Historical     MPS Model Alone   Combined Model            Historical   MPS Model Alone     Combined Model

  G           95.0             105.0            105.0                    96.2           106.2              106.2
 M          193.2              193.2            193.2                  190.4            190.4              190.4


  r            5.09                6.64              7.21                 5.05               6.78            7.09
      TB
  r Cp         5.82                7.56              8.18                 5.58               7.49            7.81
  r            6.03                6.53              6.11                 6.13               6.60            6.16
   Aaa
  S          729.6             672.1            693.2                   695.1           680.2              713.7


  X        1039.3             1048.0           1053.9                 1031.4           1047.9             1052.9
  IP          41.9              42.5             42.9                    42.2            43.4               43.7
  IE          65.5              66.7             67.3                    64.7            67.0               67.4
  P           81.73             82.87            83.06                   81.18           82.22              82.31
  GNP        850.1             869.1            876.2                   837.3           861.6              866.6


  DN          31.8             -                 31.2                    28.6            -                  26.7
 WH           66.6             -                 71.0                    68.1            -                  73.5
  B           14.0             -                 15.4                    11.3            -                  10.8
  r
      Aa
               6.56            -                     6.63                 6.54           -                   6.45




                                                                                   (table continued on next page)
TABLE 1 (continued)


Variable Symbols:     G         =   real federal government purchases (1972 $ billions)
                      M         =   demand deposits plus currency ($ billions)


                      r         =   Treasury bill yield (%)
                          TB
                      rep       =   commercial paper yield (%)
                      r         =   seasoned Aaa corporate bond yield (%)
                          Aaa
                      S         =   market value of common stock ($ billions)


                      x         =   real gross national product (1972 $ billions)
                      IP        =   real investment in plant (1972 $ billions)
                      IE        =   real investment in equipment (1972 $ billions)
                      P         =   implicit price deflator (index, 1972    =   100)
                      GNP       =   gross national product ($ billions)


                      DN        =   nonfinancial corporations' net external deficit ($ billions)
                      WH        =   households' net accumulation of financial assets ($ billions)
                      B         =   total net new issues and purchases of corporate bonds ($ billions)
                      r         =   new-issue Aa utility bond yield (%)
                          Aa
                                       -17-


determining long-term interest rates, the two simulations are identical.         The

period of attention in both is the ten-quarter interval spanning 1967:I -

1969:II -- perhaps the last time that the U.S. economy was neither in recession,

nor in the immediate recovery from a recession, nor under price controls, nor

adjusting to sharp energy price changes.      In both simulations the model is

adjusted by adding back the historical single-equation residuals so that, given

the historical values for all of its exogenous variables, the model would

exactly reproduce the historical paths for its endogenous variables.      Hence

whatever differences emerge between the simulated and historical values of the

endogenous variables, when any exogenous variable differs from its historical

path, are attributable entirely to the effect of that exogenous variable in the

model rather than to any underlying failure of the model's ability to reproduce

the observed historical record.

      The three left-hand columns of Table 1 report sets of mean values for

several key economic variables over the ten quarters of the simulation period:

first the historical means, next the means from the fiscal policy simulation

based on the MPS model alone, and then the means from the analogous simulation

based on the combined MPS and corporate bond market model.

      The behavior of two key exogenous variables defines the economic policy

content of the simulations.   In both simulations fiscal policy is more

expansionary than it was historically, to the extent of an additional $10 billion

(in 1972 dollars) annual rate of federal government spending on goods and

services -- that is, an additional $25 billion spent over the ten quarters.

Monetary pOlicy is nonaccommodative in both simulations, in that the money

stock is unchanged from its historical path despite the additional government

spending.
                                        -18-


      A comparison of the first and second coltunns of the table shows the

familiar s.tory of how debt-financed fiscal policy works in the MPS model.     No

additional supply of money is available to accommodate the greater demand for

money due to the induced increase in economic activity, and so short-term

interest rates must rise by about 1 1/2% to clear the money and bank reserves

markets.   The model's term-structure equation translates this increase in short-

term interest rates into an increase of 1/2% in the corporate bond yield, and

related equations generate a decline of $58 billion (nearly 8%) in equity

values.    Because of the effect of higher short- and long-term interest rates

and lower equity values, operating through the channels enumerated in Section II,

the average effect on real income associated with the additional $10 billion of

government spending is only $8.7 billion.      (In other words, the ten-quarter

average multiplier is 0.87.)    It is interesting to note, however, that the

overall average effect of the fiscal pOlicy action on business capital formation

is slightly positive, with fixed investment marginally greater for both plant

and equipment, indicating that in the model the positive effects of a higher

operating rate outweigh the negative effects of a higher cost of capital.         Hence

the burden of "crowding out" represented by the less-than-unit multiplier value

falls entirely on consumption and residential construction.     Finally, prices are

higher by about 1 1/2%, because of the greater real economic activity, so that

the average nominal income for the ten quarters is greater by $19 billion.

      The third column of Table 1, which gives the corresponding ten-quarter

mean values for the analogous simulation using the combined MPS and corporate

bond market model, gives a somewhat different -- in particular, a more

expansionary -- account of the working of fiscal policy.     Average real income

is greater than the historical not by $8.7 billion but by $14.6 billion (a
                                        -19-


ten-quarter multiplier of 1.46), and both components of business capital

formation are slightly stronger than in the simulation based on the MPS model

alone.    With prices marginally higher also, the average nominal income is

greater than the historical by $25 billion.    As is   to be expected, this

stronger nominal income growth increases the demand for money yet further, in

comparison with the first simulation, so that the increase in short-term

interest rates is about 2 1/4%.     Despite this sharp increase in short-term

interest rates, however, the corporate bond yield rises hardly at all, and the

related decline in equity values is only $36 billion.

         Since the small increase in the corporate bond yield (together with the

associated small equity market decline) is the key factor underlying the more

expansionary effect of fiscal policy in this alternative model simulation, it

is useful to examine some of the variables specific to the bond market model to

understand how it comes about.     The bottom lines of Table 1 show historical and

simulated ten-quarter mean values for four variables that are central to the
                                                       16
demand-supply model's treatment of the bond market.         On the supply side of the

market, it turns out that the average net external deficit of the nonfinancial

corporate business sector is marginally smaller than the historical as a result

of the fiscal action, as increased after-tax profits (adjusted for inventory

valuation) more than offset increased capital expenditures.       On the demand side

of the market, a number of categories of bond buyers experience a larger than

historical investable cash flow; the table reports the average values for the

household sector cash flow, which increases by over $4 billion.

         with the sharp rise in short-term interest rates, businesses have an

incentive to finance more of their external funds requirements in the bond

market.     Hence average total bond issues rise by $1.4 billion (or 10%) in
                                                 -20-



comparison to the historical, despite a smaller business deficit.              At the same

time, even this increase in bond issues is small in comparison with the increase

in aggregate investable cash flows.              As a result, the substantial shift in

corporate financing toward bond issues causes only a slight increase in the

corporate bond yield.

         Figure 1 provides further information about these two simulations by

plotting the quarter-by-quarter historical and simulated paths, for the ten

quarters of the simulation period, for several key variables.               The dotted paths,

corresponding to the simulation of the unaltered MPS model, clearly show the

model's "complete crowding out" result.              The increase in government spending at

first boosts private spending also, but this effect lasts little more than a

year.     By the tenth quarter of the fiscal stimulus, real income is far below

the corresponding historical value, indicating that the $10 billion of additional

government spending has crowded out more than $10 billion of private spending.

After ten quarters, business capital formation is also below its historical

path.     Nominal income, of course, remains well above the historical path because

          . d uce d h'19h er prlce
o f t h e ln                   .   1 eve 1 •17   The stock market has approximately

stabilized, in comparison with the historical path, after the first year.

         The broken lines in the figure show the contrasting analysis of fiscal

policy indicated by the simulation of the combined MPS and corporate bond market

model.      Here the peak in the expansionary effect of government spending on real

income again comes in the fifth quarter.                In contrast to the simulation of the

MPS model alone, however, here the real crowding out is about complete -- but

not much more than that -- by the end of the simulation period.               Again in

contrast to the simulation of the MPS model alone, business capital formation

remains above the historical path throughout the ten quarters.               Among the
                                                                   FIGURE 1
                               COMPARISON OF SIMULATED FISCAL POLICY EFFECTS (NONACCOMODATIVE MONETARY POLICY)

x                                                                            IP+IE                                                                                GNP                                                                              rAaa
1090                                                                         118                                                                                  960                                                                   ,. ... '   8.00                                                    .
                                                     /r-....",.--'"                                                                                    //',
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 " '"                                                                  .
                                       /
                                           1/'" .••.••
                                                ..        '.
                                                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                                 /            "                                                 ,"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       /'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /'

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .                                                                  ...
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ,

                                                                                                                                         I
                                   j       ..                                                                                        /            .'                                                           '" .'
                                                                                                                                                                                                             I.···                                                            ...... ... ..-
                               .. '" .. .                                                                     f........
                                                                                                              ,:-.               I
                                                                                                                                      .-     .'                                                          I.'                                                             .-
                        ,,"....                                                                             I..- -..
                                                                                                                          -../
                                                                                                                                 .-.-                                                                  I"                                                         ....
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ... '
                                                                                                                                                                                                     I. .'
                  ~   .. .'
                      ",
                           ,                                                                           /.-                ..-                                                                 /
                                                                                                                                                                                          "'.'". .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ..-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                   /.(..-
             /:
            /.'                                                                                                                                                                     /.'
                                                                                                                                                                                  /,.
                                                                                                                                                                                        ".'
           I:'                                                                       -<!-'
      /.'                                                                                                                                                                     ".'
 r
     (.'
                                                                              ""./

                                                                                                                                                                  ",,'
                                                                                                                                                                       ~~.. /.'




                                                                             100                                                                                  760

DN                                                                           WH                                                                                   B                                                                                rAa
50                                                                           90                                                                                   25                                                                               9.00


                                                                                                   I
                                                                                               /
                                                                                           I
                                                                      ....             /
                                                                ",'           --.../




                                                                             40                                                                                   10                                                                               5.00
          historical
......... MPS model alone
- - - - combined model
Notes: The simu lation period plotted is 1967: 1- 1969:]I.
       See Table 1 for definitions of variable symbols.
                                        -21-


variables specific to the bond market model, the business deficit first declines

and then recovers while the household cash flpw first rises and then falls back,

in comparison with the historical.    As a result, net bond volume varies

irregularly, and the corporate bond yield first rises slightly above, then falls

slightly below, and finally rises sharply above the corresponding historical

path.

        Since the peak effect of expansionary fiscal policy on real income comes

in the fifth quarter of the simulation period, the three right-hand columns of

Table 1 show the precise comparative values for that one quarter.    These results

bear little explicit comment.    In the simulation of the combined MPS and

corporate bond market model, the business deficit is sufficiently small (and

the household cash flow sufficiently large) that both net bond volume and the

bond yield are lower than the corresponding historical values, and equity prices

are accordingly higher.    As a result, the peak effect on business capital

formation is not trivial (over $4 billion, or 4%), and the peak effect on real

income is $22 billion (or a peak multiplier of 2.15).    By contrast, in the

simulation of the MPS model alone the peak effect on investment is only $0

billion, and the peak effect on real income is $16 billion (or a peak multiplier

of 1.65).


        B. Fiscal Policy with Accommodative Monetary Policy

        Although the most appropriate analytical conception of a "pure" fiscal

policy action is one that leaves the money stock (or a reserve aggregate)

unchanged, in reality the Federal Reserve System need not and often does not

maintain monetary rigidity in the face of fiscal activism.    More often, in the

past the Federal Reserve has accommodated at least some of the change in the

demand for money that results from fiscal actions, thereby damping the required
                                         -22-


change in interest rates.     The resulting effects on economic activity are then

a combination of fiscal and monetary effects.

       Table 2 presents summary statistics for a pair of fiscal policy

simulations -- one using the unalteredMPS model and one using the combined MPS

and corporate bond market model -- that are structured identically to those

reported in Table 1 except that, instead of exogenously maintaining the money

stock on its historical path, each simulation exogenously maintains the Treasury

bill rate on its historical path throughout the ten quarters of the simulation
   . d . 18
per10         The money stock is therefore an endogenous variable in these

simulations.

       The results reported in Table 2 largely speak for themselves, and the two

simulations exhibit only quantitative differences.     In both simulations a

substantial increase     (about 3%) in the money stock over the corresponding

historical mean value is required to keep short-term interest rates from rising.

The corporate bond yield rises on average only slightly in the simulation of
                                                                                    19
the unaltered MPS model and not at all in the simulation of the combined model,

and the market value of equities is consistently higher (on average 15% and 21%).

The average effect on real income is strongly positive (ten-quarter average

multipliers of 3.15 and 3.61), and the positive effect on business fixed

investment is especially strong (on average over 5% in both simulations).

       Since there is no mechanism in the MPS model generating an intermediate-

run crowding out result when monetary policy accommodates fiscal policy actions,

the expansionary effect of this joint pOlicy action continues to grow through

the final quarter of the simulation period without reaching any internal peak.

The three right-hand columns of Table 2 present the specific simulation results

for the final (tenth) quarter.
                                                                    TABLE 2



                             COMPARISON OF SIMULATED FISCAL POLICY EFFECTS (ACCOMMODATIVE MONETARY POLICY)



                              1967:I - 1969:II Mean Values                                 Values in 1969:II

Variable         Historical       MPS Model Alone   Combined Model            Historical   MPS Model Alone     Combined Model

  G                 95.0               105.0            105.0                    97.1           107.1              107.1
  r                  5.09                  5.09              5.09                 6.20              6.20             6.20
      TB


  r Cp               5.82                  5.82              5.82                 7.54              7.54             7.54
  r                  6.03                  6.18              6.03                 6.89              7.28             6.89
  Aaa
 M                 193.2               200.2            199.8                   206.7           224.1              224.6
  S                729.6               839.4            879.5                   774.5          1081.0            1248.5


  X               1039.3              1070.8           1075.4                 1079.6          1132.6             1152.4
  IP                41.9                43.8             44.0                    43.6            47.4               48.4
  IE                65.5                68.9             69.2                    70.2            75.9               77.6
 P                  81. 73              83.83            84.04                   86.05           92.03              93.30
  GNP              850.1               899.4            905.9                   929.0          1042.3            1075.2


 DN                 31. 8              -                 30.0                    37.0           -                   29.2
 WH                 66.6               -                 76.0                    56.4           -                   79.1
 B                  14.0               -                 12.8                    10.1           -                    6.2
  r
      Aa
                     6.56              -                     6.56                 7.58          -                    7.63



 Note:     See Table 1 for definitions of variable symbols.
                                            -23-



IV.   Analysis of Monetary Policy Effects

         A. Monetary Growth Rate Policy

         Table 3 presents the results of a pair of simulations analogous to those

discussed in Section III but instead focusing on the effects of monetary policy,

under the assumption that the Federal Reserve System operates by setting the

rate of growth of the money stock.        Once again, one simulation is based on the

unaltered MPS model and the other on the combined MPS and corporate bond market

model.     In both simulations the policy experiment consists of setting exogenously

a rate of growth of the money stock equal to 8.8% per annum over the ten

quarters of the simulation period, 2% per annum greater than the historical
                   20
monetary growth.         Fiscal policy, represented by the level of government
                                                      2l
spending, remains unchanged from the historical.

         The results shown in Table 3 indicate that the effect of this monetary

policy action is strongly expansionary in both simulations, but more so in that

for the MPS model alone.        On average for the ten quarters of the simulation

period, the additional 2% per annum of monetary growth raises the growth rate

of nominal income in the unaltered MPS model by 3.4% per annum, of which nearly

one-half represents additional price inflation and just over one-half represents

additional real growth.        (In considering the average simulation-period

consequences of a monetary policy action like this one, it is most convenient

to work with average growth rates rather than levels for the key aggregate

variables.)     In the combined MPS and corporate bond market model, the result of

the same monetary policy action is to raise the growth rate of nominal income

by only 1.7% per annum, but here nearly two-thirds of that extra nominal growth

represents additional real growth while only one-third represents additional

price inflation.        The expansionary monetary policy stimulates business capital
                                                                   TABLE 3



                             COMPARISON OF SIMULATED MONETARY POLICY EFFECTS (MONETARY GROWTH RATE)


                             1967:I - 1969:II Mean Values                                 Values in 1969:II

Variable         Historical      MPS Model Alone   Combined Model            Historical   MPS Model Alone     Combined Model


 M                   6.83*                8.83*             8.83*              206.7           217.3              217.3
  G                 95.0               95.0             95.0                    97.1            97.1               97.1


  r                  5.09                 3.90              3.43                 6.20              5.49             3.76
      TB
  r Cp               5.82                 4.48              3.97                 7.54              6.64             4.76
  r                  6.03                 5.71              5.86                 6.89              6.38             6.44
      Aaa
  S                729.6              821.1            773.7                   774.5          1047.5              920.9


  X                  3.41*                5.24*             4.44*            1079.6           1128.1            1106.7
  IP                41.9               43.0             42.4                    43.6            46.7               45.2
  IE                65.5               67.3             66.3                    70.2            75.1               72.8
 P                   4.15*                5.53*             4.77*               86.05           88.94              87.34
  GNP                7.70*             11.07*               9.42*              929.0          1003.3              966.5


  DN                31.8              -                 31.1                    37.0           -                   33.6
 WH                 66.6              -                 69.6                    56.4           -                   65.5
 B                  14.0              -                 13.0                   10.1            -                    5.7
 r
      Aa
                     6.56             -                     6.34                 7.58          -                    6.97




 Notes:     See Table 1 for definitions of variable symbols.
            * indicates value reported is growth rate per annum.
                                      -24-



formation in both simulations, and more so in that based on the unaltered MPS

model; the difference between the two simulations in this regard is small on

average for the entire simulation period, but by the final quarter it becomes

sizeable.

      The financial side of these simulations mirrors that discussed in Section

III for the case of fiscal policy with nonaccommodative monetary policy.      Here

the larger supply of money drives short-term interest rates lower, especially

in the early quarters before nonfinancial economic activity responds.     Even by

the end of the simulation period, short-term interest rates in both simulations

are well below the corresponding historical values -- especially in the

simulation based on the combined model, in which the more modest increase in

nominal income generates a smaller increase in the demand for money.    The

corporate bond yield is also lower than the historical in both simulations, and

of the two it is lower on average in the MPS model alone.   This difference is

largely a matter of timing, however, since the level is about the same in both

simulationsibY the end of the simulation period.   By contrast, the market value

of equities is higher than the historical in both simulations (on average by

13% and 6%), and here the two simulated paths continue to diverge through the

end of the simulation period (to 35% and 19% in the final quarter).     In the

bond market a combination of forces leads to smaller bond volume on lower yields.


      B. Interest Rate Policy

      Finally, Table 4 and Figure 2 present the results of analogous simulations

of the effects of a contractionary monetary policy action consisting of an

exogenously maintained increase in the Treasury bill rate by 1% (that is, 100

basis points) over the corresponding historical values for this interest rate.

The money stock again (as in the simulations reported in Table 2) becomes an
                                                                   TABLE 4


                           COMPARISON OF SIMULATED MONETARY POLICY EFFECTS (SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE)


                             1967:1 - 1969:I1 Mean Values                                 Values for 1969:I1

variable         Historical      MPS Model Alone   Combined Model            Historical   MPS Model Alone   Corilbined Model


  r                  5.09                 6.09              6.09                 6.20              7.20           7.20
      TB
  G                 95.0               95.0             95.0                    97.1            97.1             97.1


  r Cp               5.82                 6.95              6.95                 7.54              8.68           8.68
  r                  6.03                 6.30              6.24                 6.89              7.37           7.61
      Aaa
 M                   6.74*                4.93*             5.16*              206.7           197.0            199.2
  S                729.6              636.4            645.7                   774.5           557.2            598.8


  X                  3.41*                1. 75*            1.98*             1079.6         1033.09           1042.7
  IP                41.9               40.8             41.0                    43.6            40.2             41.0
  IE                65.5               63.4             63.9                    70.2            64.3             66.0
 P                   4.15*                3.23*             3.39*               86.05           83.83            84.48
  GNP                7.70*                5.04*             5.43*              929.0           866.0            880.8


  DN                31.8              -                 33.2                    37.0           -                 41. 3
 WH                 66.6              -                 63.8                    56.4           -                 48.2
 B                  14.0              -                 16.1                    10.1           -                 15.4
  r
      Aa
                     6.56             -                     6.88                 7.58          -                  8.74




 Notes:     See Table 1 for definitions of variable symbols.
            * indicates value reported is growth rate per annum.
                                        -25-


endogenous variable, varying below the corresponding historical path by as

much as is necessary to clear the mOney market at the higher short-term interest

rate level.   Once again, government spending remains unchanged from the historical.

        In terms of effects on nonfinancial economic activity, there is little to

distinguish the two simulations.    Nominal income growth slows in comparison to

the historical by 2.7% per annum in the unaltered model and by 2.3% per annum

in the combined model, and in both cases about two-thirds of the slower nominal

growth represents slower real growth and the remainder reduced price inflation.

Business fixed investment is weaker than the historical in both simulations,

somewhat more so in the unaltered MPS model.

        In the financial markets, however, the time path of the corporate bond

yield differs sharply in the two simulations.    On average over the simulation

period, the bond yield is higher than the historical in both simulations

and, of the two, slightly higher in the unaltered MPS model.    By the end of the

sample period, the bond yield is distinctly higher in the combined MPS and

corporate bond market model, as a result (in part) of a larger business external

deficit (higher by 12%) together with a shrunken household cash flow (lower by

15%).   These cumulating developments emerge distinctly in the full sets of

quarterly values plotted in Figure 2.
                                                                  FIGURE 2
                                  COMPARISON OF SIMULATED MONETARY POLICY EFFECTS (SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATE)

x                                                                  IP+IE                                                               GNP                                                                     rAaa
1090                                                               118                                                                 960                                                                     8,00




                                                                                                                                                                                                     ..,..--
                                            /~'""'--.",.   ' ...                                                                                                                    ~----   .. ,..         .
                                                                                                                                                                                     .. - .. -.'
                                                                                                               ,'" """"' .. -
                                        ,/ ...      .      ..                                                                                                                , ./
                                  /,-                                                                                                                                    /"".,.'.'
                              /
                                  .. .'                                                            -   I
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                                 .'
                                                                                                                      .....
                                                                                                                              •                                        '" .'
                                                                                                                                                                   '"..-"
                    . "" .
                         /          '
                                                                                     I   I'. ' ,       ,I.'                       ".                      .   ",




                                                                                                                                             ..... .. ,
                             .'
                 y'" ...•                                                        f . ' ".          v .. •'                                        r;;.""::•••
           ,:"       .                                                    - ".',
                                                                         ~~/    ..           ... , ...                                       .
                                                                                                                                                 ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ..' A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,. .- .- ~
                                                                           ~.. -                ..
     ".'

                                                                   100                                                                                                                                          "'~,oo

ON                                                                 WH                                                                  B                                                                       r Aaa
50                                                                 90                                                                  25                                                                      9,00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                .,
                                                                   40                                                                                                                                          5.00
- - - historical
.... , .... MPS model alone
- - - - combined model
Notes: The simulation period plotted is 1967: I -1969:II.
       See Table 1 for definitions of variable symbols.
                                              -26-



V.   Conclusions and    Furth~r   Prospects

       What should one make of these four sets of simulation results?

       First -- and most significantly -- these comparative simulations confirm

the importance of long-term asset yields (and prices) in financial-nonfinancial

interrelationships, and they illustrate the corollary sensitivity of even the

most central features of a macroeconomic model to the model's representation of

long-term interest rate determination.          The substitution of a demand-supply

model for the conventional single term-structure equation does not merely

provide auxiliary detail about the size of (perhaps dis aggregated) securities

issues and purchases.      It also changes a key link in the mechanism connecting

financial market phenomena to nonfinancial economic activity.            As a result, the

overall model   gives     different answers to familiar policy questions.

       At a more specific level, the simulation results presented in Sections III

and IV suggest that, in the short to intermediate run, fiscal policy may have

somewhat larger real-sector effects and monetary policy somewhat smaller real-

sector effects than conventional macroeconometric models like the MPS have

indicated.   Moreover, the results also suggest that these differences (for both

fiscal and monetary policy) are more pronounced when the Federal Reserve System

implements monetary policy by setting the monetary growth rate than when it

does so by setting interest rate levels.             Nevertheless, the preliminary, and in

some ways very rudimentary, nature of the combined MPS and corporate bond market

model used in these simulations warrants regarding such specific conclusions at

best with great caution.

       Finally, among the many ways of further improving and refining this

combined model's representation of long-term interest rate determination, the

one that stands out most clearly as of potential benefit in the analysis of
                                       -27-



macroeconomic policy effects is the addition of an explicit demand-supply

treatment of the government bond market to parallel that of the corporate bond

market.   As Ando [3] has explained, the MPS model does not explicitly incorporate

the relative asset stock effects necessary to represent the "portfolio crowding

out" mechanism emphasized by Christ [10] and Silber [39].    In the model as it

stands, even with the addition of the corporate bond market model, the

displacement of private spending by government spending as discussed in Section

III primarily reflects the "transactions crowding out" that results from the

positive effect of income on the demand for money.    Nowhere does the model's

determination of interest rates explicitly allow for the need to have private

sector investors purchase the increased net flow of government securities

associated with a stimulative fiscal policy action.   The demand-supply model of

the u.S. government securities market developed by Roley [34] is an empirical

counterpart to the model of the corporate bond market developed in Friedman [17,

19], and Roley and I are currently working on incorporating that model into the

combined MPS and corporate bond market model with the specific object of

explicitly incorporating such "portfolio crowding out" effects.     The implications

of that extended model for the effects monetary and fiscal policies (as well as

debt management policy) remain as the subject of future research.
                                    Fbotnbtes


*Theauthor is grateful to arlin Grabbe and David Jones for research assistance
and useful discussions, to Jered Enzler and Douglas Battenberg for the MPS
model materials and help in adapting them, to Franco Modigliani for many
helpful conversations about the model, and to the National Science Foundation
(grants SOC74-2l027 and APR77-l4l60) for research support.


1. To date the most comprehensive attempt to represent such effects within the
   single-equation term-structure approach has been that of Modigliani and
   Sutch [33].

2. See Friedman [17,18,19,20] and Friedman and Roley [21;23].

3. The basic thrust of this approach is the same as in the work of Silber [37,
   38] and Hendershott [25,26], and it is similar in spirit to that of Bosworth
   and Duesenberry [7]. See the references cited in footnote 2 for contrasts
   to these authors' work.

4. Other researchers have also successfully applied this approach to the U.S.
   government securities market (Roley [34,35,36]), the municipal bond market
   (Dick [14]) and the equity market (Jones [27]). The discussion in Section V
   below indicates potential opportunities for incorporating these other models
   in work analogous to that reported in this paper.

5. This section, intended as a summary, draws heavily on the papers cited in
   footnote 2. See those references for further detailed descriptions and
   results.

6. In some contexts, such as the government bond market, asset supply is
   determined by a process that does not directly reflect private market
   participants' behavior.

7. Friedman and Roley [22] showed that linear homogeneous asset demand equations,
   as in (4), follow from the assumptions of constant relative risk aversion and
   joint normally distributed assessments of asset returns.

8. In some versions of the bond market model, variables like fixed investment
   and retained earnings affect bond supply even apart from their effect via
   the external deficit; see Friedman [18,19]. The version used in conjunction
   with the MPS model excludes these features. In addition, an important
   business. use of funds that the MPS model does not determine is the net
   accumulation of liquid assets; it is therefore necessary to add a liquid
   asset equation to the model.
9. For the household sector it is necessary to add an equation for non-mortgage
   borrowing (mostly consumer credit) in order to determine the net financial
   asset accumulation.

10. Portfolio diversification behavior is a key element in the "relative asset
    stock effects" that, as Ando [3] has pointed out, are missing from the
    familiar MPS model. The discussion in Section V below suggests ways to
    incorporate additional aspects of relative stock effects in a further
    expanded model.

11. The variability of price inflation also affects investors' demands in the
    bond market model. The MPS model's original term-structure equation q.lso
    includes some attempt to capture variability effects via a single term with
    the standard deviation of the commercial paper yield.

12. For descriptions of the MPS model (and its antecedents), see deLeeuw and
    Gramlich [12,13], Jaffee and GramlichT241, Cooper. TIll, Modigliani [30], Ando [3]
    and Modigliani and Ando [31]. The version Of the model used for this paper is
    the 1978 version as supplied by the staff of the Federal Reserve Board.

13. The most important aspects of financial quantity variables' effects on non-
    financial behavior in the MPS model concern credit availability effects in
    the mortgage market; see deLeeuw and Gramlich [13] and the papers by
    Gramlich and Hulett, Modigliani, and Jaffee in Gramlich and Jaffee [24].

14. In reality, the Treasury always finances its deficit by issuing interest-
    paying debt instruments, and the point is whether or not the Federal Reserve
    System "monetizes" that debt by purc:hasing some itself and thereby providing
    the banking system .with enough reserves to absorb the remainder. The
    discussion in Section V below discusses ways of making this process more
    explicit by further extensions of the MPS model.

15. Simply eliminating the Aaa seasoned yield from the model and using the Aa
    new-issue utility yield in its place would have required re-estimating each
    such equation.

16. The table does not report corresponding mean values for the simulation of
    the MPS model alone, because the unaltered MPS model does not determine
    these variables.

17. Ando and Modigliani [31] emphasized this feature of the model and contrasted
    it with the puzzling implication of some reduced-form models (for example,
    Andersen and Jordan [2] and Andersen and Carlson [1]) that fiscal pOlicy
    results in complete nominal crowding out. More recent work (for example,
    Friedman [16] and Federal Reserve Board [15]) has shown that reduced-form
    models estimated using current data no longer exhibit this property, although
    Carlson [9] has shown that it is still possible to construct and estimate
    such a model (if, for some reason, one wants to do so).
18. In the MPS model fixing the· Treasury bill rate also fixes the commercial
    paper rate, as Table 2 shows~·

19. The results reported in the table, showing no change at all in the bond
    yield in the latter simulation either on average or for the final quarter,
    do not imply that the bond yield is exogenous in this simulation. In fact
    the bond yield does change, varying sometimes above and sometimes below the
    historical path.

20. As the right-hand columns of the table indicate, this increase in monetary
    growth amounted to an extra $10.6 billion over the ten quarters. In the
    simulations this additional money was added in equal proportional amounts
    in each quarter.

21. In addition, the model imposes unchanged tax rates. Hence the monetary
    stimulus increases tax revenues, thereby reducing the government deficit.
                                                                                     ,References,

1.    Andersen, Leonall C., and Carlson, Keith M. "A Monetarist Model for
      Economic Stabilization." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, LII
      (April, 1970), 7-25.

2.    Andersen, Leonali c.'-, and'Jordan, JerrY L.' "Monetary arid Fiscai Actions:
      A Test of Their Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization." Federal
      Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, L (November, 1968), 11-24.

 3.   Ando, Albert •. "Some Aspects of st;;$ilization Policies,'the Monetarist
      Controversy and the MPSM6del." International Economic' Review, XV Y
      (October, 1974), 541-571.

 4.   Ando, Albert, and Mod:i.gli.iihi,'ri'anc6·~ ""The Life Cycle Hypothesis of
      Saving: Aggregate Ifnpiicat'iorl'S:} and,' Test~ • " American Economic Review,
      LIII (May, 1963), 55-84.

 5.   Bischoff, Charles W. "A Model of Nonresidential Construction in the
      United States." American Economic Review, LX (May, 1970), 10-17.

 6.   Blinder, Alan S., and Solow, Robert M. "Does Fiscal Policy Matter?"
      Journal of Public Economics, II (November, 1973), 318-337.

 7.   Bosworth, Barry, and Duesenberry, James S. "A Flow of Funds Model and Its
      Implications." Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Issues in Federal Debt
      Management. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1973.

 8.   Brundy, James M., and Jorgenson, Dale W. "Efficient Estimation of
      Simultaneous Equations by Instrumental Variables." Review of Economics
      and statistics, LIII (August, 1971), 207-224.

 9.   Carlson, Keith M. "Does the St. Louis Equation Now Believe in Fiscal
      Policy?" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review, LX (February, 1978),
      13-19.

10.   Christ, Carl F. "A Simple Macroeconomic Model with a Government Budget
      Constraint." Journal of Political Economy, LXXVI (January/February, 1968),
      53-67.

11.   Cooper, J. Phillip (ed.).                                                Development of the Monetary Sector, Prediction
      ..:;an~d~p..:o..:l:..:i:..:CY~..:An=a~l?y~s;:.J.::.·
                                                        s::.-.::i:.:n~t:::h:..:e~F-=RB-=---=M.::I:.:T:.--=P::..;e:::.:nn:::.:....;M::o=-·.::d:::::e=.l. Lexington:
                                                                                                                D. C. Heath
      and Company, 1974.

12.   DeLeeuw, Frank, and Gramlich, Edward. "The Federal Reserve - M.I.T.
      Econometric ModeL" Federal Reserve Bulletin, LIV (January, 1968), 11-40.
13.   DeLeeuw, Frank, and Gramlich, Edward. "The Channels of Monetary Policy:
      A Further Report on the Federal Reserve - M.I.T. Model." Journal of
      Finance, XXIV (May, 1969), 265-290.

14.   Dick, Stacy S. A Structural Model of the Market for Municipal Bonds.
      A.B. honors thesis, Harvard University, 1978.

15.   Federal Reserve Board, "A Proposal for Redefining the Monetary Aggregates.
      Federal Reserve Bulletin, LXV (January, 1979), 13-42.

16.   Friedman, Benjamin M. "Even the St. Louis Model Now Believes in Fiscal
      Policy." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, IX (May, 1977), 365-367.

17.   Friedman, Benjamin M. "Financial Flow Variables and the Short-Run
      Determination of Long-Term Interest Rates." Journal of Political Economy,
      LXXXV (August, 1977), 661-689.

18.   Friedman, Benjamin M. "Who Puts the Inflation Premium into Nominal
      Interest Rates?" Journal of Finance, XXXIII (June, 1978), 833-845.

19.   Friedman, Benjamin M. "Substitution and Expectation Effects on Long-Term
      Borrowing Behavior and Long-Term Interest Rates." Journal of Money,
      Credit and Banking, forthcoming.

20.   Friedman, Benjamin M. "Price Inflation, Portfolio Choice, and Nominal
      Interest Rates." American Economic Review, forthcoming.

21.   Friedman, Benjamin M., and Roley, V. V~ce. "Structural Models of Interest
      Rate Determination and Portfolio Behavior in the Corporate and Government
      Bond Markets." American Statistical Association, Proceedings of the
      Business and Economic Statistics Section, 1977, Part I.

22.   Friedman, Benjamin M., and Roley, V. Vance.   "A Note on the Derivation of
      Linear Homogeneous Asset Demand Functions."   Mimeo, Harvard University,
      1979.

23.   Friedman, Benjamin M., and Roley, V. Vance. "Investors' Portfolio
      Behavior Under Alternative Models of Long-Term Interest Rate Expectations:
      Unitary, Rational or Autoregressive." Econometrica, forthcoming.

24.   Gramlich, Edward M., and Jaffee, Dwight (eds.). Savings Deposits,
      Mortgages and Housing. Lexington: D.C. Heath and Company, 1972.

25.   Hendershott, Patrie H. Understanding the Capital Markets, Volume I: A
      Flow-of-Funds Financial Model. Lexington: D.C. Heath and Company, 1977.
26.   Hendershott, Patrie H., and Orlando, Frank S. "The Interest Rate
      Behavior of Flow-of-Funds and Bank-Reserves Financial Models." Journal
      of Money, Credit and Banking, VIII (November, 1976), 497-512.

27.   Jones, David S. A Structural Econometric MOdel of the U.S. Equity Market.
      Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1979.

28.   Jorgenson, Dale W. "Capital Theory and Investment Behavior."   American
      Economic Review, LIII (May, 1963), 247-259.

29.   Modigliani, Franco. "The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving, the Demand for
      Wealth, and the Supply of Capital." Social Research,XXXIII (Summer, 1966),
      160-217.

30.   Modigliani, Franco. "Monetary Policy and Consumption: Linkages via
      Interest Rate and Wealth Effects in the FMP Model." Consumer Spending and
      Monetary Policy: The Linkages. Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
      1971.

31.   Modigliani, Franco, and Ando, Albert. "Impacts of Fiscal Actions on
      Aggregate Income and the MOnetarist Controversy: Theory and Evidence."
      Stein (ed.), Monetarism. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company,
      1976.

32.   Modigliani, Franco, and Brumberg, R. "Utility Analysis and the Consumption
      Function: An Interpretation of Cross Section Data." Kurihara (ed.), Post-
      Keynesian Economics. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1954.

33.   Modigliani, Franco, and Sutch, Richard. "Debt Management and the Term
      Structure of Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis of Recent Experience."
      Journal of Political Economy, LXXV (August, 1967), 569-589.

34.   Roley, V. Vance. A Structural Model of the U.S. Government Securities
      Market. Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1977.

35.   Roley, V. Vance. "The Determinants of the Treasury Security Yield Curve."
      Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1978.

36.   Roley, V. Vance. "The Role of Commercial Banks' Portfolio Behavior in the
      Determination of Treasury Security Yields." Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank
      of Kansas City, 1979.

37.   Silber, William L. "Portfolio Substitutability, Regulations, and Monetary
      Policy." Quarterly Journal of Economics, LXXXIII (May, 1969), 197-219).
38.   Silber, William L. Portfolio Behavior of Fin~ncial Institutions.
      New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc., 1970.

39.   Silber, William L. "Fiscal Policy in IS-LM Analysis: A Correction."
      Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, II (November, 1970), 461-472.
