NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DECLINE IN AGGREGATE SHARE VALUES:
INFLATION AND TAXATION OF THE RETURNS
FROM EQUITIES AND OWNER—OCCUPIED HOUSING

Patric

H. Hendershott

Working Paper No. 370

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138
July 1979

NBER Working Paper 370
July 1979

The Decline in Aggregate Share Values: Inflation and Taxation of the
Returns from Equities and Owner—Occupied Housing

ABSTPACT

With a neutral tax system an increase in observed and anticipated
inflation would not be expected to alter either real after—tax yields
on bonds and equities or the ratio of the market value of equities to
the replacement cost of corporate real capital. In the real world,
however, declines in real after—tax bond yields and the relative value
of shares have been observed. Feldstein (1976, 1978) hasattributed
both of these phenonema to the use of historic—cost depreciation,and
the taxation of nominal capital gains. Our analysis supports his conjecture
regarding the decline in real after—tax debt yields, but rejects his analysis
of the cause of the decline in share values.
-

The decline in share values can be attributed to many factors, but
the most important is probably the favorable taxation of income from
owner—occupied housing (no taxation of either implicit rents nor real
capital gains). As a result housing has become more attractive with the
acceleration of inflation, and households have substituted housing for
equity shares. Other possible sources of the decline in share values are
reduced profitability of existing capital, owing to increased regulatory
costs and real energy prices, and a greater perceived risk in business
operations.

Patric H. Hendershott
Kranriert Graduate School of
Management
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana 47906
317/493—1884

Hender shot t

June
THE DECLINE IN AGGREGATE SHARE VALUES:

1979

INFLATION AND TAXATION

OF THE RETURNS FROM EQUITIES AND OWNER—OCCUPIED HOUSING*

The past dozen years have been disasterous
common stocks in the United States.
price level, the aggregate value

for the value of

In spite of a near doubling of the

of publicly—traded equity shares was no

greater at the end of 1977 than at the end of 1968; share values had
fallen by 40 percent relative to the replacement cost of corporate real

assets) Little agreement exists regarding the cause of this

collapse.

Feldsteifl (1978) argues that biases in the tax law impair equity values

during inflationary periods.

Malkiel (1979) denies this and attributes

the decline in valuation to an increase in the perceived riskiness of
investment in equities vis—a—vis investment in bonds. Others might
contend that a basic decline in the pretax

profitability of the existing

capital stock has occurred, but Feldstein and Malkiel would appear to disagree with this contention.

The analysis of the present paper suggests the following. While
the use of historic—cost depreciation in the calculation of corporate
tax liabilities and the taxation of nominal capital gains do tend to

*

of Economics and Finance, Purdue University, and Visiting
Professor of Economics, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research programs in Business
Taxation and Finance and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any
National
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the

Professor

Bureau of Economic Research.
1The share value data are from U.S. Federal Reserve System (1978).
of Tobin's q fell from 1.0 in 1967—
Von Furstenberg'S (1977, Table 1) measure
one—
1968 to 0.7 at the end of 1976. Because debt has been a roughly constant
of real assets, this is tantamount to a 40
quarter of the replacement cost
cost of
percent decline in the value of equities relative to the replacement
(1978) provides alternative data
real assets [(1.0—0.7)10.751. Feldstein
supporting the 40 percent decline.

—2—

reduce equity values during inflationary periods, these same factors
cause real after—tax debt yields to fall in response to increases in

expected inflation. This tends to raise actual equity returns (shareholders gain at the expense of debtors) and to lower required equity

yields, the combination of which increases in share prices. On net,
there is no reason to expect that share values should have been negatively

affected. In contrast, there is evidence that equities have declined in
attractiveness vis—a—vis bonds and that the pretax profitability of the

existing capital stock has fallen. Each of these phenomena has contributed
to the decline in share values.

Owing to the relationships among debt and equity yields and the
market value of equities, a first step in deducing the impact of changes
in anticipated inflation on share values is to determine the impact of

inflation on debt and equity yields. This is the subject of Section I.
The impact of increases in expected inflation on share prices, when
historic cost depreciation is required and nominal capital gains are taxed,

is examined in Section II. The merits of alternative explanations of the

decline in share values are evaluated in Section III. A suary concludes the paper.

—3—

I The ImpactIofIflation on Debt andquity Yields

fundamental

Two

relationships are involved in the determination

of debt and equity yields. The first is an investment—equilibrium
condition whereby the marginal product of capital equals an average of

the real costs of debt and equity financing. The second is a portfolio
balance condition in which the after—tax risk—adjusted returns to investors

on debt and equity are equated.

These relationships are the subjects

of parts A and B of this section. The impact of changes in inflation is
deduced and illustrated graphically in parts C and D.

A.

Investment and the User Cost of Capital

As is well known, the decision to invest depends on whether the
present value of the expected revenue from investment, net of direct
operating expenses and indirect taxes, exceeds the supply price of capital,

and on marginal investments the two will be equal. Assume that inflation
is expected to cause net revenues to rise at rate ir

(profit margins are

constant) and that the productivity of the investment and thus real net
revenues are expected to decline at the output decay rate of

per year.

In the absense of taxes one can then write:

p

tl v

=

k

,

(1.1)

t=l (l+r)t
=

current

supply price of capital

REV =

current

expected net revenue (operating income), and

where

r

=

financing
and

rate. (the average of intérést rates on debt

equity)

—4—

(J_)tl

'

Because

L

t=l

1

—
—

r—Tr+

(l±r)

(1.2)

k
The left side of equation (1.2) is the gross marginal product of capital
required for a firm to purchase a new capital good.

If one allows for the taxation of business income at rate T and

business capital at T

and for differences between tax and economic

depreciation and if capital goods prices are expected to rise at the same
rate as revenues, then the analogue to equation (1.2) is:

where

p

ra —

p =

(l_T)[!k —

ra =

+ T(cS_cS*),

c(1—T)i

cS

<1.3)

— T

(1.4)

]

(1.5)

+(1—cx)e
00

= (r a—Tv+3)

t

(1.6)

(l+r)t

p is the marginal product of capital net of both depreciation and taxes;

ra is an average of the after—tax debt, (1—T)i, and equity, e, rates,

with c being the debt weight; and * is the average annual geometric
rate of tax depreciation when Sx is the tax depreciation rate allowed

in period t.

If tax depreciation were equal to economic depreciation

at replacement cost, then

=

(l+_S)t.

into equation (1.6) yields CS* = S.

Substituting this expression

However, under present tax law
2

depreciation is based on historic cost,

.

i.e., cSx = 6(1—5)

t—l

2Present law allows the use of accelerated depreciation methods
which reduces business tax liabilities. The impact of accelerated depreciation methods, the investment tax credit, and low tax rates on the first
$100,000 of corporate profits will be captured by the assumption below that
T = 0.4 rather than a higher number.

—5—

Substituting this expression into equation (1.6) yields:
=

ra -i+6

6.

(l.6a)

ra + 6

B. After—Tax Yeid and Portfolio Equilibrium

It is assumed that dividend and interest income are taxed at rate

y and capital gains income at rate c (c<y). Specification of the return
on equities after personal taxes thus requires an assumption regarding

dividend policy. Before inflation accelerated in the second half of the
l960s, nonfinancial corporations paid out slightly less than half of their
true earnings after taxes (recorded earnings with the IVA and capital

consumption adjustments). In 1964 and 1965, for example, the payout ratio
was 43 percent. In the 1970s, the payout ratio, so measured, jumped sharply.
In 1976 and 1977, for example, the ratio was 64 percent.. A plausible
explanation for the higher payout is that firms view the real gains that
accrue to shareholders when inflation erodes the real indebtedness of the
firm as ttdistributable" earnings.. To subtract debt payments based on an

inflationary premium in interest rates in the calculation of earnings but
not to add the reduction in real indebtedness is inappropriate [von Furstenberg

and Malkiel (1977)]. When the reduction in real indebtedness, TrcPkK (where
K is the real capital stock and the actual and expected inflation rates
are equal), is added to true earnings to obtain distributable earnings, the
payout ratios in 1964—65 and 1976—77 become, respectively, 41 percent and

43 percent.3 A constant fraction y of earnings so—calculated is assumed

3These calculations are based upon ci. = 0.25, rr
0.012 in 1964—65
and 0.065 in 1976—77, and the values of real assets reported in von Furstenberg
[1977, Table 1, column (2)]. Von Furstenberg's data also indicate that the
ratio of the market value of debt to the value of real assets has remained
close to 0.25 throughout the 1952—76 period.

—6—

to

be paid out.

To see precisely what is involved, it is useful to rewrite equation
(1.3), after substitution from equation (1.5), as

e =

1
[p

ct(l—T)i —

T(_*)

+ car] + TT.

(1.3')

The first term is the expected real pretax return, inclusive of the real

gains at the expense of debtors, to shareholders, y of which is assumed to
be paid out as dividends and taxed at rate y. The remainder plus Tt

is

taxed at rate c. Thus, the expected after—tax return to shareholders is:

ea =
=

where y' =

(l—y)y(e.-ii) +
(l—y')(e—ir)

(1—c)

[(1.-y) (e—1T)

+ Tr]

+ (l—c)Tr,

(1.7)

yy + c(1—'y) and equals y when all real earnings are fully

taxed (l). A neutral tax system would tax all real equity earnings
(e—11) at rate y and would not tax inflationary gains at all. Thus the
present system is biased in favor of equity returns when inflation is low
and against these returns when inflation is high.4
The expected after—tax nominal return on equity equals the expected

after—tax return on bonds plus a risk premium:

ea

where

(1—y)i + ,

(1.8)

> 0 is the risk premium.

4For c = y/5 and y' = 0.4, the system is biased in favor of
equity returns as long as r < 2.4 (e—Tr) or about 12% when the real after—
tax yield is 5%. For a discussion of why the concurrent equivalent capital
gains tax rate would fall far short of the statutory rate, see Bailey (1969).

—7—

C. Combining the Relationships

Solving (1.3') for i gives what might be labelled an investment—
equilibrium (IE) relation:

(i)

=

+

(1)

- —j e.

[ir -

(IE)

Substituting (1.7) into (1.8) and solving for i gives portfolio
equilibrium (PE):

I =

-—e
l—y

+

ir— _c._.

(FE)

l—y

l—y

Differentiating (PE) with respect to

-- +

=

l—y dir

dir

-c
(1 9)

l—y

Differentiating (IE) with respect to
on ir

allowing for the dependency of

ii,

reflected in equation (l.6a),5

di — _____

1—ct

ct(1—T)

dir

(r+S)[r

where X =

dc

ct(1—T) dir

'

(1 10)

+ S(1—T)}

unless

—

exists in which case X = 1.

replacement—cost depreciation

Solving (1.9) for de/dir and substituting

in (1.10),6

di
dir

=

(1y)X +
ct(l—T)(l—y') + (l—a(i—y)

.

(1.10')

51n these differentiations, both p/r and /Tr are assumed
to equal zero. See Section III.B for an argument that /ir > 0.

61f /Tr
becomes (1—ct)(y'—c--),

,

then the second term in the numerator o (1.10')

—8—

This expression reduces to 1/(1—T) a' la' Feldstein (1976) or
l/(l—y) as in Darby (1975) when

(1) A =
(ii)

1

(replacement—cost depreciation exists)

1

and thus Y' = y (all real earnings are fully taxed)

(iii) c = 0

(iv) y = T

(nominal capital gains are not taxed)

(interest is taxed and deducted at the same rate).

Under these conditions the real after—tax debt rate, (l—y)i
be invarient with respect to

if,

would

rr.

Equating (1.9) and (1.10) and solving

de

=

dir

(l—y)?

c(l—T)(y'—c)

(1 9')

cL(1—T)(1—y') + (l—cL)(l—y)

When conditions (i)—(lv) hold, this expression reduces to unity and

the real after—tax equity yield, (1—y)(e—rr), would be invarient with
respect to ir.

Of course, conditions (i)—(iv) do not hold in the real world.

Table 1 contains estimates of di/drr and de/dir for different values of y.
The other assumed parameter values are also listed in the table; the

ra

and ir values necessary for calculating A are approximate average values
for the 1964—77 period, not current values [see Hendershott and Ru (1980)].
As can be seen, the hypothesized parameters yield derivatives that are well

below those that would exist under a neutral tax system. To illustrate,

with a neutral system and y =

0.4,

di/dir =

1.67

The calculated values are dijdir = 1.28 and de/dir

and de/d'rr =

1.0.

0.81 or roughly

20 percent less.7 These results support Feldstein's conjecture (1976, p. 816,

7L /T 0.3 (sea Section III.B), then the calculated value of
di/dir would be 0.88 for y = 0.4 and 0.64 for y.= 0.0. Data from the ps,t
decade and a half suggest that corporate bond rates: have risen by slightly
less than the increase in expected inflation.

—9—

Table 1: Calculated Changes in Debt and Equity
Yields in Response to Changes in Expected Inflation

di/thr

de/thr

0.0

0.89

0.89

0.1

0.96

0.88

0.2

1.05

0.86

0.3

1.15

0.84

0.4

1.28

0,81

Underlying Assumed Parameter Values:

ra = 0.092,

=

0.085,

it

= 0.035, T = 0.,4 and thus

y = 0.4, c = 0.2y, and thus y' = O.52y.

= 0.25..

0.8.

—10—

note 15) that the taxation of nominal capital gains and the use of historic—
cost depreciation are the cause of the decline in real after—tax debt yields

during the last decade and a half. The results are not, however, compatible
with the analysis of Feldstein, Green and Sheshinshi (FGS, l978).8

D. A Graphical Illustration

The impact of an increase, in. expected inflation on nominal debt

and equity yields under both a neutral tax system [as defined by conditions

(i)—(iv)j and the present system is illustrated in Figure 1. The negatively—sloped solid schedule is the. IE curve when the anticipated inflation

rate is initially zero

(Tr° =

0).

The positively—sloped solid schedule is

the corresponding FE curve. From the IE and FE equations, respectively,

the slopes of these schedules can be seen to be —(1—a)! a(l—T) and
(l—y')/.(l—y). With no expected inflation (and thus S=6*), the vertical

intercepts are p/a(l—T) and

—/(l—y), respectively. The intersection of

the curves gives the initial yields of i° and e0.
In a neutral system, an increase in 'rr to ir' would raise the IE

schedule by iT'/a(l—T) and the FE schedule by yrrT/(l—y). The new dashed

schedules intersect at i' =i0 + iT"/(l—y) and e' = e0 +jr and the
real after—tax rates of return are unchanged. Firms can afford to pay these

8FGS deduce [equ (28) after correcting for an error in the substitution
from equ (27] that
di = T
y + (l—y) (X—T)
dTr

With

0.8 and T = 0.4, the values for the derivative with y = 0.0, 0.2
and 0.4, respectively, are 1.33, 1.0 and 0.67. Note that the derivative
increases, rather than decreases, with y. A major source of the difference
in analysis, including the surprising ab.sencc.of c from the expression for
di/diT, is that FGS do not employ a portfolio equilibrium relationship.
A =

Figure 1: The Impact of an Increase in Expected
Inflation on Debt and Equity Yields Under Both

Neutral and Biased Tax Systems (T =

y

=

0.4)

Nominal
Debt Yield

p

\

7

/

PE (ir'>O, yl C

PE (ii'>O, y= 0.4, c = O.2y)

PE (r° —

.o1 +

0, y =1, c = 0)

Tt

l—y

IE (Trt>0,

cS*

= 4)

jO

IE (Tr'>0, *<)
•( o

e0
yTr—

1y
l—y

e +ir

Nominal

Equity Yield

—12—

higher nominal returns on the same quantities of debt and equity, and wealth—
holders are willing to supply the same amount of debt and equity capital
as before.

The existence of historic—cost depreciation in the face of inflation
erodes some after—tax real earnings of firms by raising the effective

corporate tax rate. Given p, firms cannot afford to pay i0 + Tr°/(l—y)
to debtors and e0 + .110

[n' —

T(_S*)]/c(1_T)

to

shareholders. Thus the IE curve rises by only

to the dotted schedule in Figure 1. The shift in

the PE curve under present tax law is more complex. The taxation of nominal
capital gains makes equities less attractive during an inflationary period,
requiring higher relative before—tax yields on equities and thus tending to

shift the dashed PE schedule rightward (to lower the vertical intercept). The

only partial (y) taxation of real gains, on the, other hand, makes
equities more attractive (with or without inflation), requiring higher

relative before—tax rates. The net result of an increase in inflation
is a slight bias against equities.9 Thus current methods of taxing equity
income at both the firm and personal levels act to mitigate the increase
in debt yields that would otherwise occur in response to an increase in
expected inflation.

9When X = 1.0, the value of de/dir for y = T = 0.4 is 1.11 > 1.0,
indicating that the PE curve shifts rightward along the dashed IE schedule
(the value of di/dir is 1.56 < 1.67).

—13—

II.

Inflation, Corporate Taxation and the Market Value of Equities
The after—tax expected rate of return on equity is the expected

rate of return on a unit of real capital divided by the fraction of

capital that is equity financed. For new capital, one solves equation
(1.3') for e—Tr and substitutes in equation (1.8):

ea =

(1_y')[p_T($_S*)_ct(l_-r)i

+ cti]

-1-

(l'-c)(l—ct)ir

(2.1)

By definition, the market value of equity that finances marginal new

investments is 1—ct times the value of the investment, and the value

of new shares nd debt equals the replacement cost of the new real
capital. The determination of the market value of existing equity requires
consideration of the average return on existing capital.
The expected rate of return on existing shares, which must equal
the rate of return on new shares, can be expressed as the product of the
after—tax average return on a unit of real capital and the value of

real capital PkK, divided by the value of existing shares, Mv.

That

is,

(l-y')[_T(_*)_a(l_T)I + ct] +

e

(l_c)(l_ct)kK
'

a,

(2 2)

where !thats!t on the variables denote values pertaining to existing, rather
than new, real capital (old and new capital are assumed to be taxed
identically and financed with the same proportions of debt and equity).
Substituting (2.2) into (1.8) and solving for MV/PkK

=

(1-y')[

-

(l—y)i+

(2 3)

To deduce the impact of increases in observed and expected
inflation on the value of equities relative to the replacement cost of
real capital, one takes the derivative with respect to

=

(l_yT)_

ii:

l—T)-4+ all + (l—c)(l—ct)—

thr

(l—y)i +

Assuming that

was initially equal to 1—ct,

as it was in the middle

l960s, for an increase in inflation to reduce relative share values

(d/thr < 0) it must be that

1),t

—

a(l—T)---

+ < (l—y). — (1—c).

(2.4)

Consideration of the values of di/thr computed in Table 1, along with

the y and c associated with them, establishes that the right side
of (2.4) is negative. While somewhat more complicated to demonstrate,

the left side is also postiie.

As a result, (2.4) does

not hold and thus an increase in inflation should raise relative share
values, not lower them.
Before establishing that the left side of (2.4) is positive, it
should be noted that the left side would be negative in a model where

firms are fully equity-financed (ctO) because dSfdir < 0. It is the
pure—equity assumption of Feldstein's analysis (1978) that allows

him to reach the conclusion that inflation impairs equity values. When
debt—financing is acknowledged, it is clear that the combination of
increased inflation and the present taxation of corporate income will
not, ceteris paribus, be detrimental to share values.

—15—

The left side of (2.4) will be positive if
Td15*

idi
—>

1 + — — —(l—T)-—cdrr

idir

0.

(2.4')

The derivatives 1/i and d5*/thr are average "concurrent equivalents"
because their values depend on the time elasped from the change in

Tr

and it is the average changes in i and cS*, in present value terms,
that are relevant to the current value of shares. To illustrate, in 1977
only 14 percent of net interest—bearing debt of nonfinancial corporations

was short—term.1° Thus an increase in interest rates would apply
initially to less than a fifth of outstanding debt (in the short run

i/i < 0.2). Over time more debt would roll over at the higher interest

rate and eventually i/i would approach unity. In the calculations
reported in the next session, the average concurrent equivalent i/Bi
will assumed to be 0.4. This would make the last term on the left of (2.4')

equal to —0.3 for the maximum value of di/thr of 1.28 and T =

0.4.

The expost understatement of depreciation allowances in any period
due to inflation and the use of historic—cost depreciation, UN =

(ScS*)(PkK)l,

can be approximated by

UN =

(Pk_Pk

)SGINV1 + (k_Pk )5(l—S)GINV2 + (Pk_Pk )6(l—5)2GINV3 +

10Total net interest—bearing debt is defined as credit market
instruments outstanding plus trade debt less nonmonetary liquid assets and
consumer and trade credit holdings. Net short—term interest—bearing debt
is defined as total net interest—bearing debt less bonds and mortgages
outstanding. Total net debt equalled $577.1 billion at the end of 1977 and
net short—term debt was $81.7 billion; the ratio of the latter to the former
was 0.138, up from 0.106 at the end of 1967. [The data are from U. S.
Federal Reserve System (1978)].

—16—

where GINV is real gross investment. Multiplying UN1 by 1—cS and
subtracting,

UN —

(l-(S)UNi

=

Multiplying the right side by k 'k
UN and letting APk/Pk
—l

'k

)cS(l—5)1GINV11'

(Pk_Pk

equal

-l

—l

IT,

this

(2.5)

substituting the definition of
expression can be written as

PkK -i

and the one—period response. of *

to

is simply —(S.

Over time, the understatement of depreciation allowances will
increase as the price level continues to rise. The long—run impact of an
increase in inflation on cS*

is obtained by using the steady—state

(l+ii+g)UN1, where g is the rate of growth in

relationship that UN =

real capital. Substituting in (2.5) and solving,
=

(S
if

+g+(S

Taking the derivative,

-

or

It

(S

= 0.035,

[

1

++g

g = O.Q3

and (S =

(l-i
0.085.

= O483
The average concurrent

equivalent value of d*/dIt is taken to be —0.3. With (S = 0.085
T

= 0,4,

the second term on the left of (2.4') is thus —0.48. The

inequality is thus satisfjed,, and an

increase

jn inflation, ceteris

pat-ibus, should raise the relative value of shares.

and

—17—

III. Other Causes of the Decline in Share Values

The question still remains as to why share prices have fallen. Only
two possible sources exist within the framework developed: a decline in
the pretax net return on capital, p, and an increase in the risk premium

required to induce investors to hold equities, .

Significant

evidence

exists that each of these changes has occurred; whether the changes are
large enough to explain the observed decline in share values is another
matter.

A.

Some Empir-cai Evidence

Malkiel (1979) is most closely identified with the position that

has increased. In support of his hypothesis, he computes a series on the
expected return on stocks and compares it with the return on riskiess
long—term treasury securities,. The expected return series is an imaginative use of expected growth rates of earnings per share, obtained from the
Value Line Investment Survey, for each of the companies in the Dow Jones
Industrial average., According to Malkiel's calculations, the premium rose

—18—

from under roughly 3½ percent in the 1964—65 period to 6 percent in the

1975—77 period.11 Independent equity returns calculated by Hendershott and
Hu (1980) show a roughly 3½ percentage point rise from 4 to 7½ in this
premium.

There is also evidence that the pretax return on capital has fallen

in the 1970s. Feldstein and Summers (1977) compute cyclically—adjusted
pretax series [p/(l—T)] based on two different capital stock measures.
The declines in the pretax series between 1964—65 and 1975—76 are 3 and

2 percentage points. Moreover, the 1975—76 data were adjusted upward on
the basis of the potential GNP gap as measured in 1976. Two downward
revisions in potential GNP have been made since then [Council of Economic

Advisors (1979, pp. 72—76)]. As a result, the gap in 1975—76 is now calculated to be only 70 percent of the gap employed in the Feldstein'-

Summer's adjustment. Using the lower gap reduces the adjusted values
of the series in 1975—76 by

one half to a full percentage point.

This would constitute 4 and 2½ percentage point declines in the two series
between 1964—65 and 1975—76.

Some calculations are presented in Table 2 to indicate the impact of
changes in inflation, pretax profitability, and the risk premium on the

market value of equities. The assumed parameter values common to all
calculations are listed below the table. The values that vary [Tr,p/(1—T), and ],
the calculated ratio of share values to the replacement cost of real capital

11Malkiel computes risk premia for both equities and bonds by subtracting a risk—free treasury yield series. Unfortunately, the treasury
yield series employed was the infamous average yield on all treasury securities
with maturity over 10 years. Because this series contains primarily deep
discount and "flower" bonds, the quoted before—tax yield was consistently
between 3/4 and 1½ percentage points less than a new—issue equivalent yield
throughout the 1968—76 period [Cook and Hendershott (1978)].

—19—

Table 2: The Impact of an Increase in Inflation, a Decline in the
Pretax Return on Capital, and an Increase in the Risk Premium'

p/(l—T)

____

______
Q.O446"

____

(1)

0.00

0.11

(2)

0.07

0.11

O.044.6

0.824

+10

(3)

0.07

0.11

0.0796

0.651

-13 (—21)1

(4)

0.07

0.075

0.0446

0.682

— 9

(5)

0.07

0.075

0.0796

0.539

—28 (—35)

(6)

0.00

0.075

0.0796

0.331

—56

at

y =
T =

0.2,
0.4,

0.75

0

(—17)

c = O.2y, y 0.4 and thus y'
i

O1O4. Also, ct = 0.25,
_*
= 0.3ff, where 0.4 =
(frOm Table 1 when y= 0.2), and 0.3= d*/jç.

0.035 + 0.4 (1.05) ii,

1.05 = di/drr

and

0.035 when TF = 0

b/

Obtained by solving equation (2.3) assuming i

Cl

The numbers in parentheses are calculated as ( — 0,824)10.824. Thus
these calculations refer to the ceteris paribus impact of an increase
in
or decline in pl(l—T), given a 7% inflation rate.

and =1—c=0.75.

—20—

(), and the percentage change in share prices (%) are listed in the
table. All calculations are obtained by solving equation (2.3). Row (1)
indicates the value of

in a noninflationary world given p/(l—T)

0.11.12

Row (2) illustrates the positive ceteris paribus impact that an increase

in inflation should have on share prices. An increase in

TF

from zero to

7 percent should raise share prices by 10 percent relative to the replace-

ment cost of real capital)3 Row (3) shows that a 3½ percentage point
increase in the risk premium from 0.0446 to 0.0796, in conjunction with
the increase in inflation to 7 percent, lowers share values by 13 percent.
Row (4) indicates that a decline in the pretax return on capital from 0.11
to 0.075, again in conjunction with the rise in inflation, reduces share

values by 9 percent. When these changes are combined, row (5), the reduction in share values is 28 percent, or over two—thirds of the 40 percent

observed decline. Row (6) measures the impact of an increase in the risk
premium and a decline in pretax profitability in the absence of inflation,,

The 56 percentage point decline in share values reemphasizes the earlier
point that biases in the tax code against corporate income have not caused
the decline in equity values. Given the increase, in the risk premium and
decline in pretax profitabi1ity share: values would have fallen even more
if inflation had not accelerated.

12Thjs is consistent with Feldstein and Summers (1977), after allowing
for property taxes, and Hendershott and Hu (1980).
estimate is not sensitive to the assumed values of the personal
tax rate. For example, with y = 0.0,
would be 0.823rather than 0.824. If
the actAul inflation rate exceeded the expected rate during the adjustment,
then c1S*/d7Tcould exceed its long—run value. This appears to have been the
case in the United States [HerAdershott and Hu (1980)]. With the average concurrent equivalent value of d*/r set at —0 5 rather than —0 3,
in rows
(2) and (5), respectively,would be 0.786 and 0.509.

—21—

B. Causes of the increase In

and Decline in p

Malkiel (1979) cites three reasons for the increase in the relative

risk premium required on equities: (1) the recessions of 1969—70 and
especially 1973—75, after eight years of Continuous prosperity, (2) the
greater variability in prices associated with a higher level of inflation,

and (3) escalating uncertain business regulation. One might question the
importance of (1), it depending on a questionable naivete of investors,

and possibly (2). While uncertain inflation obviously creates uncertainty
regarding the real after—tax return on equity investments, such returns

are at least partially hedged by the underlying real assets. The real
after—tax return on investments in long—term debt instruments, in contrast,

is not hedged at all [Gordon and Halpern (1976)]. While uncertainties
regarding business regulations have undoubtedly increased, it seems un-

likely that they could explain the remarkably large increase in .

Another argument against Malkiel's explanation is the failure of
other market measures of corporate risk to increase dramatically. Malkiel
reports a spread between yields on BAA corporate bonds and long—term
treasury securities, and the spread rises sharply from 1 percentage points

or less in the first half of thel96Os to2:to3 perdaxtgepoints in the
1970—76 period (although it falls below 2 percent in 1977). However, this
increase is largely attributable to the inclusion of deep—discount bonds in
the issues underlying the average treasury yield series (see footnote 11).
When a new—issue—equivalent treasury yield series is substituted for the
deep—discount series, the yield spread exceeds 2 percent in only the
severe 1974—75 recession years and barely exceeds 1 percent in 1973 and
1977.

—22—

A better explanation for the increase in

is the impact of

increases in inflation on the attractiveness of investment in owner—

occupied housing [Hendershott and Hu (1979)]. During the past decade
and a half, leveraged homeowners have earned expost real rates of return
on the equity invested in their homes averaging 5 percentage points

greater than expected. Moreover, neither the implicit rents nor the real
capital gains on housing are taxed, while returns on financial assets are
and interest payments are deductible in computing the personal income tax
base. As a result of this tax treatment, the increase in expected inS—
flation has lowered substantially the user cost of capital for owner'-

occupied housing for those in higher tax brackets. The decline between
1964 and 1978 has been estimated to be 2½ percentage points for those in
the 30 percent marginal tax bracket and 4 percentage points for those in
the, 45 percent bracket.

Because investment in owner—occupied housing is more faoedby
tax law during inflationary periods, it is not surprising that households
have substituted housing investment for purchases of equities. Rather than
channelling current income into equity mutual funds, this, income is bei:ng used to

make mortgage payments. In order to maintain a balance in portfolios
between "real" (shares and real estate) and debt investments, bond holdings

have been maintained. The result is the observed increase in the premium
required to hold shares vis—a—vis debt.
Turning to the causes of the decline in the pretax profitability of

the existing capital stock, two seem relevant. First is the sharp increase
in regulatory costs. These include those generated by environmental
standards, health and safety programs,, and affirmative action programs.

14

14
See Crandell (1978, pp. 417—426) for estimates of some of these costs.

—23—

Unless these costs can be fully passed onto consumers, i.e., labor
absorbs the full costs via reduced real wages, the return on existing

capital would decline. Second is the sharp rise in energy prices in the
1970s relative to that expected when the capital was put into place. This
has required expenditures to render production processes more energy

efficient and the resultant processes are probably still inferior
relative to those associated with new capital.,

C. Implications for Empirical Investigation of Investment Behavior

Tobin's "q" theory makes the ratio of the market value of the firm
to the replacement cost of its real assets a central determinant of investment

behavior [Tobin and Brainard (1977)]. When q >

raise the value of shares; when q <

1.0,

1.0,

net investment will

investment will lower the value

of shares. The relevant q is a nonobservable anticipated marginal ratio:
the increase in the market value of the firm owing to investment in real

assets divided by the value of the additional real assets. However, if

marginal and average q's move together, the latter equalling
the symbolism of this paper, then the observed

+ a

+ a in

is an adequate proxy

for the marginal q and can successfully be employed in empirical work.
As long as deviations of

the business cycle, q and

+ a from unity are largely caused by
+ a are likely to move together. During

recessions, when excess capacity exists and

is unlikely to be profitable (q <

1.0);

+ a < 1.0, new investment

the reverse is true during expansions.

Of course, if this is the case, then capacity utilization rates would provide as accurate an explanation of investment behavior as would

+ a

—24—

[von Furstenberg (1977)]. However when

in cyclically—adjusted p/(1 —

+ a

falls owing to a decline

+ a and q could diverge sub-

stantially. New capital will be more productive than old capital because
only the former will be energy and environment efficient. In this case,
capacity utilization rates would be preferred, empirically,to
the other hand, when

+ a. On

+ a falls owing to an increase in , then

+ a

would be preferred empirically to capacity utilization rates.

IV. Summary
With a neutral tax system an increase in observed and anticipated
inflation would not be expected to alter either real after—tax yields
on bonds and equities or the ratio of the market value of equities to

the replacement cost of corporate real capital. In the real world,
however, declines in real after—tax bond yields and the relative value

of shares have been observed. Feldstein (1976) (1978) has attributed
both of these phenomenon to the use of replacement—cost depreciation and

the taxation of nominal capital gains., Ou analysis supports his conjecture
regarding the decline in real after-tax debt yields, but rejects his analysis
of the cause of the decline in share values.

The decline in share values can be attributed to many factors, but
the most important is probably the favorable taxation of income from
owner—occupied housing rather than the unfavorable taxation of corporate

income. Neither implicit rents nor real capital gains on housing are
taxed, and mortgage interest is deductible in computing the personal income

tax base. As a result housing has become more attractive with the acceleration of inflation, and househqlds have, substituted

equity

shares. Other possible sources of the decline in share values are reduced

—25—

profitability of existing capital, owing to increased regulatory costs
and real energy prices, and a greater perceived risk in business
operations.

REFERENCES

Bailey, Martin J., "Capital Gains and Income Taxation," in A. G. Harberger
and N. J. Bailey (eds.) The Taxation Of Income from Capital (Brookings
Institution, Washington, D. C.), 1969.
Cook, Timothy Q. and Patric H. Hendershott, "The Impact of Taxes, Risk,
and Relative Security Supplies on Interest Rate Differentials,"
Journal of Finance, August 1978.
Council of Economic Advisors, Annual Report, U. S. Government Printing
Office, January 1979.
Crandell, Robert W., "Federal Government Initiatives to Reduce the Price
Level," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity) 2, 1978.
Darby, Michael R., "The Financial and Tax Effects of Monetary, Policy on
Interest Rates," Economic Inquiry, June 1975.

Feldstein, Martin, "Inflation, Income Taxes and the Rate of Interest: A
Theoretical Analysis," American Economic Review, December 1976.
Feldstein, Martin, "Inflation and the Stock Market," NBER Working Paper
No. 276, August 1978.
Feldstein, Martin, Jerry Green, and Eyton Sheshinski, "Inflation and Taxes
in a Growing Economy with Debt and Equity Finance," Journal of
Political Economy, Part 2, April 1978.
Feldstein, Martin and Lawrence Summers, "Is the Rate of Profit Falling?"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, 1977.

von Furstenberg, George M., "Corporate Investments: Does Market Valuation
Matter in the Aggregate?" Brookings Papers on EcOnomic Activity, 2, 1977.
von Furstenberg, George N. and Burton G. Malkiel, "Financial Analysis in
an Inflationary Environment," Journal of Finance, May 1977.
Gordon, Myron J. and Paul J. Halpern, "Bond Share Yield Spreads Under
Uncertain Inflation," American Economic Review, September 1976.

—26—

REFERENCES (cont'd)

Hendershott, Patric H. and Sheng Cheng Hu, "Government—Induced Biases in
the Allocation of the Stock of Fixed Capital in the United States,"
in G.M. von Eurstenberg (ed.) Capital, Efficiency and Growth,
Ballinger Publishing Company, 1980.
Hendershott, Patric H. and Sheng Cheng Hu, "Inflation and the Benefits from
Owner—Occupied Housing," revised version of paper presented at the
Mid—Year Meetings of AR1JEA, Washington, D.C., June 1979.
Malkiel, Burton G., "The Capital Formation Problem in the United States,"
Journal of Finance, May 1979.
Tobin, James and William C. Brainard, "Asset Markets and the Cost of
Capital," in B. Belassa and R. Nelson (eds..) EconOmic Progress,
Private Values, and Public Policy: Essays in Honor of William
Feilner, North Holland, 1977.
U. S. Federal Reserve System, Board of Governors, Flow of Funds Accounts
Assets and Liabilities l967-77, August 1978.

