               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            SORTING MODELS OF LABOR MOBILITY,
               TURNOVER, AND UNEMPLOYMENT


                     W. Kip Viscusi



                  Working Paper No. 3T1




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                        July 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER' s research
program in Labor Economics. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research. I am indebted to Dale Mortensen for
helpful suggestions and the Rockefeller Foundation for
Financial support.
                                                  NBER Working Paper 371
                                                               July 1979




   Sorting Models of Labor Mobility, Turnover, and Unemployment



                             ABSTRACT




      Utilizing a model in which individuals search among lotteries

on likely success at different jobs, this paper analyzes both the

search decision when unemployed and the implications of the sorting

process. The model correctly predicts both the direction and con-

vexity of the age-unemployment relationship and the impact of ex-

perience on turnover and wages. Actions taken when unemployed have

an important impact on equilibrium turnover rates, unemployment

rates, and the work history of the pool of unemployed. The sorting

model is used to analyze racial differences in youth unemployment

and major empirical features of low income labor markets.




                                           W. Kip Viscusi
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Northwestern University
                                           Evanston, IL 60201
                                           312/492—5140
                            I. Introduction


    At the time   of   entry into the labor market, few individuals know

the type of job for which tl-Ev are best suited. This uncertainty leads

to a process of experimentation in which individuals and employers learn

about the appropriateness of the job—individual inatchup and terminate

this relationship if it is not desirable. The process by which individ-

uals engage in lotteries on appropriate matchups will be referred

to in this paper as worker sorting. Different aspects of this

process have been considered under various headings, such as job shopping,
                                                1
job matching, and adaptive models of job choice.

     The purpose of this essay is to provide a general framework for

analyzing the implications of worker sorting for patterns of turnover,

unemployment, and wage growth. I will consequently not be primarily con-

cerned with the specific features of the sorting process, but will focus

instead on the broader ramifications of sorting for worker mobility.

While it will be shown that most of the established empirical patterns

of labor mobility are consistent with the sorting model, the framework

is not inconsistent with more traditional analyses of mobility, which

often contribute to the motivation of the economic processes underlying

sorting behavior.2



     1Although there is some overlap in the issues considered, the
following division is representative. See Johnson (1978) and Viscusi
(forthcoming—c) for job shopping models, Mortensen (1975, 1978), Becker
(1974), Jovanovic (1977), and Mincer and Jovanovic (1979) for matching
models, and Viscusi (1979, forthcoming—a,b) for adaptive control models.
     ore specifically, the analytic foundation of the process leading to
sorting is based in part on the insights in the human capital literature,
most particularly those regarding specific human capital. See Becker (1964),
Lazear (1976), Leighton and Mincer (forthcoming), Mincer (1974), Mincer and
Jovanovic (1979), 01 (1962), Parsons (1972), Pencavel (1962), and Rosen (1972).
                                —2—

     Section II analyzes the process of job search in which individuals

do not search among alternative wage offers but instead confront different

lotteries on whether or not a job matchup will be successful. The ram—

ifications of this soriii. pLocess for aggregative patterns of unemployment

and turnover are the subjedt of Section III. Special attention is devoted

to the implications of the model for the unemployment patterns of black

youths and low income workers. Section IV analyzes the impact of experience

at the firm on worker separations, quits, layoffs, and wage levels, while

Section V considers the age—unemployment relationship. A major strength

of the sorting theory is that it correctly predicts both the observed

direction of these relationships and the empirically observed convexity.3

      II. Mobility Lotteries and Optimal Search Procedures

     Consider an employment situation in which an individual can reside

in one of three possible states S, where the superscript i will be used

throughout to refer to the individual's present state. State 1 represents

a successful job match,    represents an unsuccessful job match, and S3

is unemployment.4 Let the periods remaining in the worker's choice problem



     3See especially Leighton and Mincer (forthcoming) for the most com-
prehensive analysis of the empirical aspects to be considered. Their
analysis also includes a discussion of the importance of sorting and
other conceptual underpinnings of labor mobility. Also pertinent are
the other papers included in Freeman and Wise (forthcoming).
      Following Burdett and Mortensen(1978), one can also develop the
model in terms of groups of states S1 and S2 for successful and unsuc—
cessful matches across a heterogeneous set of jobs.
                                   —3—


be indicated by subscripts. With n periods ].eft, the employment transition

probabilities are given by P, so that


                           I   b
                                n
                                         0       1—bI
                                                   n

                     Pl
                      U
                           I
                               0         c       1—cl
                                                    ni
                           Is f          "n
                                     (l—s,.)f    1—f   I




where the ij'th element represents the transition from S1 to S3 with n

periods remaining. Each of these transition probabilities can assume

values in [0,1], but the rows must sum to 1.

     Individuals do not move between successful and unsuccessful job

matches without searching for another job while in S3.5 The probability

of termination of a successful job match is assumed to be less than for

an unsuccessful match, so that
                                             6
                               bU >cfl


     50n—the—job search leading to job changes without intervening unemploy-
ment, as in Burdett (1978), is excluded. For short periods, the necessity
of an intervening spell of employment does not provide too dissimilar results.
With minor amendments, the model also can include labor force dropouts along
the lines of Burdett and Mortensen (1979) or Toikka (1976). Doing so would
require the addition of a fourth state.
           assumption can be derived rigorously as in Mortensen (1975, 1978),
Jovanovic (1977), and Viscusi (forthcoming—a). Cyclical factors and a
change in the locale of one's spouse's job are among the influences that
lead to termination of successful matches.
                                            —4—



The specific economic processes leading to worker turnover from the two

employment states need not be considered explicitly for the purposes of

cs analysis. Cyclical factors, random events that lead the orker to

move, and decisions by employers and workers to terminate unsuccessful

matchups are among the determinants of these probabilities.

     Unemployed individuals have a probability f of finding an acceptable

job, where S is the conditional probability of a successful job match

given that the offer is acceptable. More specifically, the individual

job searth will take the form of individuals searching not among

alternative wage offers, but rather lotteries on successful and unsuccess-

ful job outcomes with a probability z of S1 and (l—z) of S2. Let the

density function of possible success probabilities with n periods remain-

ing be g(z). If z IS the lowest probability of S acceptable to the

worker, the probability f of finding a job in that period is given by



                           1
          (1) f =              g(x) dx


Similarly, the conditional probability of success s given that the job

is acceptable is

                               l
                                   xg(x)dx
          (2)          =
                   U
                                   g(x)dx

     The transition probability sf from S3 to S1 can be obtained

using equations 1 and 2, and is
                                           —5—
                          1
            sf    =   I       xg(x)dx


Similarly, the transition probability (l—s)f from S3 to S2 is


            (1_s)f =           1(l—x) g(x)dx


and the value (i—f) for remaining in S3 is



                      =
             (l—f)            fg(x)dx

Higher values of Z increase the probability of remaining unemployed
and decrease both probabilities of employment since
             a(snfl
                 f)       =                <0 ,
              n
                               —z
                                 nn
                                  g (z )
                                      ii

             a[(l_Sn)fn]         = —(l—z)    g(z) <   0


and
             3(1—fn)
                     =
                              g(z)   > 0



      Residence   in each state S1 with n periods remaining has an associated
immediate  payoff u1. In addition, there is the discounted present value
V_1 of   starting in that state in the next period. An interest rate r
has   an associated discount factor (l+r), which will be indicated by 8.
                                              —6—

                        i                           i
Entry into a particular S has an associated payoff u +                           .   The

relative attractiveness of the states is such that


      (3) u1 +              > u3 +              >       +
                 n    n—i     n          n—i        n       n—i
             7
for all n.

      The recursive solution to the worker's dynamic programming problem

in each state is

                     bnfl
                       Eu1 + V1    + (1—b11 )[u3
             V1
                 n            n—i]             n +                n—i]
                     2            23                              3
             Vn2 =c[u
                   nfl +V  ]+(i—c)[u
                         n—i     n n +Vn—i],
and

      (4) V3 = snil
                 f [u1 ÷                      + (i-sn)fn[u2
           n         n                n—i ]              n +             n—i I


                       + (i-f) [u ÷

Any choices in the three states with n periods left are made with respect

to the predetermined optimal values V1.8



     7A sufficient, but not necessary condition for this to be true is
that u1 > u3 > u2 , for all n.

     8To av:id co:plicating the notation further, all values of V in
subsequent periods are assumed to be their optituai values determined
by backward induction.
                               —7—



     The worker in S3 receives a job offer at random from the distribution

characterized by g(z). Instead of receiving a wage offer, he learns the

probability z that the job match will be successful. The :.ly choice

variable is whether or not to accept the job. Thus the worker picks his

reservation probability of success z in each period. Subsequent lotteries

will be generated from a perhaps different distribution so that g_1(z)

need not be identical to g(z). However, the values of g in each period

are assumed to be independent of the worker's previous experiences, ruling

out learning effects and recall of a previous of fer.9

     Two possible variants of sorting can be incorporated in this model.

First, the worker who accepts a job may   realize   immediately whether S'

prevails so that his job characteristics satisfy u >      u and   b > cn.

Alternatively, the rewards in S1 and S2 may   be    indistinguishable

(u =   u)   so that the worker and employer are not immediately aware of

the outcome.1° The appropriateness of the match is, however, discovered

on a probabilistic basis over time, leading to a higher termination

probability for S2 than S1. For concreteness, the exposition will be in

terms of the first of these situations.

     Consider a worker in S3 with n periods remaining. The optimal

decisions in other states at that time are not matters of concern. More-

over, all that must be known about subsequent decisions is that they are



       The parallel of the format with wage search models from a known
distribution is quite close. See the survey by Lippman and McCall (1976).
         model developed along these lines must have associated transition
probabilities that satisfy equation 3.
                                            —8—

made optimally, so that the V1 terms in equation 4 assume their maximum

values.     The worker's objective is to Max V3, leading to the first—order

condition

                                                  —
             0       g(z){_z[u' +                     (l_z)[u +
                     + [u +
or

         (5) z{[u' ÷                — [u2   + V2 J} =       [u +   -   [u2 +

The worker sets the value of z so that the product of the reservation

success probability and the net gain from being in S1 instead of S2

equals the net difference in the value of being unemployed over the value

of an unsuccessful job outcome. The optimal value of z depends only on

the values of being in each state. It is independent of the shape of the

(Z) distribution, although it does depend on subsequent values of g.

     The worker's choice of z responds in the expected fashion to changes
    i
in u ,
     n
          since

                           3z
                     <0,            <0,and            >0.
             au                              au
                 n              n                 n

Increases in the value of either employed state lower the reservation

acceptance probability, while increases in the unemployment state payoff

make the worker more selective as he raises z
                                                            n


     See Howard (1971) for a detailed motivation of optimization
procedures within the context of Markov decision models.
                                          —9—


       The role of the mobility lottery distribution can be seen by examining

the role of                  where        is some parameter. Only the V31 term in

equation 5 depends on g1(z, ), so that


                             n =
                                            av3
                                                n-l
                                     sign
                                      .
                   sign


From the counterpart of equation 5 for n—i periods left, we know that

       is independent of g1(z, ) so that                     need not be written as

a function of the parameteri that will be used to alter g1(z,).

Using equation 4, V1 can be formulated as

       V_1 =                         dx] [u1 +               +
                      g_1(x,


                 f(l-x)g1(x, ) dx][u1 4-v_2] ÷

                                p)   dx] [u1 + V2]

       Differentiating with respect toi , one obtains



 (6)         =
                 { [u11   + 8V12] -
                                          [u_ +, By22]   }
                                                                 'x g(x, ) dx
               + {[u1 +               -
                                          [u1 ÷                        g_(x, ) dx

where the first term in braces is positive and the second is negative.

       Consider a shift in g1 distribution toward the upper tail so that

both of the         terms are positive. This would occur if, for example,

g_1(x ) shifted
              to            the right by some constant amount. The first
                                          —10—


    derivative term Is the Increased probability of a successful job out-

    come, s1f1, from a marginal increase in .                  This value is weighted
 by the net advantage of residence in S1 over S2. The second drivative

    term is the increase in the probability of finding
                                                                 a job, f1, weighted
 by the (negative) difference between the values of states 2S and S3 .              If
 both of the               terms are positive, 2   will   be an increasing function of
p    if the value of the increased probability of a successful job match
 offsets the drop in utility associated with the increased chance of finding

 a job that is not a successful match.

        Whether one considers changes in the distribution of job offers,

payoffs, or other parameters of the job choice problem, any effect that

alters z will influence both the probability of finding a job f and

the conditional probability of a successful job outcome in opposite

fashion. Upon differentiation of equations 1 and 2, one obtains


        (7)            =   — g(z)   < 0


and

        (8)nnn3$
                  nn z xgn(x)dx]
            g (z )[—z f +
              3z                                          >0
                   n

These equations will be utilized in Section III to assess whether different

groups' unemployment experiences are attributable to differences in job

offer distribution or differences in other parameters of the decision

problem.
                                           —11—


               III. Determinants of Equilibrium Outcomes


A. Steady State Frequencies

      Suppose that '.h-                    ansition matrix P for a labor market

group is given by


                         r
                                   c
                         10                  i—cl
                                  (l—s)f
                                             l_fJ

which is the same as P except that the period subscripts have been

dropped assuming that the group's average behavior is time—invariant.

The equilibrium proportions a. of the group in each of the states S1

are given by


                   =                    sf(l—c)
      (9)
             a1        sf(l—c) + (l—s)f(l—b) + (l—b)(l—c)


                   —                (l—s)f(l—b)
      (     ) a2       sf(l—c)   + (l—s)f(l—b) + (l—b)(l—c)

and
                 —                     (l—b)(l—c)
              a3 —
                       sf(l—c)   + (l—s)f(l—b) + (l—b)(l—c)

      The nature in which the group proportions depend on the different

parameters y (where y includes s,f,b, and c) is sunimarized in Table I.

Groups with higher conditional probabilities of success s will exhibit

greater concentrations in S1 and lower concentrations in S2 and S3.

Increasing the probability f of finding an acceptable job reduces the

unemployment rate and increases both employment             state   frequencies. Finally,
          —12--




          Table I




Summary of aa.Iy    Effects



y    a1       a2       a3

S    +        -        -
f    +       +         -
b    +        -        -
C    -        +        -
                             —13—



increases in b and c raise the values of a1 and a2, respectively, while

decreasing all other a.'s.
                      3.


    What is particularly striking about the results is that a difference

in a parameter for one of the states has widespread ramifications for the

group's labor mobility patterns. Consider two groups of workers that

differ only in that one group has a lower conditional probability of

success 12 As these individuals leave the ranks of the unemployed,

they will tend to be concentrated in unsuccessful job matches in S2.

These jobs are associated with higher turnover rates, which in turn

leads to an increase in the level of unemployment a3 even though both

groups were assumed to have the same probability f of finding an accept-

able job once employed.
    This interdependence is reflected in the characterizations in the

literature on the secondary labor market and individuals in dead—end jobs.13

There is a strong correlation among high turnover, low wage jobs, and

unemployment rates. As the sorting models indicate, this correlation

need not be attributable to Institutional factors or labor market discrimination

once employed, but may be due to the dynamics of the mobility process, and,

more specifically, to differences in groups' job search activities. This matter

will be explored in greater detail in Section III.C.



     '2Other things equal, a lower z is required to lower s and an
increase in f will occur as well. Te analysis here assumes that s
is the only difference in behavior. The joint variation of s and f is
analyzed below.
     '3For detailed discussion along these lines, see Doeringer and
Piore (1971) and Hall (1972).
                                    —14—




B. Turnover Histories and the Quality of the Workforce


       The nature of the interdependerce in the labor mobility process is

Lorcefully illustrated by the work histories associated with different

labor force groups. SInce there is greater turnover from S2, oneVs

intuition might suggest that S3 would eventually consist largely of

individuals with unsuccessful job histories. To assess whether this is

the case, suppose that the transition matrix P is time—invariant and
                            *
that   the average quality Q of any group of workers is the ratio of the

proportion in that group who are successfully matched (i.e., those in

S') to the proportion who are unsuccessfully matched (i.e., those in S2).

The average quality of the inf low of workers from         to new jobs is always

s/(l—s) since the fraction s will always be in S1 and (l—s) will enter
                                    *
Now consider the equilibrium Q of the workers leaving their jobs in any

period. If the total population of workers is N, then the number of suc-

cessfully matched workers entering S3 in any period is Na1(l—b), while

the corresponding number of unsuccessful entrants to S3 is Na2(l—c).

Consequently, the value of Q for the flow into the unemployed state is


               *     Na1(l—b)
                                  1—s
                     Na2(l—c)
as one can verify by substituting for a1 and a2 from equations 9 and 10.

       Any   value   of s will yield an equilibrium quality of workers that

is the same for new hires, those entering the ranks of the unemployed,
                                  —15—


                                                         *
and the stock of unemployed. 14   Moreover, the value of Q depends only

on s, the conditional probability of success for acceptable jobs. Labor

market groups with lower values of s generated during the job search

process will consequently be associated with more turnover from unsuccess-

ful job matches and a stock of unemployed who were unsuccessfully matched

on their previous jobs. For the equilibrium values of the labor mobility

process, there is not simply some positive correlation among these values.
                    *
Rather, all of the Q values are identical and dependent only on s.

'C. Application to Black—White Youth Unemployment Differences

     The sorting model can be profitably applied to the analysis of a

particularly salient problem, the wide discrepancy between rates of unemploy-

ment for black and white youths. Despite slight differences in emphasis in

various studies, the general consensus is that, while blacks have a some-

what lower probability of finding a job once unemployed, the dominant cause

of the unemployment discrepancy is that young blacks exhibit much higher

rates of turnover.

     Although this problem is manifested through departures from employment

(S1 and S2), the source of the discrepancy may not be due to any aspect of

the functioning of the employment process. Rather differences while unemployed

in the nature of the search strategies can generate observed differences in
                                                             1   2
employment even if the transition probabilities while in S and S are

identical for both groups.


     14              3                    *
       If exits from S are random and the Q fo the outflow from S3
and for the inflow are identical, the..1value of Q for the preceding       *
job held by the stock of workers in S will also have the same equilibrium Q
                                 —16—


       More specifically, suppose that some economic factors lead blacks

 to be less selective in their search so that they adopt a lower z. One

such influence may be a lower u3 value because remaining unemployed may

-be   less   desirable ror     ack youths.   The reduced z will lead

blacks to be matched less successfully to jobs in S2from which they will

exhibit higher turnover and become unemployed.

       An important issue is whether the observed racial differences can

be possibly attributed solely to exogenous factors that affect the choice

z. First, it should be noted that the values of b and c may    differ    by

race, so that lower levels of z and the associated lower values of s
                              n                                     n
need not be the cause of the observed patterns, though they are consistent

with the data. Second, if blacks do have lower z values, one can deter—
                                                   n
mine whether their mobility lottery offer distributions are identical

to those of whites. Since 3f/Dz is negative, a lower s (due to a

lower z) for blacks must be accompanied by a higher job finding rate

f if the distribution g(z) is identical across races. Since unemployed

blacks have slightly lower probabilities of finding jobs, if lower s

values do indeed contribute to the observed mobility patterns, then

blacks must also have different g(z) distributions with smaller upper

right tails.15

       Differences in groups' choices of zn has an additional ramification

as well. Suppose that economic factors associated with the disadvantaged


-      15       .     .             . .
         For a discussion of the empirical differences in the f values
for black and white youths and the other patterns considered here,
see Leighton and Mincer (forthcoming), the other papers in Freeman
and Wise (forthcoming), and Flanagan (1978).
                              —17—


status of a labor force group have led them to lower their z values

for the mobility lottery search process. Then that group's job finding

rate will be raised so that examination of exits from unemployment for

these individuals will yield an overly optimistic portrayal of the

functioning of the labor market for the unemployed, while at the same

time leading to greater turnover (since as/az > 0) that suggests that

the problem is an intrinsic instability of the nature of jobs. Thus,

the endogeneity of mobility decisions may mask important differences in

the behavior of the unemployed. Moreover, group differences in search

strategies will lead to different turnover propensities that one might

attribute incorrectly to the functioning of the employment process rather

than individual search decisions. Both the locus and cause of labor

mobility differences may be misunderstood.

           IV. On—the—Job Experience and Labor Mobility

     A central, and perhaps most important, determinant of empirically

observed patterns of labor mobility is the years of experience the worker

has had with his present employer. Firm—specific experience has a

negative influence on overall job separations, quits, and layoffs, and

a positive effect on worker earnings.16 The economic motivations for

these effects Include the role of specific human capital formation,

which enhances the employee's attractiveness to the firm.   Such concerns

are implicit in the models developed here since they contribute to the

higher termination rate of unsuccessful matches.



     16See, for example, Becker (1964), Jovanovic (1977), Lazear (1976),
Leighton and Mincer (forthcoming), Mincer (1974), Mincer and Jovanovic
(1979), Mortensen (1978), 01 (1962), Pencavel (1972), Rosen (1972), and
Viscusi (1979, forthconiug-a).
                                                   —18—


     The focus of this section is not on the economic underpinnings of

the probabilitistic structure of the mobility patterns analyzed in

Sections II and III. Rather I will attempt to assess whether the rather

unrestrictive stochastic structures described previously are consistent

with empirical observations. Both the first and second derivatives of

the relationship between firm—specific experience and the aforementioned

variables will be matters of concern.

        Let t indicate the years of the worker's experience at the firm.

Then the probability P(S11t) that the worker is matched successfully in

S1 given t years of experience is given by



              P(   s—
                    t)   —              P(S1)P(tIS1)              —
                                                                  —
                                                                            1

                             P(S'):P(tlS1) + F(S2) P(tIS2)            1 + S2) tIS2)


which simplifies to


                                 1                  =     1
        (11) P(S'It) =
                                                              C
                              i + P(S2flt)              1 +
                                                              b
                                     P(S1t)
The strong correlation between specific experience and successful job

matches is reflected in the limiting result that


              limit P(S'It) = 1            ,



since   b >   c.   In contrast, from the earlier asymptotic results, we know

that as the worker's age n increases,


              limit P(S1!n) =                  <    1
                                      a1
                                                 —19—


    The superior empirical performance of specific experience (or tenure)

    variables over that of age variables is not unexpected since large values

    of experience are quite accurate predictors of successful job matches,

    which, in the context of the sorting models, are the key determinants of

    mobility.

           The impact of t on mobility patterns depends on how it alters the

    value of the conditional probability P(S'It))7 Logarithmic differentiation

    of equation 11 yields


                   ap(S11t)       —
           (12)                        [1   + (c)t]_2(C)t,fl(C) >


    and
                                            c 2 ct             ct
                   2                  [2n()) [(i-)
                                                u
                                                        —   l1 (t)
           (13)
                   at2
                                 =
                                            [   + (C)t)3
                                                                     < 0



    The relation between the conditional probability of a successful job match

    is positive, but P(S'It) increases at a diminishing rate.

          The relations in equations 12 and 13 provide all of the information

    required to assess the impact of specific experience within the context

    of the sorting models. Let P(Sep IS') indicate the separation probability

    for a worker in state 1. By our earlier assumption,


                         P(SepIS1) = (1—b) < p(SepjS2) = (1—c)

          The probability of a separation for a worker with experience t is

    a conditional weighted average of the probabilities for each state, so



         17Since P(S21t) = 1 — p(S'It), this information is all that is
    required to assess the conditional probabilities of success for employed
    workers.



S
                                     —20—



that

            P(Seplt) =    P(SepIS1)P(S'It) + p(SepS2)P(S2t)
:or

            P(Seplt) = P(SepjS2) + p(S11t)[P(SepIS1) —          '(SepS2))

Upon differentiation by t, one obtains the result using equations 12

and 13 that


            3P(Seplt) =   3P(S'It)   [P(SepjS1) —   P(SepIS2)] < 0

and

            2P(SepIt)     =   2P(S1it)     [P(SepIS1) —   P(SepIS2)]   >   0


       As illustrated in Figure I, the sorting model predicts a convex

negative relationship between the probability of separation and firm—

specific experience t. The limiting value of the separation probability

is the turnover rate (1—b) for S1. The initial separation probability

for new hires is an average of the separation rates for each state, with

 the probability of a successful job match being the weight. More specif-

 ically, the initial separation value is s(1—b) + (l—s)(l—c).

       If the composition of separations in the two states is not too

 similar, then one will also have a relationship between worker quits

 (Quit) and permanent layoffs (Fire) that satisfy

            P(QuitIS1) <      P(QuitIS2)
 and
                                            18
            B(FjreIS1) <      P(FireIS2)

      181n most analyses of the matching process as in empirical work,
 the distinction between quits and involuntary terminations is somewhat
 blurred.
                                      Figure I


                  Firm—Specific Experience and Separation Probabilities




    P(Sep IS2)


        s(l—b)+
    (l—s)(l—c)




Separation
Probability




    P(Sep




                             Firm—Specific Experience t
                                     —21—




With these stipulations one can derive a similar negative, convex relation

between t and both quits and layoffs.

      In addition to generatinc predictions regarding worker turnover

propensities, the sorting model can also be used to analyze the earnings—

experience relationship. Let the state rewards u1 be wage levels for S'

and S2 and let (t) be the expected wage rate with t years of firm—specific

experience.

      Following a procedure similar to that employed for separations, one

obtains the result that

           —       2
           u(t) = u + P(S
                         1
                                 t)[u1     — u2

Differentiation with respect to t yields


           a(t) = aP(S11t)            — U2]

and
                  —       2   1
              t
                  u(t)   a P(S It)
                                     [Ul   —   2j   <
                         at

Figure II sketches the positive, concave functional relationship between

i and t. The value of i        starts   at su1' + (l—s)u2 and approaches a limiting

value of u1.

      What is particularly striking about all of these results is that

the sorting model involves a rather simple probabilistic structure and

that no restrictive assumptions about the magnitude of different prob-

abilities were made. Nevertheless, the sorting models correctly predicted

both the direction arid convexity of the relationship between firm—specific

experiences and both wages and turnover)9


     19me direction and convexity of these relations is examined most
thoroughly by Leighton and Mincer (forthcoming).
                                   Figure II


                          .Firm—Specific Experience and

                             Expected Wage Levels




                      1
                  U




Expected
Wage
u (t)


     1             2
Si       +   (l—s)u

                   2
                 U




                           Firm—Specific Experience t
                               —22—


                 V. Worker Age and Unemployment

     Perhaps the most salient characteristic of unemployment patterns

is that youth uncm'.r-nt         are considerably higher than those of

their older counterparts. .A major source of this difference is that

older workers have more on—the—job experience, are more likely to be

matched appropriately to jobs, and will have lower turnover rates,

thus entering the ranks of the unemployed less frequently.2° The

analysis here will abstract from such age—related effects and will focus

on the impact of age per se on unemployment.

     Consider the following merged mobility transition matrix,


                        N
                       1±

where S1 is employment, S2 is unemployment, f is still the probability

of finding a job, q is the probability that one will not leave the job,

and q >   f.21New labor force entrants are assumed to enter the labor force in S2.
                                                                             22
Their age n reflects the number of periods they have been in the labor force.



     2O an empirical basis, these influences are probably best reflected
in the firm—specific experience (or tenure) variables, as the analysis in
Section IV would suggest.
          b equals c in the larger version of the model, the merged Markov
process involves no loss in generality. Otherwise, the restriction to
two—states can be viewed as a simplification. Analysis of 3—state models
is too complex to yield general closed—form solutions, such as that in
equation 14, once one leaves the realm of numerical examples.
            format also accords with usual empirical procedures, which
typically set the overall experience measure equal to Age—Years of
Schooling — 6.
                                   —23--




      The matter of interest is the nature of the conditional probability

of unemployment, given the worker's age, or P(S21n). Using the z—trans—

form analysis described in Howard (1971), one can calculate the closed

form expression for this value as


      (14) P(s2In) =             + (q_f)fl tl+q1

The first bracketed term is the steady state probability that the worker

will be in S2. The final terms in this expression are associated with

the impact of n on P(S21n)       and have a limiting value of 0.

      Logarithmic differentiation of equation 14 yields


                                 (q_f)fl th(q—f) < 0
           P(s2In) =
                        i+f-q
and


           32(s2In) =
                        l+f-q'    (q [th(q-f)]2 > 0

As illustrated in Figure III, the probability of unemployment diminishes
                                                                     23
at a decreasing rate with respect to age, as is found empirically.

                          VI. Conclusion

      The sorting models of labor mobility introduced the process of

mobility lottery search into the analysis of unemployment and assessed

its implications for subsequent worker actions. With relatively minimal

assumptions concerning relative empirical magnitudes, these simple models

correctly predict both the direction and convexity of the age—unemployment



     23A recent analysis of this relationship is provided by Leighton
and Mincer (forthcoming).
                             Figure III


                   Age—Unemployment Relationship




               1




Probability
    of
Unemployment




        i—c
      1+f—q




                              Age n
                              —24—



relation as well as the impact of enterprise—specific experience on

wages and various turnover measures.

     Application of the sorting framework to observed mobility patterns

suggests that the             .f   the mobility lottery decision may lead

to turnover differences that are incorrectly attributed to employment

policies and unemployment patterns that disguise important group dif-

ferences in the nature of unemployment. The theory also implies that

differences in black—white unemployment and turnover cannot be simply

due to less selective search policies by blacks. If blacks do indeed

have lower reservation probabilities for acceptable job matches, then

their opportunities must also differ from those of whites.
                              —25—


                           References


Becker, C., "A Theory of Marriage," in Schultz, ed., Economics of the
     Family (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1974).

__________, Human Capital (New York: National Bureau of Economic
     Research, 1964).

Burdett, K., "The Theory of Employee Job Search and Quit Rates,"
     American Economic Review, Vol. 68, No. 1 (Mar. 1978), pp. 212—220.

Burdett, K., and D. Mortensen, "Labor Supply under Uncertainty," Research
     in Labor Economics, Vol. 2 (1978), pp. 109—158.

Doeringer, P., and M. Piore, Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis
     (Lexington: D.C. Heath and Co.;, 1971).

Flanagan, R., "Discrimination Theory, Labor Turnover, and Racial Unemployment
     Differentials," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 13 (Spring 1978), pp.
     187—207.

Freeman, R., and D. Wise, eds., The Youth Employment Problem: Its Nature,
     Causes, and Consequences, (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
     forthcoming).

Hall, R., "Turnover in the Labor Force," Brookings Papers on Economic
     Activity, Vol. 3 (1972), pp. 709—756.

Howard, R., Dynamic Probabilistic Systems (New York: John Wiley and
     Sons, 1971).

Johnson, W.R., "A Theory of Job Shopping," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     Vol. XCII, No. 2 (May 1978), pp. 261—278.

Jovanovic, B., "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover," unpublished
     paper, Columbia University (1977).

Lazear, E., "Age, Experience, and Wage Growth," American Economic Review,
     Vol. 66, No. 4 (Sept. 1976), pp. 548—558.

Leighton, L., and J. Mincer, "Labor Turnover and Youth Unemployment,"
     in R. Freeman and D. Wise, eds., The Youth Unemployment Problem:
     Its Nature, Causes, and Consequences (Chicago: University of
-    Chicago Press, forthcoming).
Lippman, S., and J. McCall, "The Economics of Job Search: A Survey,"
     Economic Inquiry, Vol. XIV, No. 2 (June 1976), pp. 155—189.
1.




                                     —26—



     Mincer, J., Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (New York: National
          Bureau of Economic Research, 1974).

     Mincer, J. and B. Jovanovic, "Labor Mobility and Wages," unpublished
          paper, Columbia University (Jan. 1979).

     Mortensen, D., ttSpecific Capital and Labor Turnover," Bell Journal of
          Economics, Vol. 9, No. 2 (Autumn 1978), pp. 572—586.

     ______________ "The Turnover Implications of Learning about Attributes
          on the Job," unpublished paper, Northwestern University (1975).

     Oi, W., "Labor as a Quasi—Fixed Factor," Journal of Political Economy,
          Vol. LXX, No. 6 (1962), pp. 538—555.

     Parsons, D., "Specific Human Capital: An Application to Quit Rates
          and Layoff Rates," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 80 (Dec.
          1972), pp. 1120—1143.

     Pencavel, J., "Wages, Specific Training, and Turnover in U.S. Manufacturing
          Industries," International Economic Review, Vol. 13 (Feb. 1972),
          pp. 53—64.

     Rosen, S., "Learning and Experience in the Labor Market," Journal of
          Human Resources, Vol. VII, No. 3 (Fall 1972), pp. 326—342.

     Toikka, R., "A Markovian Model of Labor Market Decisions by Workers,"
          American Economic Review, Vol. 66, No. 5 (Dec. 1976), pp. 821—834.

     Viscusi, W.K., Employment Hazards: An Investigation of Market Performance,
          Harvard Economic Studes Series No. (Cambridge: darvard University
          Press, forthcoming—a).

     _____________ "Job Hazards and Worker Quit Rates: An Analysis of
          Adaptive Worker Behavior," International Economic Review, Vol. 20,
          No.. 1 (Feb. 1979), pp. 29—58.

     _____________ "Self—Selection, Learning—Induced Quits, and the Optimal
          Wage Structure," International Economic Review, forthcoming—b.

     _____________ "A Theory of Job Shopping: A Bayesian Perspective,"
          Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming—c.
