                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      INFLATION RISK AND CAPITAL MARKET EQUILIBRIUM



                        Zvi Bodie




                  Working Paper No. 373




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                        July 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics and
Capital Formation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. I am grateful to Robert C. Merton,
Stanley Fischer and Alex Kane for helpful comments. I
also benefited greatly from reading an unpublished
manuscript by Stuart M. Turnbull, "Inflation, Indexation
and the Structure of Returns."
REVISED                                           NBER Working Paper 373
                                                               July 1979


                 Inflation Risk and Capital Market Equilibrium


                                  ABSTRACT


       This paper investigates the effect of inflation uncertainty on the
  portfolio behavior of households and the equilibrium structure of capitol
  market rates.


          The principal findings regarding portfoIio behavior are:

  1.      In the presence of inflation uncertainty, households will
          have an inflation—hedging demand for assets other than
          riskiess nominal bonds, which will be directly proportional
          to the covariance between the rate of inflation and the
          nominal rates of return on these other assets.

  2.      An asset is a perfect inflation hedge if and only if its
          nominal return is perfectly correlated with the rate of
          inflation.


          The principal findings regarding capital market rates are:

  1.      The equilibrium real yield spread between any risky security
          and riskiess nominal bonds is directly proportional to the
          difference between the covariance of the security's nominal
          rate of return with the market portfolio and its covariance
          with the rate of inflation.

  2.      As long as the net supply of monetary assets in the economy is
          greater than zero, an increase in inflation uncertainty will
          lower the risk premia on all real assets.

  3.      A preliminary empirical test of the theory ttsing rates of
          return on common stocks, long—terni bonds, real estate and
          commodity futures contracts yields mixed results. The
          risk premia on long—term bonds and futures have the "wrong"
          signs.

                                                     Zvi   Bodie
                                                     School of Management
                                                     Boston University
                                                     Boston, MA 02215
                                                     617 / 353—4160
                                                                        Revised April 1979




                  Inflation Risk and Capital Market Equilibrium



I. Introduction

        The purpose of this paper is to investigate the effect of inflation

   risk on the portfolio behavior of households and the equilibrium structure

   of capital market rates. In a previous paper (Bodie [2]) I defined inflation

   risk as the uncertainty associated with the real return on single-period,

   riskiess-in-terms-of-default nominal bonds and explored the factors determining

   the effectiveness of a security as an inflation hedge. This paper attempts

   to integrate that earlier analysis into a more complete model of capital

   market equilibrium.

        The   theoretical   model used is the one pioneered by Merton[l5] and applied

   by Fischer [6] in his study of a hypothetical capital market in which a perfect

   inflation, hedge exists in the form    of   index bonds.   I employ the same methodology

   here tQ examine asset demands and ecjuilibriuin yields when the available inflation

   hedges are less than perfect. Fischer's results then turn out to be a special

   case, in which   a   perfect hedge is available.

        In their paper on equilibrium yield relationships under uncertain inflation,

   Friend, Landskroner and Losq CFLL) [7] highlighted the crucial role played

   by the covariances between nominal asset returns and unanticipated inflation

   and showed that the Security Market Line of the traditional Sharpe-Lintner-

   Mossin Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM)1 is in effect a special case of

   their model, in which all of these covariances are zero. In this paper
                                       -2—




    I extend the analysis of FLL in several directions. First I explore the

    special role of the minimum-variance of real return portfolio in the asset

    demand functions of households and show that the effectiveness of an asset

    as an inflation hedge is determined by the degree of correlation between

    its nominal rate of return and the rate of inflation. This leads to a

    discussion of a special 'inlation-hedge" portfolio of nominally risky

    assets which is combined with riskiess nominal bonds to create the minimum-

    variance portfolio. Then by expressing the asset demand functions in terms of

    the parameters of the distribution of real rather than nominal returns I am

    able to examine the effect of an increase in inflation uncertainty both on

    these asset demands and on the equilibrium yield relationships derived from

    them.

            The paper is structured as follows. In the next section I develop the

    basic model for the case o two assets.     I then generalize it in Part III to

    the case of many assets to discuss the role of the "inflationhedge" Dortfolio

    and derive three alternative formulas for an inflation.-ad-iustpd cecurity Market Line.

    Part III. ends with a discussion of the relationship between the model developed

    here and Black's [1] model of capital market equilibrium in the absence of a

    riskiess asset. In Part IV I discuss the available empirical evidence, and

    in Part V I summarize my findings and indicate some directions for future

    research.

II. The Two-Asset Case.

    A. Asset Demands.

            We assume an infinitely-lived household receiving all its income as a

    return on two tradable assets: bonds offering a riskless nominal return
and an asset, which we shall call equity, whose nominal return is risky.

We assume further that there are no transactions costs or restrictions on

short sales. The household makes its portfolio choices by maximizing the

expected utility of its consumption stream.

        There is a single consumption good whose price, P. follows a geometric

Brownian motion described by the stochastic differential equation:2


        (1)
               !.
               p
                          = 'irdt   + s dz

where 7T      is   the instantaneous mean rate of inflation per unit time and s

the instantaneous variance.

       The behavior of the nominal return on equity is described by the

equation:


        (2)                =            +
                               RMdt          sMdZM


where         and s1 are the instantaneous mean and variance per unit time of the

nominal rate of return on equity.

       By Ito's lemma the real return on equity is then given by:

               d(Q4/P)         =             -           - Mr   + s2) dt +               sdz
                                                                                 sMdzM

where SM       is       the instantaneous covariance per unit time between the rate of

inflation and the nominal return on equity. Equivalently, we can express

3) in terms of real parameters as:

        (3') d(Q/P) =                                +
                                        rMdt             aMdz.


        The riskiess nominal return on bonds is:

        (4) dQf =
                               Rfdt
                   Qf
and   the real return is:


        (5) d(Qf/P) =                   (R       -        +   s2)dt   -   s dz
                   Qf/P
or, in real terms:

                                    =
        (5') d(Qf/P)
                   QjP
                                        rfdt         +
                                                          fd4
                                                        -4-




     Let us consider the relationships between the parameters of the distributions

of real and nominal rates of return implied by these equations. From equations

(5) and (5') we see that the stochastic component of the real return on nominal

bonds, fdzf, is just the negative of unanticipated inflation, -s,idz.rr, and there-

fore the variance of the real return on nominal bonds, a, is equal to the vari-

ance of the rate of inflation, s. Equations (3) and (3') show that the stocha-

stic component of the real return on equity, crMdz, is equal to sMdzM -                           sdzrr.
Since the variance of the difference between two random variables is the sum of

their variances less twice the covariance between them, we get for the variance

of the real return on equity:
             2        2        2
                  =       + Sir
     (6)                               2Mir
The covariance between the real returns on equity and bonds, aMf is the covar-

iance between sMdzM -          sdz         and -slldzT,., which is given by:
                                       2                2
     (6) Mf =
The covariance between the real return on equity and the rate of inflation, aMrr,

is just the negative of cMf, or s -                     s.     Finally, note that the difference be-

tween the mean real returns on equity and bonds, ij                          - rf,   which we shall call the

real risk premium on equity, is equal to RM -                      Rf
                                                                        -
                                                                            s.
     For convenience in later use we summarize these relationships in Table 1.

                                                 Table 1

    Summary of Relationships Between Real and Nominal Returns Parameters

           Variances:
                           2               2
                 Bonds af =            s

                 Equity            =           + S2 -
           Covariances:

                 Equity and inflation aM.ff             =           - S2
                                                              5M

                 Equity and bonds                Mf =                   =           + S2
                                                               aM           _SMir

           Risk premium on equity: TM -                 Tf     =         - Rf   -
      Let x be the proportion of its asset portfolio which the household will

 invest in equity. The change                    in.   the     household's nominal wealth in any

 insthnt is then given by:


      (7) d( =               +                    W—PC} dt +
                    {[Rf         x(RMRf)]                            xWsMdzM
 where C is the rate of consumption, and W is nominal wealth.




     The household's optimal consumption and portfolio rules are derived

by finding:

     (8) max E0f0 [U C(t), t]dt
           (C,x}

subject to (7) and W(0) =                    and with U (             ) strictly   concave in C. One

solves the problem by first defining the derived utility of wealth function:


     (9) J(W,P,t) =               max       EtIO U[C(T),T] dr
                                 C,x}
and then solving the two first order conditions:


      (10) 0 =     U(C,t)         -


      (11)    0 =                   Wxs2 + J Ps
                    Jw(R.M -Rf) + Jww  M wp Mit
     Solving (11) for the optimal value of x gives:


      (12) x = _Jw(RM_Rf)                        ________
                        JwwW
                                  s               JwwW
                                                           s
The term            is just           the   inverse of Pratt's measure of relative risk

 aversion, which we will denote by A. Since consumption is in effect a

 function of real wealth, it can                   be      shown     that:3
              J P       =          Jw
                                 - _____ —1            =
                                                           1
                                                                -1
      (13)     wp
              JwwW

 Substituting    into (12) and combining terms we get:


      (14)    x* = RM-Rf_             SM +       5M1T
                         A        2               2
                                 SM

                    =   rM-rf         +     sM
                        As
     The demand for equity is thus seen to be composed of two parts

represented by the two terms on the right-hand side of (14). The first

part is the "speculative" demand for equity, which is directly proportional

to the real risk premium on equity (the numerator of the first term in (14))

and inversely proportional to the variance of its nominal return and to the

household's degree of relative risk aversion. The second part is the

"inflation-hedging" demand for equity which is equal to the covariance between

inflation and the nominal return on equity, divided by the variance of the

nominal return on equity. The inflation-hedging component of the demand for

equity is thus independent of the investor's risk preferences, so that an

extremely risk-averse investor (one whose A is very large) would still demand

at least this amount of equity no matter what the risk premium on it was.

     The explanation for this result is that the inflation-hedging demand is

exactly the proportion of equity which. must be added to riskiess nominal

bonds in order to create the portfolio with. minimum variance of real return.4

The inflation-hedging demand thus   stems   from a kind of portfolio efficiency

condition. Figure 1 is a diagram showing the familiar Markowitz-Tobin

portfolio frontier,5 but with mean real returns on the vertical axis and

variance of real returns on the horizontal. Points F, Mm and M correspond

to an all-bond portfolio (x=O), the niiniinujn-variance portfolio, and an

all-equity portfolio (x=l), respectively. Every investor, no matter what

his risk preferences, would make the move from point F to point Mm in order

to get to the efficient part of the frontier; but how far one would go beyond

point Mm depends on one's tolerance for risk.

     Equation Q.4) implies that the inflation-hedging demand for equity will

be zero if and only if its nominal rate of return is uncorrelated with the

rate of inflation           In that special case the minimum-variance port-

folio would simply be the all-bond portfolio. To readers familiar with mean-

variance portfolio analysis this result might seem a bit puzzling because

usually the minimum-variance portfolio formed between two assets whose

correlation is zero will contain positive amounts of both assets. The
         Figure 1 -   Efficient   Portfolio Frontier

Mean Real Return




                                    Equity Only

                   Mm

                            Bonds only
                                                  Variance of Real Return
puzzle is solved, however, by referring to equation (6') which reveals that

a zero covariance between the nominal return on equity and the rate of in-

flation implies that the covariance between the real returns on equity and

bonds is equal to the variance of the real return on bonds
                                                                  (crMf=

Expressed        in these terms it is easier to see why the minimum-variance

portfolio would be all-bonds.


        Returning to the general case it can be shown that the variance of

the real rate of return on the minimum-variance portfolio is given by:6


                             o.
                              mm    (l—p2) s2
                                            rr
where   p   is   the correlation coefficient between the nominal rate of return

on equity and the rate of inflation. p2 is thus a natural measure of the

effectiveness of equity as a hedge against unanticipated inflation. Equity

would be a perfect inflation hedge if and only if its nominal return were

perfectly correlated with the rate of inflation (p2=l). Furthermore, as long

as there are no restrictions on short sales, it does not matter whether the

sign of the correlation is positive or negative.

     This view of the way to measure the effectiveness of an asset as an

inflation hedge differs sharply from a view advanced recently by Fama and

Schwert (FS) [5]. They propose that an asset be called a "complete hedge

against unexpected inflation" if and only if its real rate of return is

uncorrelated with unanticipated inflation. By their definition an asset would

qualify as a complete inflation hedge even if it were subject to a great deal

of non-inflation risk and therefore relatively useless in reducing the risk

associated with a nominal bond.
                                       -.8—




      To understand better the distinction between the FS definition of an

inflation hedge and ours, consider the case of a hypothetical asset, a

futures contract, whose price is much more volatile thaii the consumer price

level, yet is perfectly positively correlated with it. In a regression of the

nominal return on the futures contract against unanticipated inflation, the

slope coefficient, which is denoted by y in FS' equation (4), would be much

greater than 1, and therefore by their definition the futures contract would

be a poor hedge against unanticipated inflation. According to our definition,

however, it would be a perfect hedge, because by combining the futures

contract with riskless nominal bonds an investor could create a "synthetic

index bond", whose real rate of return would be completely risk-free.

      Finally, note that the FS definition although different from ours, is

not necessarily inconsistent with it. The only asset which would be a

complete inflation—hedge under both definitions, however, is an asset with

zero variance of real return, i.e., an index bond.7

      Before concluding our discussion of the demand for equity let us consider

what effect an increase in inflation uncertainty will have on it.8 To answer

this question it is best to reformulate (14) in terms of the variances and

covariances of real rather than nominal rates of return. From Table 1 we know

that SM= aM s2       and that      =
                                        s s   +          -   It   therefore follows that


s =       +s   +      .   Substituting        these expressions for SM    and s into (14)
we get:

      (14') x =    rMrf                   +       GM11

                   A(o-+2a
                      M
                           +5Z)
                          M1r11
                                                  G2+2G+S
                                                   M M1r11
                                                  -9-




The effect of an increase in inflation uncertainty is found                  by   differentiating
(14') with respect to s2:


        (15)
                     S
                         =   _(rM_rf)               +   (a+2cYM+s2)_(M+s2)
                             A(+2M+s)'                  (y
                                                             +    + s)'
                         =   _(rM_rf)         +
                                 As                 s
     Inspection          of the first term on the right hand side of (15) reveals that

if there is a positive real risk premium on equity (rM>rf) then the speculative

demand for it will fall with an increase in s2; while the second term indicates

that as long as              >        the hedging demand will rise. It can be shown that
the net impact on x of the increase in s will depend on what the initial

demand for bonds was.9 tf initially the investor held a positive amount of

bonds (x*<l) then the increase in s2 will cause the demand for equity to rise.

B. The Equilibrium Risk Premium on Equity

    Assuming exogenously given supplies of equity and "outside" (i.e.,

government) bonds, the equilibrium real risk premium on equity is found by

aggregating the demands of all households equation (14)) weighted by their

shares of total private wealth, Tk' and solving the resulting equation

for rM -
               rf:
                     M—rf —A
                           ' 2_
                             M          M7r

where      is the ratio of equity to the total wealth of the private sector

i.e., equity plus government bonds), and A is [Z yk/Ak]',                    a   weighted
                                              k
                                 -10—



harmonic mean of the individual households' measures of relative risk

aversion.

     Since a is a critical parameter in (16) and in the analysis which is

to follow, we should emphasize a problem which exists in assessing its value.

There is considerable controversy among monetary theorists about whether all

government debt should be included in the total wealth of the private sector)0

There does, however, seem to be a consensus that at least the government's

non-interest-bearing debt (i.e., the monetary base) should be included. In

our analysis, the term "bonds" means all securities with a fixed nominal

value and thus includes money. We shall therefore assume in general that

a is less than 1, although we shall point out in every case what our results

would be if a were equal to 1.

     Equation (16) implies that the real risk premium on equity will be

greater the higher the degree of relative risk aversion, the greater the

variance of the nominal return on equity, and the higher the ratio of the

outstanding supply of equity to the total wealth of the private sector. It

will be smaller, however, the more positive the covariance between the nominal

return on equity and the rate of inflation, i.e., the more effective equity

is as an inflation hedge.

     We can gain additional insight into the determinants of the real risk

premium on equity by reformulating (16) in.   terms   of the variances and

covariances of real rather than nominal rates of return and dividing by the

variance of the real rate of return on equity. The result is the formula for

the real market price of risk (RMPR):
                                                       —11—



          (17) rMrf =           A   [ +(2a         -
                                                        1)
                                                                  -
                                                                  aM - (l-a)s2
                                                                  M

          Equation (17) implies that, unless there are no government bonds (c=l),
                                                                                    4M   ]




     an increase in inflation risk,which leaves both the covariance structure of

     real returns and the average degree of relative risk aversion unchanged, will

     cause the RMPR to fall. The fall in the RMPR will be greater the higher

     the proportion of government bonds in the total wealth of the private sector.

     In the special case in which there are no government bonds, (17) reduces to:

                   r-r              —
          (17')     M f     =       A(l   + °M
                                               -
                                               M

     implying that the RMPR is independent of 52• If the real return on equity is

     also uncorrelated with inflation then the RMPR will simply equal A,

     as is the case jn the traditional CAPM.

III. The Case of Many Assets

     A. Asset Demands.

          Let us assume that there are n nominally risky assets (i.e., assets with

     uncertain nominal rates of return) with nominal returns dynamics of:

          (18)          =   R.dt        + s.dz.                            j
                                                                                =   1, ..., n
                                           3   3
                   Qi
     and a riskless nominal bond as before. Let s.. be the covariance between the
                                                                               13
     nominal returns on assets i and j,                      s.
                                                              1ff
                                                                      the covariance between the rate of

     inflation and the nominal return on asset i, and Rf the nominal return

     on nominal riskless bonds.

          The    household's    portfolio demand for asset i is given by:1'
                                                                      n
          (19) x1 =     —       v. (R.-Rf-s.
                        A j=l 13
                                    .
                                                        ) +           E v. .s. for i = 1, ..., n
                                                                    j=l 13 3ff
                                                      -12-


                        ..th
where v.. is the                      element of the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix
       13

[s].    As in the previous section the demand for each nominally risky asset

is seen to be composed of a speculative component, represented by the first

term in (19), and an inflation-hedging component represented by the second

term, which is the weight of asset i in the portfolio with minimum variance

of real return:

      (20)             =     E        v• sjr for nominally risky asset i         i=l, ...,   n
                           3=1

              mm
                       = 1       -
                                       n n
             x•1                                v. .s.       for nominal bonds
                                      1=1 j=1 13       311



B.   The Optimal Inflation-Hedge Portfolio.12

      In the absence of inflation uncertainty the nominal bond would be a risk-

less asset, and all investors regardless of their preferences would be able to

satisfy their asset demands for each of the n + 1 available assets by choosing

from just two assets: the nominal bond and the "optimal combination of the n

nominally risky assets (OCONRA)" defined by:13
                       n
      (21) x =                   v.     (R. —   Rf)                              i=1, ...,   n
                       j=1        13      3

                   n       n
                   E    Z v.. (R. -
                   i=l j=1 ij               j     R)
                                                   £

where x is the portfolio proportion of security i.

In other words the nominal bond and the OCONRA sDan the nominal efficient

portfolio frontier.

      In the presence of inflation uncertainty, the real efficient frontier can

still be spanned by two portfolios, but the nominal bond and the OCONRA will not

in general have this property. However, by adding to them a third, "inflation-

hedge" portfolio, all investors would again be able to satisfy their asset de-

mands for each of the n + 1 available assets. This inflation-hedge portfolio
                                                  -13—




consists   of the n nominally risky assets only and is defined by:
              H    n                  mm
                =                =
      (22)
                  j1                             i=l,
                                                         mm
                  n n
                 i=l            V. .S             j=l x.J
                       j=]. '

     To see how any household would be able to satisfy its asset demands under

inflation uncertainty with just               these   three assets let us rewrite (19) for house-

hold k as:

     (23) Xk =                          (R
                                              -
                                                  Rf) +     (1 -                        i=l, ...,   n
                                                                         VjjSyr


To satisfy (23) the household would have to invest

                                                                  in
                                                                         1nn
                                                                          k m=i
                                                                                  Z Vj.
                                                                                  j=l      . j
                                                                                                 -R

of its wealth in the OCONRA portfolio, (l -
                                                                  kji   jl vs11 of it

in the inflation-hedge portfolio, and the remainder in nominal bonds.

     Note that the inflation—hedge portfolio is the portfolio of nominally

risky assets which is combined with riskless nominal bonds to create the glo-

bal minimum-variance portfolio. An alternative but equivalent way of defining

the inflation-hedge portfolio is as the portfolio of risky assets whose nomi-

nal return has the highest correlation with the rate of inflation.14



C. Equilibrium Risk Premia.

     By aggregating the individual household asset demand functions (19) and

setting tkeni equal to the exogenously given proportional supplies of assets,

we obtain the following yield relationships:
                                          n
     (24)    R.
              1
                - Rf   —   s.    =   A(   E u.s. .    — s.        )
                                                            iir         i=1 ..., n
                                    —14-



where a. is the ratio of the market value of nominally risky asset j to

the total wealth of the private sector, and A is the same harmonic mean of

the individual Ak defined before. Equation (24) can therefore be written as:

     (25) r. -
                    rf — (as.M s.)
                               -


where a is the ratio of the value of all nominally risky assets to the total

wealth of the private sector, SiM is the covariance between the nominal return

on asset i and what we shall call the "market" portfolio of nominally risky

assets, defined as the portfolio containing each nominally risky asset in

proportion to its outstanding aggregate value)5

     The real risk premium on each security is thus seen to be directly

proportional to the difference between the covariance of its nominal return

witK tke market portfolio of nominally risky assets and its covariance with

the rate of inflation. f its covariance with inflation exceeds its covariance

with th.e market, it will have a negative risk premium.     (25) also implies that

the risk premia on nominally risky securities which are positively correlated

wi:th the market portfolio will be higher the higher the ratio of nominally

risky assets, to total private wealth.

     The   impact   of inflation risk on these equilibrium risk premia is best

examined by reformulating (25) in terms of real rather than nominal
               16
covariances:

     (25') r_rf [a(.M+aM) — (l-ct)(a.           +   s2)]
Equation (25') implies that unless there are no government bonds, an increase

in the variance of the rate of inflation will lower the risk premia on all

nominally risky assets. This effect will be greater the larger the proportion
of government bonds in total private wealth. In the special case in which

there are no government bonds (c=l), the real risk premium on any security

will depend only on the sum of the covariance of its real return with the

market portfolio and the covariance between the real return on the market and

the rate of inflation.

     Applying (25) to the market portfolio of nominally risky assets, we get:

     (26) rMrf =          (cts     -
                                       SM)
which is exactly equivalent to the formula for the risk premium on equity

derived and discussed in the two-asset model of the previous section.

     Finally, applying (25) to the minimum-variance portfolio and recognizing

that s
         min,M
                  s
                   7rM
                         and s .
                              min,rr
                                        = pHir
                                           2 s2
                                               ii
                                                       we get:
                                                                 17



     27 rmm              r — At s
                          f   1TM
                                               2
                                               Hirir
where p      is   the coefficient of correlation between the nominal rate of return

on the inflation hedge portfolio and the rate of inflation. We thus see that the

real risk premium on the minimum-variance portfolio can be either positive or

negative. ft will be more positive the higher the covariance between the

nominal return on the market portfolio and the rate of inflation, and more

negative the greater the degree of correlation between the nominal return on

the inflation-hedge fund and the rate of inflation.                               Note that if rmjn -   rc
is ositiye, the "cQst" of hedging against inflation is negative in the sense

that in moving from a portfolio of nominal bonds only to the minimum -                            variance
portfolio an investor would experience both a reduction in variance and an

increase in mean real return.


     Alternatively we can express the real risk premium on the minimum-

variance portfolio in terms of real covariances and variances by applying

(25') and recognizing that                      =          for       all i. We then get:
     (27') r.                                                    —
                               2_1)jn + Mir                           Cl-cx)s2]
If c*=l, then (27') reduces to:

     (27") rmin -
                         rf = A(j            ÷ aMTr)
                                        -16-


      Two special    cases are of interest. The first is if the real return on

nominally risky securities is uncorrelated with inflation. In that case

(27") implies that the real risk premium on the minimum-variance portfolio

is directly proportional to the variance of its real rate of return. The

second   is if there exists a perfect inflation hedge (such as an index bond),
in   which case the real risk premium on        the minimum-variance portfolio will
be   proportional to the covariance between the real return on the market
                                           19
portfolio and the rate of inflation.

D. The Inflation-Adjusted Security Market Line.

      As FLL have shown, one way to adjust the traditional Security Market

Line (SML) for inflation is as follows:

       (28)     Rj_Rf_si,T = (RM_Rf_sM) (asM_s)
                                 (cts_sM)
Equation (28) reduces to the SML of the traditional CAPM either when there is
no inflation uncertainty or when the nominal returns on all securities are

uncorrelated with inflation.

       But there are two other equally valid ways of adjusting the SML for

inflation, each of which offers an additional perspective. The first is to

reformulate      (28), in real rather   than nominal terms:


       (29)     r.-rf
                 1    = (rM-rf) (aMM) -(1-a) (a. +s2)
                                MMrr           —



If we assume further that ct=l, we get:
       (.29')   r.rf =   (rM_rf)(a.M+aM)
                                (a + aMl)
If   the real return on the market portfolio is uncorrelated with the rate of

inflation, then (29') implies that the real risk premium on a security is its

real beta coefficient times the real risk premium on the market portfolio.
                                      -17-


Although (29') would then have the same form as the traditional SML,

the difference would be that all of the parameters would be in real

rather than nominal terms and the nominal bond would not be riskless.

     The second alternative way of adjusting the SML for inflation is

in the spirit of Merton's intertemporal CAPM and is entirely in
                 20
nominal terms:


        (30) R - Rf =   iM•HM      Rf) +   iH•MH   -
                                                       Rf)
where         and iHM are multiple regression coefficients.


Equation    (30) expresses the nominal risk premium on a security as the suni of
two factors, a market factor and an inflation factor. It is a natural

generalization of the traditional SML and may appropriately be called the

Security Market Plane. Note that in this last formulation c'. does not appear.

Thus th.e value of    does not affect the SMP relationship.

E. Connection with. Other Models of Asset Market Equilibrium.

     Up to this point we have been comparing and contrasting our model with

the traditional form of the CAPM, in which the riskless asset is nominal bonds.

Now we propose to make the connection between our model and other models which

have been used to describe the equilibrium structure of asset returns in the

absence of a riskless asset.

        In order to make the connection we have to interpret the returns in these

other models as real rates of return, and we must redefine what we mean by

the market portfolio. In the previous section of this paper, the market

pQrtfolio consisted of all assets whose nominal rates of return were risky.
                                               -18-




In this section we must redefine it to include nominal bonds as well. The

two definitions of the market portfolio will be equivalent if and only if

the net supply of nominal bonds is zero (i.e., if c=l).

     In a recent paper, Roll [20] summarized the state of our knowledge of

efficient set yield relationships by showing that the mean real return on

any asset can be expressed as:

     (31) r. -            =
                 rA           (rB_rA)(a±B_aAB)


where A and B are any two "frontier" portfolios on the Markowitz efficient

portfolio frontier. If the assumptions underlying the CAPM are correct then

the market portfolio (inclusive of nominal bonds) will be efficient. If we

choose the market portfolio as B and the minimum-variance zero   portfolio as

A (not the global minimum-variance portfolio, but rather that frontier

portfolio which is uncorrelated with the market) then we get Black's [1]

generalization of the SML:

     (32) r. -   r        =
                              (rM
                                    -
                                        rZ)aM
                                          aM
where all parameters are in real terms.

     If, however, we select the global minimum-variance of real return portfolio

as our second efficient portfolio and make use of the fact that the covariance

between any security and the minimum-variance portfolio is equal to the

variance of the minimum-variance portfolio we get:

     (33) r. -
            1
                 rmm
                      .       = (rM-rnun )(aiM—a2nun )
                                                 -
                                                M amm
                  Figure 2

 Relationship Between Global Minimum Variance
Portfolio and Minimum-Variance Zero-s Portfolio
    Mean Real Return


                                Market Portfolio




                        Minimum-Variance
                            Zero-6 Portfolio

                                           Variance of
                                           Real Return
                                        -19—



         If   there exists a real riskless asset such as an index bond then both
    (32) and (33) converge to the same formula (the traditional SML) with the
    real riskiess rate taking the place of r and               respectively. In the

    absence of a perfect inflation hedge, r .
                                               mm
                                                    will   exceed r ,
                                                                   z
                                                                        but   the difference

    between them will get smaller the more effectively investors can hedge

    against inflation (i.e., the smaller the value of a2. ).
                                                              mm

         Figure 2 displays the relative positions of the global minimum—variance

    portfolio and the minimum—variance zero-s portfolio on the Markowitz frontier.

    The location of point Z representing the minimum-variance zero-s portfolio

    is found by projecting a straight line from point M (the market portfolio)

    through. point Mm to the vertical axis and then projecting a horizontal line

    back to the frontier. If we perform the conceptual experiment of holding

    r and r .
     M     mm
                  constant and allowing a2.
                                         mm
                                            to go to zero, we can see that as

    point Mm moves closer to the vertical axis, point Z converges on it from

    below.

IV. Empirical Evidence

         The   most   important empirical implication of the theory developed above

    is the one embodied in equation (25), that the real risk premium on a

    security measured relative to a riskless nominal bond is a linear decreasing

    function of the covariance between its nominal rate of return and unanticipated

    inflation and a linear increasing function of its covariance with the market

    portfolio of nominally risky assets. In this section of the paper we briefly

    examine some of the available U.S. evidence on four classes of assets:

    common stocks, long-term government bonds, residential real estate, and

    commodity futures contracts, to check its consistency with this theoretical

    result.
                               -20-




     Using quarterly data over the 27 year period 1950-1976, I

computed the parameter estimates reported in Table 2. I used the

Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index as my measure of

the price of the consumer good, the three month Treasury bill rate

as the riskless nominal rate of interest,and the Standard and Poor's

500 Composite Index of Stocks as the representative common stock portfolio.

The return on residential real estate was measured as the rate of increase

in the Home Purchase Price component of the CPI. For U.S. Government

bond returns I used Ibbotson and Sinquefield's (9) series. The commodity

futures returns series represents the rate of return on a well-diversi-

fied portfolio of commodity futures contracts with an average maturity

of a little over three months. The derivation of the series is explained

in detail in Bodie and Rosansky (3). It is an equally weighted

portfolio containing futures contracts on a number of different com-

modities, which grows from seven at the start of our sample period to

twenty-two at the end. The quarterly series for unanticipated inflation

was derived by the same procedure employed by Fama and Schwert (5), i.e.

by taking the residuals from a regression of the rate of inflation on

the three month T-bill rate.




     Finally, as a proxy for the rate of return on the market portfolio of

nominally risky assets I used an equally weighted average of the returns

on three of the four representative asset categories: common stocks, long-

term government bonds and residential real   estate.21 I excluded commodity

futures contracts from the market proxy because their net supply is always

zero, i.e., the number of short positions always equals the number of long

positions.
                                       —21—

     The measure of the rate of return used in all cases was the natural

logarithm of the quarterly wealth. relatives P(t)/P(t_l). On the assumption

that th.e rate of return on security i follows a geometric Brownian motion:

                 dP.

                 P.
                           =   R.dt
                                i
                                       + s.dz.
                                          i i



the log of the wealth relative over one discrete time interval will be

normally distributed with mean . and variance s, where

                 1     1           1
                               2

If, in addition, we assume that these parameters were stable during our

sample period, then the standard t-tests of statistical
                                                          significance apply.

     The last two columns in Table 2 indicate that the covariances with un-

anticipated inflation are negative for common stocks and long-term bonds

and positive for real estate and commodity futures, while the covariances

with the market portfolio of nominally risky assets are positive for

stocks and bonds and negative for real estate and commodity futures.

According to our theory the real risk premia should therefore be positive

in the cases of stocks and bonds and negative in the cases of real estate

and commodity futures.


     As Table 2 shows, however, the estimates of these real risk premia

derived from our data conflict with the theory in two of the four cases.

Although the risk premium on common stocks is positive and on real

estate it is negative as predicted by the theory, the risk premia for long-term

bonds and commodity futures have the wrong signs.
                                      Table 2

              Summary Statistics of Quarterly Nominal Rates
                            of Return: 1950_1976a


                                        Real    Standard   Covariance      Covariance witht
                   Meanb           Risk Preiniu Ded.atiQn with inflation   market portfolio

    Asset           i.

                   (t
                        i (xlO2)
                         statistic)
                                          if
                                         r.-r
                                         Ex102)
                                                  s.
                                                   1
                                                  (x102)
                                                            s
                                                                iii
                                                             (xl04)
                                                                              s
                                                                                  iM
                                                                              (xlO4)
Common stocks            2.65*            1.93    6.65      -.498             14.82
                        (4.14)
Long-Term Bonds          0.64*           -0.26    3.11      -.470                 3.17
                        (2.14)
Real Estate              0.69*           -0.24    1.01          .219              -.32
                        (6.55)
Commodity FuturesC 1.66*                                    1.832             -6.47
                                          1.86    6.61
                        (2.61)
Treasury Bills           0.94                      .49

Unanticipated            0.00                      .64
  Inflation



     *indicates statistical significance at the 5% level

Notes to Table 2


aThe time series for real estate starts in 1954 and therefore has only 92

 quarterly observations. For the other three asset categories we have 108

 quarterly observations.

b11 is the arithmetic mean of the natural logarithms of the quarterly wealth

 relatives. An estimate of R1 can be obtained by adding 1/2 s to



cThe nominal rate of return on a futures contract is analogous to the

excess return (nominal return minus the Treasury bill rate) on other

assets because no money is actually paid for such a contract at the

beginning of the contract period. See Bodie and Rosansky [3] for a more

complete explanation of this point.
                                  -22-




    There are several serious deficiencies in our data, which might account

for this somewhat surprising result. The most important of these is the lack

of a reliable measure of the return on the market portfolio. Roll O]

has recently raised serious doubts about the empirical testability of any

hypothesis involving the market portfolio because of the near impossibility

of measuring it or even of agreeing on its composition.

    A possible theoretical explanation of our empirical results whic: would

be consistent with the "consumer services" model employed in this paper is

that thcre are systematic risk factors other than the two considered here

which might be affecting equilibrium expected returns in offsetting ways.

Merton [16], for example, has suggested several possible sources of systematic

risk, other than the two considered explicitly in this paper. Whether they

can account for the discrepancy between theory and evidence reported above

remains a subject for future research.
                                      -23-



V. Summary and Implications for Future Research

        In a capital market in which there exist only two assets, riskiess

   nominal bonds and   equity,   the demand for equity will consist of two

   distinct components. The first is the "speculative" demand, which is

   directly proportional to the real risk premium on equity and inversely

   proportional to the variance of its nominal rate of return and to the

   investor's degree of relative risk aversion. The second component is the

   "inflation-hedging" demand which is directly proportional to the covariance

   between the rate of inflation and the nominal rate of return on equity.

   The inflation-hedging demand is exactly the amount of equity which must be

   added to riskiess nominal bonds in order to create the portfolio with

   minimum variance of real return, and it is the minimum amount of equity every

   investor would hold regardless of his risk preferences. An increase in the

   variance of the rate of inflation will cause an investor's demand for equity

   to increase if he initially held positive amounts of both bonds and equity.

        Our analysis suggests that the most natural measure of the effectiveness

   of an asset as an inflation hedge is the degree of correlation between its

   nominal rate of return and unanticipated inflation. An asset is therefore a

   perfect inflation hedge if and only if its nominal return is perfectly

   correlated with the rate of inflation. This view differs sharply from Fama

   and Schwert's [5] definition of a "complete hedge against unexpected

   inflation" as an asset whose real return is uncorrelated with unanticipated

   inflation.
      The equilibrium real riSk     premium on equity measured as the difference
between   the mean real rates of return on equity and nominal bonds is

higher the higher the variance of the rate of return on equity and the higher

the ratio of equity to the total wealth of the private sector. It is lower

the higher the covariance between the nominal rate of return on equity and

the rate of inflation, i.e., the better equity is as an inflation hedge.

Unless the supply of government bonds is zero, an increase in inflation

risk will lower the real risk premium on equity.

     In   the many risky asset case, with no single security which is a
perfect   inflation hedge, there is an analogous  decomposability of the
demand for   each asset into speculative and inflation-hedging components.
We showed that there is an inflation-hedge portfolio which when combined

with the riskless nominal bond and the optimal combination of
                                                                        nominally
risky assets allows investors      to span the real efficient portfolio frontier.
This inflation—hedge portfolio is        that   portfolio composed of nominally
risky assets whose nominal return has           the highest correlation with

unanticipated   inflation.
     We then showed that the equilibrium real risk premium on
                                                              any security
with uncertain nominal returns      is   directly proportional to the difference
between   the covariance of its nominal rate of return with the timarketti
portfolio of nominally risky assets and its covariance with the rate of
inflation. The risk premium on any security which is positively correlated
with the market portfolio will be higher the higher the ratio of nominally
risky assets to total private wealth. Unless there is no government fiat                 money,

an increase in the variance of the rate of inflation will lower the risk

premia on all nominally risky assets, and this effect will be greater the

larger the proportion of government bonds in total private wealth.
We also showed that the "cost" of hedging against inflation might well be

negative in trie   sense   tnat in moving trom nominal bonds to the minimum-

variance portfolio   an    investor might be able to achieve both a reduction       in
the variance and an increase in the mean of his real rate of return.
                                                     FOOTNOTES

*1 want to thank Robert C. Merton, Stanley Fischer, Alex Kane and an anonymous

referee for helpful comments. I also benefited greatly from reading an unpublished

manuscript by Stuart M. Turnbull, "Inlfation, Indexation and the Structure of

Returns."


1See Sharpe (21), Lintner (10,11) , and Mossin (18).


2Fischer (6) has an appendix which presents an excellent explanation of the

meaning of stochastic differential equations such as (1) and of Ito's lemma.


    Fischer C6), p. 515, has shown, (13) can be derived by differentiating

(10) with respect to P and then with respect to W to obtain:


                   =
                           + PJ        and            =
                                                          1ww

                                                                             C
 Then, since C is a function of W/P we have C = -w
                                                                    P aw
 Hence,            =                  - 1.
          Jw               jw
                           ww


4Let c be the variance of the real rate of return on                             any portfolio

 consisting of equity and riskiess nominal bonds. It is given by:

        a2 = x2a2 +                         +
                           (1-x)2a              2x(l_x)aMf

 Using the equivalences sunimarized in Table 1 of the text we get by

 substitution:

              =                         +                     2x(1-x) (S_SMlr)
                  x2(sjs_2s7)                   (1-x)2s   +

              - s2-2s
              —
                 M    Mrr
                          ÷2

 The    variance-minimizing proportion of equity, x., is found by setting
                                2
  the   derivative of a with respect to x equal to zero:

        da2
                       M
                            2         —0
          dx
                            S
                       -        Mit
                  mm
                            S
5See. Markowitz t13J                                 for             a definition, explanation and deriviation of the

efficient portfolio frontier.




6                                            s                                                     2
    Substituting x .                       = Mrr into the expression for a in footnote 4 we get:
                                        miii ——                          p
                                                             S
                                                                 M
                      2                 2            2
                                                     2
                   mm
                                  =x.s
                                    mm M -2x.s
                                           mm M7r
                                                  +s 'if



                                  7 S4'\2
                                  s             I
                                                         2
                                                                 -2       SMif
                                                                          —--—
                                                                          S
                                                                              M
                                                                                     SM
                                                                                           +
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               S
                                         2                         2
                                    s                        2s
                          =             Mrr                       Mrr                2
                                                                     Z
                                        M                            M
               2        2                        s2
                                            -
    (1)       Gmifl = s11
                                                     2
                                                 SM
    The correlation coefficient between the nominal return on bonds and

    inflation, p,                        is         defined by:
                                  2 —-
                              P                 Mu
                                             22
                                            sS
                                             Mit
    so that:

    (2) 2
                  Mit               22
                  2                ps
              SM

    Substituting from (2) into (1) above we get:

          a
              2           = s 2 — p 22
                                     s                           =       (i—p
                                                                                  2 2
                                                                                  )s 'if
              mm              it      it
  If an asset has both a nominal return which is perfectly correlated

  with inflation and a real return which is uncorrelated with inflation,

  it must have zero variance of real return.

  Proof:
                                2           2                                 2
  By definition,                    = s
                                            Mr      -        (aMir + S )2
                                                    —
                                                                                        2    2
                                        SMS                  (aM + 2Mir +
                                                2
      Using the fact that p =                           1   and arr           = 0 we get
                      4
                          =
                              (aM
                                    2 22+
                 22=0
                as
                 Mir

  Assuming
                2
               s11 >       0,       a
                                    2
                                        must be zero.


 8This   question was answered by Gordon and Halpern [8] for                                                  the special

  case   in   which a =0, but as we show their result also holds for the more
                              Mir

  general case considered here. Bookstaber [4] has also examined this issue.


 9Equation (j) can be rewritten as: 3x* =                                               A(a2
                                                                                           M
                                                                                                 +   aMit)-(r M-rf)




 We   know from (14) that x =                               rM
                                                                 -       rf                           rM -    rf              +
                                                                                        5M                             aMTr
                                                                     2            +              =        2        +
                                                                                        2                                     2
                                                                                                        As                    SM
  If x <      1 then:

                                >
                                     rM-rf +
                                    -     - 2) -                                  > 0
                          A(s           aM7                   (rM_rf)
                          A(a+aMll.) - (rM-rf)                   >   0

  so that:
              —2          >0
                •TT




10See for example Patinkin [19], p. 289.
11The n first-order conditions to be solved for the optimal portfolio

     weights x are:
              3.
                                                 n
                   0 =   JW (R.         Z x.Ws. .+J S.
                             1 -R£ )+Jj=l3                              (i1,2   ,n)
                                             13 pwnr
     This is a set of n linear equations, which is solved by simple matrix

     inversion to yield (19).


12
     The material in this section is closely related to the work done by

     Solnik [22] and Manaster [12]. Manaster defines the hedge portfolio

     as the portfolio which must be added to a nominal efficient portfolio

     to transform it into a real efficient portfolio. But he does this in

     the context of a model with no nominal riskless asset, and consequently

     the composition and properties of his hedge portfolio are very different

     from mine. Solnik, however, does consider in part II of his paper what

 happens when a nominal riskiess asset exists, thus making his analysis

 more comparable to mine.


13The proof is in Merton [15], p. 878.


14Th.e proof is in Merton [17], p.91.




15The weigkt of security i in the market portfolio of nominally risky

     assets is:

                         c.
                           1                           1
                         n                       ci.


                              ct.
                                  1
                        1=1




-6The    reformulation        is accomplished by using the identities:

                   S.         =
                                       iM+a.
                                      a.
                                           i +             M7r
                                                                 52
                                                                  'iF



                   s.lir      =
                                       iii   +
 '7Proof: Let 2 be the variance-covariance matrix [s..], coy r be the
                                                                                 13
                        mm
      vector [s. J and x                 the vector of variance-minimizing portfolio
                'IT


      weights defined by:
                                    mm
                                   X           =   1COV    IT



      The covariance between the nominal return on any security and the minimum-

      variance portfolio, s.
                           i,min
                                           .   , is   then given by:

                                  mm      =     csr1cov   IT =   coy   IT



      It follows that s .                = s2. and that p.                  =   S2.
                                m,n,rr      nan         mnin,ir                 mm
                                                                                sz
                                                                                 IT

      But 2•          =     2
          mm


      Hence, s .
               nan,   it
                           = ps2

 18 See Merton [14]. p. 1864, for the proof.




 19 This is the case discussed in Fischer [61. As Fischer shows, however, in

      this special case no nominal bonds would exist.


20
     Equation (30) is derived in the appendix.
21
     The decision to use equal weights is
                                                          a rough approximation based on unpublished
     data supplied by the U.S. Federal Reserve Board's Flow of Funds Division; how-

     ever the signs of the covariances reported in the last column of Table 2 are

     quite robust with respect to changes in these weights.
                             Appendix: Derivation of Security Market Plane




From equation (25) we can get:


(Al)       -
               Rf
                    -
                             = ACci.SIM -s1)                   for i = 1,    ...,   n
or

                    =                   +
(A2) R — Rf             (l-A)s1              AasiM
Applying (A2) to the market portfolio of nominally risky assets and to

 the inflation-hedge portfolio we get:

 (A3)      -   R
                   f=   (l-A)s Hr       + At-is
                                                   HM
                                             _2
                                        +Acj M
         RM_R£          (l-A)s Mu


 Solving   (A3) for 1-A and Ac                 we       get:

  (A4) (l-) =                            -
                        (RH_Rf)s              CRM_Rf)s
                         SHS - SSM
   and
          Ac =            )s -
                    M- Rf Hut                CRH_Rf)SMu
                              2
                         SHSM - SSM

     Substituting from (A4) into (A2) we get:

     (AS) R_Rf =        sj   (RH-Rf)s -              (RM_Rf)sHM              (RM-Rf)st -      (RH_Rf)sM.
                                               -                        iM         -
                                  SHuS1             5HMMTr
                                                                                     -
                                                                                    SS
  which reduces to:


          R_Rf = (s IMs ut              s                              (s. s2 — s. s) (R
   (A6)                             —          s
                                             i7r 4M) (RM_Rf)
                                                                   +      lltM   1M
                                                                       ________________       —   Rf)

                        SHrrSM -        SHMSMrr                         5R5M -      5HM541r
From footnote (17) and                    the      fact that the minimum-variance portfolio is created

by just combining the inflation-hedge portfolio with riskless nominal bonds we

know that:

               =                              s i,
(A7)    SHir       ks             and                =   ks iH


        5H7r
               =
                   ks
whe.rek= EEv s
                          ijj7r

Substitute     from (A7)              into     (A6) the k's cancel out and we get:


CA8) R1—Rf =
                       (sHs —             SiMSl) (RM_Rf) + (sIMSHM            -
                                                                                  siHsM) (RH_Rf)
                              2
                   -      S               S                              2         22
                              HM               M                        SHM_SHSN




Since   by definition:


               =                      -                                            -
                       51H5HM             1M5FI
                                                         and     jI1.M = 5iM5HM        SjHS
                                                                                       22
                       SM s22
                           H5M
                                  -                                          2
                                                                             5HM SHSM

we get equation (30) in the text.
                                           REFERENCES


      1.       F. Black, "Capital Market Equilibrj with Restricted
                  Journal of Business, Volume                         Borrowing,"
                                              45, (July 1972), pp. 444-454.
      2.       Z.   Bodje,  "Common Stocks
                                           as a Hedge Against Inflation," Journal of
                    Finance, Volume 31, Number 2 (May 1976), PP. 459-470.
      3.    Z. Bodje and V. Rosansky,
                                            "Risk and Return in Commodity
                    Boston University School of                           Futures,"
                                                Management Working Paper, 1978.

      4. R. Bookstaber, "T1ie
                          Use of Authority Induced
          Monetary Policy," unpublished            Uncertainty as a Tool of
                                         manuscript, September 1977.
  5. E.F. Faina and G.W.
                         Schwert, "Asset Returns and Inflation," Journal
         of Financial Economics, Volume 5, Number 2(November 1977),
                                                                    pp. 115-146.
  •   S. Fischer, "The Demand for Index Bonds," Journal of Political
         Volume 83, Number 3(June 1975), pp. 509—534.                  Economy,

  7.        I. Friend, Y. Landskroner
                                      and E. Losq, "The Demand for Risky Assets Under
               Uncertain Inflation," Journal of Finance, Volume 31, Number 5(December
               1976), pp. 1287-1297.

  8. M. Gordon and P. Halpern, "Bond Share Yield Spreads
                                                          Under Uncertain
         Inflation," American Economic
                                       Review, Volume 66, Number 4, pp. 559-565.
  9.       R. Ibbotson and Sinquefield,
                                               Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation,
                    Financial Analysts Research Foundation; 1977.
10.        J. Lintner, "The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection
              Investments in Stock Portfolios                           of Risky
                                              and Capital Budgets," Review of
              Economics and Statistics, Volume
                                               47(February 1965), pp. 13-47.
11.        —            , "Security Prices, Risk and Maximal Gains from
                 Journal of Finance, Volume                              Diversification"
                                            20(December 1965), pp. 587-615.
12.        S. Manaster, "Real and Nominal
                                          Efficient Sets," Journal of Finance, Volume 34,
              Number 1, (March 1979), pp. 93-102.

13.        H. Markowitz, "Portfolio Selection," Journal of Finance, Volume 7,
              Number 1 (March 1952), pp. 77-91.

14. R.C. Merton, "Au Analytic Derivation of the Efficient Portfolio
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative                        Frontier,"
                                                        Analysis, Volume 7(September
                1972), pp. 1851—1871.

15. ___________, "An Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,"
        Volume 41, Number 5(September 1973), pp. 867-887.                      Econometrica,
16.   ____________,  "A Reexamination of the Capital Asset Pricing Model," Risk
         and Return in Finance, Volume I, Friend and Bicksler, ed., Ballinger:
         Cambridge, MA, 1977.

17. ____________, "On the Microeconomic Theory of Investment Under Uncertainty,"
        Sloan SchQol of Management Working Paper No. 938-77, October 1977.

18. J. Mossin, "Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market," Econometrica,
        Volume 34, Number 4(October 1966), pp. 768-783.

19.   D. Patinkin, Money, Interest and Prices, 2nd ed., Harper and Row:
         New York, 1965.

20. R. Roll, "A Critique of the Asset Pricing Theory's Tests," Journal of
        Financial Economics, Volume 4, Number 2(March 1977), pp. 129-176.

21. W.F. Sharpe, "Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium
        uncer Conditions of Risk," Journal of Finance, Volume 19, Number 3
        (September 1964), pp. 425-442.

22.   B. Solnik, "Inflation and Optimal Portfolio Choices," Journal of
         FinancIal and Quantitative Pnanlysis, Volume 13, Number 5,
         (December 1978), pp. 903—925.
