                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              COLONIAL AND REVOLUTIONARY MUSTER ROLLS:
            SOME NEW EVIDENCE ON NUTRITION AND MIGRATION
                          IN EARLY AMERICA

                         Kenneth L. Sokolof'f
                        Georgia   C. Villaflor


                        Working Paper No. 3714




                 NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                          Cambridge Mk 02138

                              July 1979




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
the Development of the American Economy. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The authors would like to thank Robert W. Fogel and Stanley
L. Engerman for their encouragement, generous support, and
enlightening comments during the course of this study. They are also
grateful to Allan Kulifoff, Edward Papenfuse, John Shy, and many
others for their help in the collection of data. They have benefited
from comments and criticisms by Fred Anderson, David H. Fischer, Alan
Green, Zvi Griliches, Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, and Sarah F. McMahon, as
well as from seminar discussions at the Harvard Workshop in Economic
History, the NBER, and the Cliometrics Conference. The research has
been supported by NBER/NSF Grant NO. SOC7T—09576.
                                                      NBER Working Paper 374
                                                                   July 1979




                 Colonial and Revolutionary Muster Rolls:
               Some New Evidence on Nutrition and Migration
                             in Early America


                                 ABSTRACT


       That investment in human capital has made an important contribution

to the increase of labor productivity arid per capita income during the last

several centuries is widely acknowledged. While much of the research on

this issue has focused on education, many scholars have also directed

attention to the significance of improvements in nutrition. Until recently,

efforts to study this subject have been hampered by a lack of evidence,

but it now appears possible to construct indexes of nutrition from height-

by-age data. This paper employs a relatively underutilized type of histor-

ical document to investigate the level of nutrition in early America. The

same material also provides a rich source of information about patterns

of migration during this period.

       This paper finds that native—born Americans approached modern

heights by the time of the Revolution. On average, colonial Americans

appear to have been 2 to 4 inches taller than Europeans, with southerners

considerably taller than northerners and the rural population of greater

stature than the urban. These differences may indicate that other factors

besides nutrition were important in accounting for the dramatic changes

in U.S. mortality rates during the nineteenth century.




Kenneth Sokoloff                                Georgia Villaflor
National Bureau of Economic Research            National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                       1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138                             Cambridge, MA 02138

617/868—3918                                    617/868—3918
                                      —1—


                                Introduction



       The historian seeking to understand aspects of the past is heavily

            on the nature of the documents prepared by previous          -
dependent

generations. The specific reasons for collecting information from certain
groups, the precise range of questions asked, and the extent to which such
documents   have survived and become accessible to the scholar all influence

the issues which can be examined. This situation need not be viewed as

being overly restrictive, however, since surviving documents can often

be employed to study subjects which are unrelated to the particular

concerns for which the materials were originally assembled.

       In this paper we shall be reporting on our preliminary analysis of

a type of historical document which has not generally been examined system-

atically. The military records we have utilized1referred to as muster

rolls or size rolls (or descriptive lists), are predominantly from the

years of the French and Indian War (1756-1763) and the American Revolution

(1775-1783), and for the soldiers of the American Colonies. Such lists

were compiled for most colonial military forces, typically by individual

companies or regiments, and provided the basis for distributing supplies

and payments, as well as aiding in the identification of deserters. Since

there was no standard format for the muster rolls, the nature of the information

contained varies widely. Lists have been retrieved which included for each

 soldier some, but never all, of the following information: place of birth,

 age, place of residence, occupation, height, hair color, eye color, complexion,

place and date of enlistment, military rank, by whom enlisted, language

 spoken, term of service, pay scale, and other assorted remarks relevant to

 military service. These data facilitate the investigation of issues for

 which there has been in the past only sparse or scattered evidence available.
                                   -2-




They are of particular value in studying levels of nutrition, patterns

of migration, and participation in the military.

       The analysis of the data is organized into two rather independent

sections of the paper. The first part treats the potential of height-by-age

profiles for studying levels of nutrition, and reports our findings and

what they might suggest about the variation of nutrition across geographic

regions, economic classes, and other relevant characteristics during this

period. The next section is concerned with the utilization of the data

for the analysis of patterns of migration, both inter-and intra-continental.

       The information examined in this paper is drawn almost entirely

from those muster rolls that list, at a minimum, for each recruit, height,

age, and place of birth. The subset of observations which included

these variables is only a fraction of the total surviving sample of muster

rolls, and it is possible that this sample is not fully representative of the
population. If the data reflected only a small sub-sample of recruits, the amount

of information provided by them might be quite limited. With regard to the French

and Indian War period, the observations were retrieved from materials of New

York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia, with an especially great reliance on the former,

where the bulk of the American troops involved in that conflict were raised.

 The militia records of the only other colony which appears to have contributed
                                  —11—


statistical significance). The southerners appear to have been experiencing

a rapid increase in final heights. While the heights of the Middle Atlantic

born grew at the relatively modest pace of 0.4 inches per generation, the

stature of those born in the South mushroomed at the rate of 2.0 inches per

generation. The latter is a rather high rate of increase in final heights,

and is particularly unusual for a period so early in time.

       It is also clear from the distribution of the final heights of the

British Royal Marines, presented in Figure 1, that native-born Americans

during the Revolutionary period were quite tall by relative standards.

The mean terminal heights of those groups of Americans exceed the British

figure by amounts ranging from 2.3 to 3.5 inches. Possibly more surprising

is that the mean terminal heights of the groups of northern Revolutionary

soldiers were equal (Middle Atlantic) and 0.30 inches shorter (New England)

than the average of native-born northern recruits during the Civil War.

The southern revolutionaries were 0.9 inches taller. The total Revolutionary

sample has a mean terminal height (68.33) which is equal to the World War II
       12
level. Native-born Americans appear to have approached modern heights as

long ago as two centuries.

       The pattern of final heights suggested by the military data is so

surprising as to deserve more careful analysis. One possibility is that

the results may be statistical artifacts. As Figure 1 illustrates was the

case in the British Army, the recruits may not have been drawn randomly

with respect to height. The British usually applied a minimum height

requirement, the minimum varying with the demand for, and supply of,

recruits. Self-selection considerations might also produce a non-random

sample of the population; short individuals might avoid military service.

Either phenomenon would generate the left-tail truncation that is observed

in the height distributions of the British soldiers. If such truncation
                                     -4-


substantially to the war effort, Massachusetts, do not include height-by-

age data) As for the Revolutionary War period, our present sample has

broad geographic coverage, and does not diverge substantially from the

crude   existing estimate of the actual distribution of soldiers across

states (see Table l).2      Another potential source of sample selection

bias is that muster rolls which report height may have been prepared

in atypical localities. As we are ignorant of the true compositions of

the two armies, consideration of aggregate characteristics would be difficult

regardless, since even if afl'áreas were encompassed by our sample, some might

be disproportionately represented.

         Although it seems likely that the sample includes a relatively large

percentage of the French and Indian War troops, it is not clear what proportion

of the population of Revolutionary War soldiers are contained. There is no

consensus on the number of men that served in the militia or the Continental

Army; estimates range from 100,000 to 250,000. This paper is a report of an

ongoing project, and we anticipate that when the collection of data is

completed, our sample will constitute a significant proportion of the population

of Revolutionary recruits. Even if one possessed a sample which was

representative of all army and militia recruits, however, inferences about

the general population would still have to be tendered with considerable caution.

i. Height-By-Age Analysis

        There are a variety of reasons why scholars have been concerned

with the level of nutrition in colonial America.       It is of substantial

interest by itself, of course, as the food supply is a major component

of the standard of living of a population, partic4arly for an economy
                                           addition, it has been proposed that during
at an early stage of development. 'In

the period of the late seventeenth century to the early nineteenth

century there was a great change in the capacity of men to work, larg1y
                                -5-


attributable to improvements in nutrition.4 An index of nutrition would

also be informative, because it is likely that nutrition will tend to be

related to more conventional economic variables of which we have limited

knowledge. Although it is unlikely that nutrition would move closely

with per capita income, even at this early stage of development, evidence

of significant changes in the former might suggest that there was at

least the potential for change in the latter. Within a population of

a relatively homogeneous culture, patterns of nutrition might reflect

the distribution of income.,
        It was an interest in studying the trend in mortality during this

period that originally led to these data being retrieved. One of

the principal issues in the attempt to explain the secular decline

in mortality rates over the last several centuries, both in Europe

and in North America, is the role played by nutrition. While Brown,

Higgs, McKeown, and Record have argued that improvement in nutrition

was the major factor accounting for the decline in death rates,

Razzell and Appleby have challenged this interpretation.5 Alternative

hypotheses for contributors to this development include medical

advances, an increasing knowledge of the operation of the physical world

(personal health measures), improvements in housing, decreasing virulence

of disease, and the implementation of public health measures.

        Despite. the importance of the issues concerning the amount and nut-

ritional adequacy of the food supply, efforts to study this   subject   were initially

hampered by a lack of evidence. It may be possible to resolve this

problem by utilizing information on height by age. Data on both

height and weight, by age, are particularly desirable for identifying

a population's "average nutritional status." While such joint

distributions are sometimes available, only data on height have thus

far been located in such quantities that they can be used to construct
                                -6-


time series extending back into the eighteenth century. Even

without observations of weight, height-by-age data can be quite

accurate indicators of the "average nutritional status" of populations,

as well as of changes in this condition over time and place.6

        Many researchers have studied the effects of nutritional

deficiencies and illness on the height-by-age profile through observational

studies of human populations and laboratory experiments.7 Three statistics

are particularly useful: the age at which the adolescent growth spurt peaks,

the age at which full height is attained, and the change in terminal heights
over time. Short periods of malnutrition or prolonged periods of moderate

malnutrition, during childhood, merely delay the onset of the adolescent

growth spurt. Severe, prolonged malnutrition may completely erode the

typical growth-spurt pattern and cause permanent stunting.   If malnutrition

is prolonged and moderate, growth will continue beyond the age at which

the growth of well-fed adolescents ceases. Hence, the age at which

growth terminates is an important indicator, especially for older

adolescents, of nutritional status. There is a clear pattern of "catching-

up" after periods of malnutrition, but the longer the periods and the

more severe the malnutrition, the more likely the terminal height will

fall below what it would have been under conditions of good nutrition.

Malnutrition is not the only environmental influence on height-by-age

profiles. Major illnsses ç è detected by the existence of "slowdowns"

in the velocity profiles, followed by acceleration in growth after recovery.

        Recent studies have suggested that the effects of malnutrition

 are manifested not only in the immediate generation, but in subsequent

 ones as well. This may be the mechanism which produces the observed

 secular increase in final heights of various populations for which long—

 term series are available.8 The final heights of different

 populations thus appear to be a significant index of the
                               -7-


cumulative effect of the nutritional status of these populations over

several generations.9 This is not to imply that radical changes in diet

cannot result in a large change in the average termjnal heights between

children and parents (i.e. a temporal span of a single generation).    The

experience of the Japanese during the post-war period is a well known

case of rapid growth in the heights of a population within a generation.

A study of Italian-Swiss immigrants in twentieth century California

reported that the first generation achieved a mean terminal height that

was approximately four centimeters taller than that of their fellow

villagers and family methers who remained in Switzerland)0
                                                    abundant evidence on
        The muster rolls, of course, provide more

 final heights and on the age at which growth terminates than on the

 peak of the growth spurt. As one would expect, very few individuals under

 the age of 16 enlisted in the military, making it difficult to utilize
                                                     accordingly, the analysis
 this data for studying adolescent growth spurts.

 of th height-by-age data, in this paper, will focus on the terminal

 heights achieved.

          In Figures 1 and 2, we present, for the Revolutionary and French

 and Indian Wars, frequency distributions of the heights of white native-

 born recruits aged 25 through 35. One can safely treat these soldiers as

 saving achieved terminal height. Since the Revolutionary sample is diverse

  with regard to geographic region, and one observes some relation between

  place of birth and stature, it is divided into three groups: New England,

  Middle Atlantic, and South. As our sample from the earlier war includes

  relatively few individuals from New England, this regional group does not

  appear in Figure 2. Having a small number of observations prevents us, at

  this stage, from dividing the sample any further. The more sub-groups that

  can be compared, the more differences within populations will be illuminated,
                         FINAL HEIGHTS OF RECRUITS IN ENGLAND AND
                      AMERICA AT TUE TIME OF THE A?.ERICAN REVOLLTFION*




200



                                                              BRITISH ROYAL MARINES
                                                                    1776-82
                                                                              65,6 inches
                                                                    N = 1178
 50




30


                                                                 U.S. NATIVE-BORN WHITES,
                                                                        SOUTh
                                                                        c.1778

 10                                                                       —69•' (S.D.=2.42)
                                                                          N    = 159


       57   58 59 60 61 62 63 64        67 68        70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77
                                                61




                                    I
                                                                 U.S. NATIVE-BORN WHITES,
                                                                          MIDDLE ATLANTIC
                                                                           c.1778
                                                                          11 =68.2     (S. D. =2 .   68)
                                                                          NC
                                                                                250




       57   58 59 60 61 62 63                                 73 74 75 76 77

                                    I
                                                 I




2 ()                                                             U.S. NATIVE-BORN WHITES,
                                                                        NEW ENGLAND
                                                                        c.1778
                                                                          67.9 (S.D.=2.55)
                                                                          N = 184
                                    FIGURE 2

                     FINAL HEIGHTS OF RECRUITS IN AMERICA AT
                     THE TIME OF THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR*




     *
         In estimating the true means of these distributions, we have attempted to
         adjust for biases arising from "heaping" and truncation. We have employed
         an equation, derived from simulations, which estimates the amount of bias
         in the sample mean from several moments of the distribution. For a
         detailed discussion of the problem, and the method utilized, consult the
         reference in footnote 14. The standard deviation of the final heights of
         the British Royal Marines is not currently available, but the true figure
         should be in the neighborhood of 2.5 inches.




80                                                             U.S. NATIVE-BORN WHITES,
                                                                    MIDDLE ATLANTIC,
                                                                    c. 1761
                                                                    — 68.0; (S.D.r2.46)
40                                                                  N    716




              60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76




                                                               U.S. NATIVE-BORN WHITES,
                                                                     SOI.TFH
                                                                     c.1755
                                                                    "676 inches;S.D.=2.47
                                                                   N = 111
                               -10-


and the greater the likelihood that biases in the data will be detected.

If one is examining a relatively homogeneous population, without sample

selection bias, one should observe a normal distribution of final, heights)3

The frequency distribution for the aggregate Revolutionary War sample

does not resemble a normal distribution, but two of the three sub-groups

do generate distributions such that chi-square tests cannot reject the

hypotheses that they are drawn from normal distributions. We suspect that

the Middle Atlantic distribution diverges from normality, because hetero-

geneous populations are being lumped together (geographically, from Connecticut

to Maryland). The Middle Atlantic distribution, for the French and Indian

War, closely conforms to the properties of a normal distribution, however,

a chi-square test rejects the hypothesis that the southern sub-group is drawn

from a normal distribution. It should be noted that there appears to have

been rounding to even inches in the South's distribution; if one assumes that

this is the explanation for the "heaping", the appropriate adjustments,

conservatively applied, produce a substantial increase in the probability

that the underlying distribution is normal. In considering the deviations

from normality, one should recognize that only crude attempts at isolating

homogeneous sub-groups have yet been made.

       Perhaps a more important point about these data is that there are

substantive differences between the mean final heights of these sub-samples.

The mean terminal height of the South group is 1.2 and 0.9 inches greater than

those of New England and the Middle Atlantic respectively. Although the

sample sizes are not very large, these differences are statistically

significant. The difference between the heights of recruits from New

England and the Middle Atlantic is not statistically significant. When

one inspects the French and Indian War observations, it is interesting that

the Middle Atlantic heights ceed those of the South (of marginal
                                  —11—


statistical significance). The southerners appear to have been experiencing

a rapid increase in final heights. While the heights of the Middle Atlantic

born grew at the relatively modest pace of 0.4 inches per generation, the

stature of those born in the South mushroomed at the rate of 2.0 inches per

generation. The latter is a rather high rate of increase in final heights,

and is particularly unusual for a period so early in time.

       It is also clear from the distribution of the final heights of the

British Royal Marines, presented in Figure 1, that native-born Americans

during the Revolutionary period were quite tall by relative standards.

The mean terminal heights of those groups of Americans exceed the British

figure by amounts ranging from 2.3 to 3.5 inches. Possibly more surprising

is that the mean terminal heights of the groups of northern Revolutionary

soldiers were equal (Middle Atlantic) and 0.30 inches shorter (New England)

than the average of native-born northern recruits during the Civil War.

The southern revolutionaries were 0.9 inches taller. The total Revolutionary

sample has a mean terminal height (68.33) which is equal to the World War II
       12
level. Native-born Americans appear to have approached modern heights as

long ago as two centuries.

       The pattern of final heights suggested by the military data is so

surprising as to deserve more careful analysis. One possibility is that

the results may be statistical artifacts. As Figure 1 illustrates was the

case in the British Army, the recruits may not have been drawn randomly

with respect to height. The British usually applied a minimum height

requirement, the minimum varying with the demand for, and supply of,

recruits. Self-selection considerations might also produce a non-random

sample of the population; short individuals might avoid military service.

Either phenomenon would generate the left-tail truncation that is observed

in the height distributions of the British soldiers. If such truncation
                               —12—
or "censoring': occurred, the estimated mean final height would be biased

upwards. However, left-tail truncation does not appear to be a major

factor in the American height distributions, except perhaps in the New

England group from the Revolutionary period. Employing an equation fitted

over simulated cases, we estimated the degree of bias in the raw figures
                                                 14
for means,. and made the appropriate adjustment. These corrected estimates

of the mean are the only ones cited in the paper. None of the adjustments

led to a qualitative change in the results.

       As it seems unlikely that the genetic potential of the U.S. population

has changed significantly, the rather tall heights observed suggest that

the colonial population was reasonably well nourished. More specifically,

the levels of calories and protein, which are often identified as being

particularly important in the influence of nutrition on height, would appear

to have been quite high. The inferences to be made from final heights about

the average nutritional status of Americans are even more striking when one

considers that members of the upper class, who would presumably be better

nourished, would not be expected to appear frequently among the enlisted

men. In addition, if the full effect of improvements in nutrition requires

several generations to be manifested, it seems likely that the colonial

level of nutrition was even higher than our sample's heights suggest. Although

little is known about the diet of Americans during this period, there is some

evidence that they were avid meat-eaters. One visitor to Virginia, in the 1770's

remarked, "that they eat larger quantities of animal food [than at home].

you can be contented with one joirt of meat is a reproach frequently thrown

into the teeth of an Englishman."15 If this rich source of protein was

abundant, it could account for the tall stature, and if the supply of

livestock increased in the South during the middle of the century, meat

might be responsible for the growth observed. Of course, it may be that certain

trace elementSare critical for growth, in which case one would need to

investigate the possibility of subtle changes in the diet that might have affected

the intake of one or more of these critical substances. If such an event transpired
                                   -13-



it would be extremely difficult to identify given the paucity of evidence

on food consumption.

       One might remain troubled by the significant difference in mean

final heights between the New England and the non-New England groups for the

Revolutionary period. Since a higher class of individuals is supposed to

have served in the New England military and this region's population had

probably resided for the longest period in America, one might have expect

heights in Massachusetts to be higher. A possible explanation is that

southerners were measured with thei± shoes On. Some contemporaries noticed,

however, that southerners seemed to be taller: "The natives for the most

part, rise above the middling stature: and they attain their full height

sooner, than the people usually do in colder climates    There are several other

hypotheses which could account for this divergence. The apparent difference

in nutrition suggested by the height-by-age data might be related to regional

differences in income. This explanation would be consistent with the finding

derived from probate records that the average wealth holdings were substantially

higher, for nearly all classes of society, in the South and Middle Atlantic

relative to New England.18 Another set of possible explanations concerns

the agricultural differences between the two regions. Perhaps the farther

south an individual lived, the more nutritious the crops, the larger the supply

of livestock, the better the access to food, or the greater the quality of the

food supply during the winter months. Other hypotheses might involved differences

in occupational distributions, tastes in food, or in genetic potential. It

 should be further noted that a siidilar pattern appears in Civil War data. For

example, the mean height of the New England-born soldiers of the Civil War, at

 age 26, was 68.16 inches, while for Kentucky and Tennessee (the closest states

to the southern seaboard) the mean height was 69.05 inches.19 The regional difference
                                       -14-


in heights is puzzling, but it should not discredit the height-by--age

analysis. It is the contention of this paper that the level of nutrition

did vary within the population, and that height-by-age analysis can detect

some of the systematic patterns of that variation.

       From the discussion of regional differences in heights, it is clear

that a multivariate analysis is desirable. Accordingly, a regression

with height as the dependent variable was run over the sub-sample of

Revolutionary soldiers, ages 25 to 35. The independent variables include

age and a series of dummies representing occupational classes, places of

birth and residence, and race, while the intercept reflects the height of

a rural New England-born white farmer who lived in a rural area. The results

are reported in Table 2. It is evident that even after allowing for other

characteristics, the regional difference in height among native-born Americans

persists. The results suggest that being born in Virginia adds 0.84 inches

to an individual's height and North or South Carolina contributes 0.70 inches.

The coefficients on the other domestic nativity dummies imply that New Yorkers

are somewhat taller, and the Delaware born substantially shorter, than New

Englanders. The stature of those born in other states is not significantly

different from that for New England.

       The regression also provides support for the view that Americans were

better nourished than Europeans, as the coefficients on the foreign-born

                                                                         One
dummies are generally large, negative, and statistically significant.

must remember, however, that the immigrants who appear in the military data

 do not accurately reflect the populations of their home countries, since

 many of them probably arrived in America before reaching terminal height.

 Of particular interest are the coefficients for the three major immigrant

 groups, the English, Germans, and Irish; the English and Irish reduce the
                                  -15-
                               TABLE 2

               REGRESSION WITH HEIGHT AS DEPENDENT
           VARIABLE - AMERICAN REVOLUTION OBSERVATIONS,
                              AGES 25-35

            R2 = 0.1258                    N = 1141

        Variable                           Coefficient    t-statistic

Intercept                                     67.662        91.41
Years of Age                                   0.010         0.43
Native-Born Artisan                           -0.060        -0.23
Nativ"-Born Laborer                            0.132         0.35
Foreign-Born Artisan                           0.115         0.30
Foreign-Born Laborer                           0.688         1.48
Foreign-Born Farmer                           -0.491        -0.99
Seaman                                         0.116         0.23
Unknown Occupation                             0.018         0.07
Native-Born Urban                             -0.981        -1.87
Urban Resident                                -0.857        -1.49
Foreign-Born Urban Resident                    0.911         1.31
Foreign-Born Urban                            -0.905        -1.44
English-Born Urban                            -0.287        -0.33
Native-Born Black                             -0.482        -0.81
Born in New York or New Jersey                 0.490         1.52
Born in Connecticut                           -0.186        -0.43
Born in Delaware                              -1.516        -2.43
Born in Pennsylvania                          -0.295        -0.60
Born in Maryland                               0.309         0.68
Born in Virginia                               0.840         2.48
Born in North or South Carolina                0.701         1.68
Born Elsewhere in America or Canada           -0.394        -1.03
Born in England                               -1.483        -3.72
Born in Ireland                               -1.168        -3.36
Born in Germany                               -0.815        -1.75
Born in Scotland                              -0.479        -0.74
Born in France or Switzerland                 -2.330        -2.32
Born in Other Foreign Countries               -1.500        -2.35
Foreign-Born Residing in the South             0.795         2.21
Northern-Born Residing in the South           -0.231        -0.37
Native-Born Migrants Across State Lines        0.764         2.45
height by over an inch, while the German born are shorter by 0.81 inches.

The relative sizes of thea coefficients are influenced by the conditions
                                        of immigration, and the conditions
in the home country, the average ages
                                          ethnic groups. It is also interesting
within the states which attracted these

that being black reduces an individual's height by only 0.48 inches, with

this effect statistically insignificant.
                                               that the level of nutrition varied
       The regression coefficients indicate

between urban and rural areas, both in the U.S. and Europe. An individual

born in an American urban area would be nearly an inch shorter, on average,
                                            the interpretation that the level
than his rural-born countrymen. Besides
                                        conditions) was simply worse in American
of nutrition (or other environmental
                                      reflect that those who were born in the cities
 cities, the coefficient might also
                                             and were still affected by malnutrition
 were children of foreign born immigrants,
                                of being a resident of an urban area, a
 a generation ago. The effect
                                                      interesting. The statistically
 reduction of 0.86 inches in stature, is extremely

 significant coefficient, when viewed together with our evidence on patterns
                                          who were malnourished when growing up
 of migration, may indicate that those

 (and perhaps more likely to be poor) tended to become concentrated in the
                                       coefficient which argues for a causal
 cities. An interpretation of this
                                                         these residents moving
 influence of urban conditions on height depends upon
                                            good portion of the urban born moving
 to the urban areas at a young age, or a
                                      Foreigners who reside in urban areas appear
 out of the cities at early ages.
                                                                     born in
 to be about the same height as those in rural areas. The foreigners
                                        inches shorter than those that wer& not
 urban areas were approximately 0.90

  There appears to have been no difference in the relative circumstances of

  English urban-born and other foreign urban-born recruits.
                                             coefficients on the occupational class
         Finally, the lack of significant
                                        The small coefficients, and their insignificance)
  dummy variables is quite striking.
                                     -17-


imply that the level of nutrition did not vary substantially over occupational,

and perhaps income, classes. This may be indicative of the extent of economic

equality, at least within a colony or region. If income is more closely

related to region than to occupation, then our regional difference in

heights may reflect a degree of income inequality. Of course, it is

important to remember what underlying phenomena we are attempting to detect.

The heights of individuals are influenced by the levels of nutrition they

experience when they are young. Thus, we might prefer to know the occupations

of the parents of these soldiers when investigating the relationship between

occupation and nutrition. The greater the extent of social mobility, the

less one would expect toobserve a relation between an individual's occupation

and his height (unless occupation was a function of height). Another

reason why the occupational categories may not explain much of the variation

in height is because they are not sufficiently precise. For example, our

failure to distinguish between large planters and yeomen with minor holdings,

or urban and rural laborers may be the critical element in achieving

our result.

       There are several variables included in the regression that refer to

classes of migrants. Those native-born soldiers who migrated from their

.places of birth to reside or enlist in ttherclonieS were approximately 0.76

inches taller than their more sedentary neighbors. It is not apparent whether

the greater stature is attributable to superior material circumstances, or

the net effect of migration to areas with better nutritional conditions.

Foreigners residing in the South (North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia)

are about 0.80 inches taller than those who have settled in the North, after

adjusting for country of birth. This gap might reflect class differences between

these groups of migrants, might be attributable to a younger age at migration

on the part of the South's foreign population, or simply indicate that
                                        -18-


foreigners arrived at a sufficiently early age to be affected by regional

nutritional conditions. In contrast, northerners who migrated to the South

were, after allowing for the generally greater heights of migrants, no taller than

those who chose to remain in the colder climate.

          A regression with a simiIar specification, run over the French and

Indian War sample, is reported in Table 3. As is immediately evident, the

patterns of variation in height are rather different from those in the later

period. The native born are again of substantially greater stature than the

foreign born. However, there are no statistically significant differences

in height across piaces of birth. Focusing solely on the size of the regression

coefficients, New Yorkers, as they do in the American Revolution sample, tend

to be slightly taller than New Englanders, while the recruits born in

Pennsylvania and Delaware are shorter. The major surprise is that during

this earlier period, being born in the South reduced one's terminal height

relative to New England levels. The lack of significant differentials might

be attributable to a large portion of the sample being drawn from New York,

with the consequence that many of the nativeborn from other colonies had

moved to New York and perhaps been affected by the nutritional conditions there.

The results from the French and Indian Was sample also deviate from those of

the Revolutionary sample in that there is no significant relation between

height and birth or residence in an urban area. This may not be unreasonable

for American cities, since they were still small and relatively undeveloped

at the beginning    of the 18th   Century, but the absence of any   effect   of being

born   in foreign urban centers is unexpected.
           The occupational dummy variables, in the French and Indian War

sample,   provide   significant explanatory power in accounting for the variation

in height across individuals. Both native-born artisans and laborers were

about 0.6 inches shorter than native-born farmers, after adjusting for the

urban-rural mix and other factors. It is not at all apparent why         occupation
                                   —



                               TABLE   3

                    REGRESSION WITh HEIGHT AS DEPENDENT
                 VARIABLE - FRENCH AND INDIAN OBSERVATIONS,
                              AGES 25-35



       R2 = 0.1389                           N = 2675



     Variable                          Coefficient        T-Statistic


Intercept                                  68.076             119.88
Years of Age                                0.006               0.36
Native-born Artisan                        -0.566              -2.14
Native-born Laborer                        -0.583              -2.08
Foreign-born Artisan                        0.061               0.17
Foreign-born Laborer                        0.124               0.33
Foreign-born Farmer                        -0.166              -0.35
Professional                                0.132               0.21
Seaman                                     -0.184              -0.44
Unknown Occupation                         -0.379              -1.02
Native-born Urban                          -0.183              -0.61
Urban Resident                             -0.232              -0.68
Foreign-born Urban Resident                 0.168               0.45
Foreign-born Urban                         -0.246              -0.67
English-born Urban                         -0.573              -0.96
Native-born Black                          -2.096              -3.44
Born in New York or New Jersey              0.277               0.98
Born in Pennsylvania or Delaware           -0.444              -1.29
Born in Maryland                           -0.665              -0.86
Bcrn in Virginia                           -0.254              -0.71
Born ip North or South Carolina            -0.135              -0.05
Birthplace Specified as America            -1.051              -1.33
Born Elsewhere in America or Canada         1.831               1.45
Born in England                            -2.006              -4.71
Born in Ireland                            -1.368              -3.32
Born in Germany                            -2.332              -5.58
Born in Scotland                           -1.531              -3.24
Born in France or Switzerland              -1.737              -3.36
Born in Other Foreign Country              -1.332              -2.74
Unknown Place of Birth                     -0.473              -0.98
Foreign-born Residing in the South         -0.764              -3.48
Northern-born Residing in the South         0.424               0.64
Native-born Migrants across State Lines     0.203               0.70
                                       -20-


is related to height in this sample, but not in the Revolutionary sample,

The above discussion noted that the greater the degree of social mobility, the

weaker the link between the two variables. Thus, one might argue that social

mobility increased during the inter-war period. An alternative view might

identify the relative geographical homogeneity of the French and Indian sample,

with its implications for consistent recording of occupations, as the critical

element. Although this interpretation is not without appeal, the answer does

not seem completely adequate, since one would expect a significant regression

coefficient if, by all colonies of birth, laborers were shorter than farmers

(   a not especially stringent condition). A third explanation is that regional

differences dwarfed the occupational effects in the later period, and that

migratory behavior must be given fliore attention before the relationship between

occupation and height can be isolated. None of these scenarios is very satisfying,

however, and this issue will receive further study. As a final point, it should

be mentioned that this concern with regional patterns, in a context of substantial

geographical mobility, emerges again with the finding that, after allowing for

country of birth etc., the foreign born in the South are shorter than those

immigrating to the North. This relative stature of the two groups is the opposite

of that observed in the American Revolution sample; the shift in the pattern may

reflect the change, in the same direction and of similar magnitude, in the relative

heights of regional native-born populations.

          Although the above regressions are extremely informative about the

variation of height in cross-section, we also seek to investigate changes in

stature over time. For this purpose, we ran a regression over all of the

recruits, ages 25 to 35, from the French and Indian and Revolutionary samples.

In this regression, the results of which are reported in Table 4, the intercept

represents the height of a rural New England-born white farmer who lived in a

rural area during the Revolution. It has already been discussed how some of

the estimated relationships shifted significantly during the inter-war period
                                   —21—
                                TABLE 4

                 REGRESSION WITH HEIGHT AS DEPENDENT
             VARIABLE - OBSERVATIONS PROM BOTH PERIODS,
                              AGES 25-35



        R2 = 0.1521                       N = 3777


           Variable                          Coefficient   t-statistic


                                               67.951        159.59
Intercept
Years of Age                                     0.009         0.68
Native-Born Artisan                            -0.410         -2.25
Native-Born Laborer                            -0.424         -2.06
Native-Born Seaman                             -0.518         -1.26
Foreign-Born Artisan                           -0.042         -0.16
Foreign_Born Laborer                             0.114         0.44
Foreign-Born Farmer                            -0.137         -0.45
Foreign-Born Seaman                              0.404         1.32
                                               -0.084         -0.42
Unknown Occupation
Native-Born Urban                              -0.980         -2.01
Urban Resident                                 -0.361         -1.26
Foreign-Born Urban Resident                      0.386         1.20
Foreign-Born Urban                             -0.531         -2.23
Native-Born Black                               -1.268        -3.01
Born in New York or New Jersey                   0.537         2.62
Born in Connecticut                              0.006         0.02
Born in Delaware                                -1.564        -2.57
Born in Pennsylvania                            -0.297        -1.00
Born in Maryland                                 0.038         0.10
Born in Virginia                                 0.833         2.79
Born in North or South Carolina                  0.657         1.67
Born Elsewhere in America or Canada             -0.454        -1.41
Born in England                                 -1.628        -5.91
Born in Ireland                                 -0.983        -3.73
Born in Germany                                 -1.666        -5.86
Born in Scotland                                -1.039        -3.06
Born in France or Switzerland                   -l_337        -3.34
Born in Other Foreign Countries                 -0.974        -2.79
Native-Born Migrants Across State Lines           0.511        2.47
Served During French and Indian War             -0.389        -2.13
Foreign-Born and Served During Fl War           -0.591        -2.53
Born in South and Served During Fl War          -0.764        -1.92
Native-Born Urban and Served During Fl War        0.782        1.39
                                      —22-

(or more precisely, over the two samples). For those variables where there

was a dramatic change, a literal interpretation of the size of the coefficient

would be misleading, since it will, for the most part, only reflect the average

impact of the variable. In other cases, the combined sample may yield improved

estimates of the effects of variables, due to having more observations.

     The regression was primarily designed to determine, after adjusting for

all of the relevant factors we can, the amount of increase in the final heights

of various groups between the wars. The results indicate that the mean terminal

heights of northern, native-born recruits, born in rural areas, increased about

0.4 inches, of southern native-born recruits increased 1.1 inches (0.389+0.764),

and that of foreign-born soldiers rosé about 1.0 inches (0.389+0.591). These

figures imply that the rural northerners were growing at a respectable, but

not unusual, rate of 0.7 inchesper generation, while the mean final height Of

southeiners was increasing at: the remarkable, for such an early'period, rate of

1.4 inches per generation. Thus, the multivariate analysis has not altered the

qualitative findings obtained from the simple comparison of the distributions of

height for the various groups. It has, however, narrowed the gap in the implied

rates of increase of final heights between the North and the South.

        The rural northern rate of increase in final heights is augmented by

multivariate analysis, because it is abstracted from the urban experience. The

regression indicates that the stature of urban native-born recruits declined in

absolute terms, between the wars, at a rate of 0.7 inches per generation. If

one computes the rate of increase of final heights for all northerners, both

urban and rural born, the rural figure is reduced to a more modest amount of

0.45 inches per generation.

     The regression results imply that the stature of the foreign born increased

substantially more than that of the northern native born, and nearly as much as

that of the southerners. This is rather surprising, as the available data on

the British military might suggest lower rates of growth. One possible
                                       -23-




explanation is that the ethnic mix of the foreign-born category shifted towards

greater representation of well-nourished groups. There is a small increase in

the proportion of Irish born in our sample between the wars, but it appears

unlikely that this could account for much of the estimated effect. It would

seem more likely that there may have been a change in some unmeasured background

characteristic of the foreign born. Perhaps there was a change in the pattern

of migration, such that a greater proportion of the foreign born in the

Revolutionary military had arrived in America while they were young (a shift

towards more migration by young families). In this way, their heights could

have been influenced more by food supply conditions in the colonies than in

the lands of their birth. Furthermore, it appears likely that some of the

foreign born in the South benefited from the improved circumstances in that

region.

          As we discussed above, there is a possibility that our results are

affected by sample selection bias. Although a preliminary examination of the

distrubtion of heights suggested that any truncation or "censoring" which might have

occurred is probably of a minor magnitude for native-born groups, it should be
noted that such problems with our sample would be likely to produce

underestimates of the differences in mean terminal heights between groups

This analysis would be relevant if the truncation decision based on height was

applied equally across sub-populations and that all of these groups were

characterized by the same degree of dispersion in heights. Both of these

conditions would seem to be reasonable assumptions and would tend to

imply that the regression coefficients would bebiased toward zero.
                                      -24-


If truncation occurred below some specific level of height, then the sample

mean terminal heights of all sub_populations would be biased upwards as
                                                       the bias associated with the
estimators of the true population-Values. However,

sample mean heights would be greater for the shorter groups, because larger

proportions of their distributions would be subject to truncation (the

argument is similar for right tail truncation). Therefore, analysis of the

unadjusted heights will be likely to yield lower-bound estimates of the

differences in stature between groups. The coefficients in our regressions

are underestimates of the effects (in absolute value) of the respective

variables, implying that the significant differences observed are not simply

consequences of this type of sample selection bias.

     Since the collection of data for the sample has not yet been completed,

our results must be labelled tentative.      Nevertheless, the analysis of the
                                                                     unlikely
height-by-age data has yielded several important findings which seem
                                       striking of these discoveries is that
 to be overturned. Perhaps the most
                                              modern heights by the time of the
 native-born men appear to have approached
                                        the South. Americans seem to have been
 American Revolution, particularly in
                                                                         Itis
 about two to four inches taller tan their European contemporaries.
                                     the North and the South were characterized
 also of substantial interest that

                           of increase in final height during the inter-war
 by very different rates
                                                                populations
 period. After the French and Indian War, when the two regional
                                       the much more rapid growth of southerners
 had been of roughly equal stature,
                               While the northern rate of increase of final
 opened a gap between them.
                                               the southern rate was twice that.
 heights was less than the British figure,
                                                                         to what
  The modest record of the North, in total, is partially attributable
                                                          of the urban-born
  appears to have been an absolute decline in the stature
                                                              and North-South
  population. These developments generated large urban-rural
                                                                      and significance
  differentials in height, which came to be of much greater magnitude

  than the variation across occupational classes.
                                      -25-


II.   Immigration   and Migration


      Collection of the colonial muster rolls has provided us with one of the most

extensive sources of data on the movement of colonists across oceans and borders

in the 18th Century. Most observations in the two samples include information on

nativity, which allows us to study the ethnic composition of the militias.
                                                          recruits in the two sam-
Tables 6 and 7 tabulate the birthplaces of foreign-born

ples. Because of the large differences in ethnic composition between different

colonies, these data must be examined colony by colony.   Some common characteris-

tics emerge from a general consideration of the two periods, however. One, by

far the most striking, is the large percentage of foreign born in nearly every
                                                over-representation of the Scotch-
colony (see Table 5); another is the apparent
                                                       that many of the native born
Irish among the foreign born, especially considering

must be one or two generations removed from that same stock.
                                                                   from Table 7.
      The settlement patterns of particular nationalities emerge

 We see a concentration of Irish born (by far the most numerous group in the

 Revolutionary militias) especially in Pennsylvania and Maryland. Virginia was

 a more popular destination for the English, although many also settled in Mary-

 land and Pennsylvania. The major non_English-speaking nationalities--Germans,

 French, and Swiss--appeared in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.    Finally, those

 born in Scotland turned up in New York and North Carolina. The comparison of

 regional concentrations of immigrants in Table 8 is perhaps more meaningful for

 our purpose, since it highlights the overwhelming attraction to the Middle Atlantic

  region of the immigrants to the American colonies.   This domination holds in every

 major ethnic category, but particularly for the Irish and Germans, three-fourths

 of whom were found, in our sample, in those three colonies.      Although the

  sample from the Revoluition contains fewer foreign immigrants than

 the French and Indian War sample, some of this difference can be explained by the
                                      -26-

                                     TABLE 5

                FOREIGN BORN AS PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL ENLISThIENT



          French     Indian War                  American Revolution

          New York         47%                   Massachusetts    14%
          Pennsylvania      68%                  Connecticut       5%
          Virginia          50%                  New York         10%
          Maryland         42%                   Pennsylvania     69%
                                                 Delaware         38%
                                                 Maryland         56%
                                                 Virginia         18%
                                                 North Carolina    7%
                                                 South Carolina   16%




selection of colonies comprising the samples. The earlier period draws heavily from

Pennsylvania,      New York, and Virginia. The colonies that appear in the sample

from the Revolution include the Carolinas, Massachusetts, and Connecticut, which

received comparatively few Europeans during this era. That the Revolutionary army
enjoyed more general participation of the population, and is characterized by

a much higher socio-economic composition, may also account for a portion of

the decline in the percentage of foreign born.

     Pennsylvania is thought to have received nearly half the immigrants to the

thirteen colonies during the middle 18th Century, and accordingly its foreign

component is the highest of any colony sampled. Although the proportion of for-

eign born remains nearly the same over the two periods, it does undergo a slight

shift in composition by nationality: numbers of English born doubled relative

to Scotch-Irish and Germans. Since these three nationalities were not distri-

buted evenly across the colony, it seems plausible that the different loci of the

fighting in the two wars might account for this--the earlier war having been

fought largely on the frontier, where the Scotch-Irish predominated.

     However, a comparison of the ethnic breakdown of the youngest age groups
                                                         TABLE 6
                                                                                                              FRENCH
                              DISTIRUBTION OF RESIDENCE BY NATIVITY:     FOREIGN-BORN SOLDIERS                INDIAN   WAR
                                                    Country   of Birth
Place of                                                                   France1      West
Enlistment            England        Ireland     Scotland      Germany    Switzerland   Indies         Other       TOTAL
                         16             7            2              3           0             0           0             28
Maryland       a)      .S7            .25          .07            .11
               b)      .29            .10          .11            .15
                       710           1365          190           830         122             41         175        3433
New York       a)      .21            .40          .06           .24          .04        .01            .05
               b)      .08            .13          .07           .27          .50       1.00            .20
                        33            267           22             87           4             0          11            424
Pennsylvania    a)     .08            .63          .05            .21         .01                       .03
                b)     .07            .46          .15            .52         .30            —          .23
                       184            134           70              8           2             0          19            417
Virginia       a)      .44            .32          .17            .02         --             —          .05
               b)      .55            .32          .66            .07         .21                       .56
  TOTAL                943           1773          284           928         128             41         205        4302
               a)    Proportion of row total
               b)    Weighted proportion of column total; see "Notes to Tables      9-'1l"   and   Table 11
                                                          TABLE   7
                                                                                                                  ANERICAN
                                 DISTRIBUTION OF RESIDENCE BY NATIVITY:       FOREIGN-BORN SOLDIERS               REVOLUTION
                                                       Country of Birth
      Place of                                                                      France3
      Enlistment               Ireland     England     Germany        Scotland    Switzerland    Other           TOTAL
                                                          45             7             11            15           165
                                 44           43
                                                         .27            .04           .07            .09   (b)    .07
      Massachusetts     a)      .27          .26
                                                         .16            .04           .54            .23
                        b)      .03          .06
                                 26               3        6             8                                         47
      New York                   55          .06         .13            .17                          .09   (b)    .04
                        a)
                                             .01         .04            .09                          .12
                        b)      .04
                                                                                        3             5           380
                                227           66          67             12
                                                         .18                          .01            .01   (b)    .40
                                .60          .17                        .03
      Pennsylvania      a)                                                                           .20
                                             .26         .62            .18           .38
                        b)      .47
                                                  2        3              2             1              1           46
                                 37
      Delaware          a)      .80          .04         .07            .04           .02            .02   (b)    .03
                                .05           -          .02            .02           .08            .03
Co
                        b)
C'4                             126           80          11             12             0              5          234
                                             .34         .05            .05                          .02   (b) .20
      Maryland          a)      .54                                                     —
                                                         .08            .15                          .17
                        b)      .22          .26
                                              47           4              5             0              3           80
                                 21
                                             .59         .05            .06                          .04   (b)    .17
                                .26
      Virginia          a)
                        b)      .09          .37         .07            .15            —             .24
                                               6           0              3                                        42
                                 33
                                             .14           -            .07             -              -   (b)    .05
      South Carolina     a)     .79                        -                            —             —
                        b)      .08          .03                        .05
                                  4               1        0              7             0              0           12
                                                           -            .58                                (b)    .04
      North Carolina     a)     .33          .08
                                                           —            .30             -             —
                        b)      .02          .01
                                                                         56            15             35         1015
          TOTAL                 522         250          137
           a)    Proportion of row total
           b)    Weighted proportion of column total; see "Notes to Tables 9-11" and Table      11
                                                          TABLE 8
                                                                                                      AMERICAN
                                        REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF THE FOREIGN BORN                     REVOLUTION
                                                   Country   of Birth
                                                                          France,        Total          Total
Region of
Enlistment                   Ireland   England   Germany     Scotland   Switzerland   Immigration    Population
NORTHEAST                      .07       .07        .20         .13         .54           .11              .30
(Ma.,   Ct.,   N.Y.)
MIDDLE ATLANTIC                .74       .52        .72         .35         .46           .63              .27
(Pa., De., Md.)
SOUTH                          .19       .41        .07         .50                       .26              .43
(Va., N.C., S.C.)
               Figures are aggregations of the weighted averages reported for individual colonies in row (b)
               of Table 7.  See "Note to Tables 9-il" for an explanation of the weighting procedure.
               The last column is the proportion of the total population of the 9 colonies in the sample
               residing in the three colonies of each region.
                                          -30-



  in the earlier war with the group 20 years older during the Revolution21 suggests

  that   the shift was a result of a change in patterns of immigration, rather than
  a change in the tendency of a particular nationality to enlist. The ethnic com-
  position remains   the same in the two wars for the same cohort. Virginia and

  New York provide much sharper contrasts. Although the numbers of foreigners

  decline drastically in both colonies, it is the English and Germans responsible for

  the drop in New York, while the Scotch-Irish fell most precipitously in Virginia.

  Since changing patterns of immigration could not be of a magnitude great enough to

  explain such discrepancies, some changes in the propensities to enlist must have

  occurred.

          In the remaining colonies, the proportion of foreigners decreases
as the distance from the Middle Atlantic region increases. On the northern end,

only the presence of Germans in western Massachusetts indicates an inflow into

New England. In South Carolina, the small number of foreigners (particularly

considering the much shorter 7iistory of settlement in that colony) seems to im-

ply that the ranks of the militia were peopled more heavily by migrants who had

come down the overland route through the Appalachians, rather than through the

port of Charleston, and furthermore that the process of removing to the frontier

after entering the country generally consumed more than one generation.

     Pennsylvanias large component of foreigners--over two-thirds in both wars--

is excessive even for the colony likely to have had the largest proportion. Simi-

larly, in most of the other colonies, rates of immigration implied by our sample

far exceed what seems plausible, even considering the huge inflows in the middle

18th Century. We cannot escape the conclusion that the foreign born are greatly

over-represented in the colonial militia, although rankings of the colonies by

the percentage of foreign born coincide roughly with our prior expectations.22

Furthermore, it appears that some nationalities are disproportionately represented

relative to other foreign-born groups. Within some colonies one can appeal to ad

hoc explanations of these strange changes and persistent patterns: political
                                      -31-


loyalties, cultural antagonisms, language barriers, and religion could be cited.

It is obvious that, in both wars, the Scotch-Irish are too numerous in nearly

every colony, and- the Germans.. and English relatively scarce even in those

colonies iii which they are thought to have predominated.


Geographical Mobility


     The colonial muster rolls offer one of the broadest sources so far examined

of the extent and direction of migration between colonies. Muster rolls often

include both place of birth (town and province) and place of residence at the

time of enlistment. Residence is reported for most of the recruits in the Revo-

lutionary sample. For the other soldiers, including nearly all of those in the

French and Indian sample, place of enlistment is treated as residence. We are

thUs presented with two points on the migratory paths of each individual, and an

imaginary line connecting them. Three problems with the interpretation of these

implied routes of migration deserve consideration.

     First, we recognize many of the inherent biases in our sample that make

inferences about the behavior of the population as a whole risky. The over-

representation of the foreign born, of certain occupational classes, of low-
                                                                               -
status and probably lower-class members of society is discussed below.

 The biases may work in several directions with respect to 'the ques-
tion of mobility. The preponderance of younger men (average age was between 25

and 27 in both wars) means that many had not yet wandered as far as their feet

were likely to take them before they settled down--or died. On the other hand,

 since the militia drew what was in many respects an unrepresentative subset of

 the population, it might be argued that the recruits were likely to be more

 footloose than the typical colonist. These possibilities suggest that one should

 draw conclusions about the magnitude of migratory flows with some caution; they do

 not, however, convince us to doubt the evidence bearing on the direction of these

 flows.
                                       -32-

    A second limitation of the sample consists in the present lack of data from

particular colonies. The French and Indian War sample, although numerically the

larger, draws primarily from New York, with significant numbers available only as

far away as Pennsylvania and Virginia. The sample from the Revolution includes

at least a hundred men residing in each colony except Rhode Island, New Jersey,

and Georgia, and scattered recruits from these as well. Whereas we can discuss

the flow of migrants, no matter what their origin, into each colony represented,

we have only a partial record of the eventual destinations of men born in a parti-

cular colony, especially in the earlier war.

     Finally, we understand that regional boundaries may in some instances play

a greater role in migration than political boundaries; in the South and the Middle

Atlantic regions, these do not coincide. The more interesting divisions may have

been between the coastal, piedmont, and mountain areas--geographic rather than

political distinctions, and considerably more cumbersome to investigate.     Shifts

in population within each colony for the most part escape our scrutiny also,

     Traditional accounts of inter-colonial migration trace the shift in popula-

tion from the original coastal settlements inland, pushing the frontiers back,

and place particular emphasis on the flow from New England southward and west-

ward, down the Appalachian valleys. Studies of migration typically find the

activity to be gradual--most people do not move very far from home. The first

descriptions of inter-colonial migration in America, however, sketched a prominent

role for New Englanders in the settlement of the frontiers in the mid-l8th

Century. Little evidence existed to aid the historian in determining exactly

how far these typical pioneers pushed away from their origins.23

     Our   results   provide some mild contradictions to some of these traditional

views. Tables 9 and 10 categorize residents of nine colonies according to

birthplace. Each resulting cell is further described, where appropriate, by two
                                       -33-

measures, corresponding to the two possible points of view in examining this

issue. The first--row (a), the proportion of all enlistees that originated in a

particular colony--simpl tells where residents of an area came from. The

second measure--row (b)--is slightly more complicated. Its purpose is to focus

on the place of birth and indicate what destinations, among those colonies sur-

veyed, claimed men born in some colony. The column headed "Pennsylvania," for

instance, distributes all men born in that colony by eventual residence. The

statistic described here tells that, in the case of recruits in the Revolu-

tionary army in the colonies we surveyed, half of those born in Pennsylvania

remained in Pennsylvania, 8% moved to Maryland, 24% to Virginia, and 15% ended

up in the Carolinas. These are not simple percentages, because sample sizes

vary greatly between colonies, and the populations of the colonies themselves

differ. For instance, the column underneath the heading "New Jersey" in Table 9

seems to suggest at first glance that by far the most New Jersey-born French and

Indian War recruits went to New York. Weighting the numbers by population and

sample size, however, reveals that proportionately far more New Jersey natives

migrated to Pennsylvania than to New York. For more information on the weights

used to derive this statistic, see "Notes to Tables 9-11"; this note also contains

admonitions on the limitations of these numbers and suggestions for their inter-

pretation.

     These warnings aside, what do these data inform us about patterns of inter-

colonial migration? A glance at Tables 9 and 10 reveals nothing startling; they

tend rather to reinforce the traditional accounts of the direction of flow. Cer-

tain conclusions stand out, however. First, no great shift in direction of flows

occurred between the two wars (magnitudes are not comparable). The observed pat-

terns are very clearly discernible; almost all movement was southward, or in some

cases westward. Such large numbers of migrants appear on the muster rolls that

the colonial American population (or at least that segment of the population en-

 listing in the military) must have been extremely mobile.
                                                      TABLE 9
                                                                                                     FRENCH
                                                                      NATIVE-BORN SOLDIERS           INDIAN WAR
                            DISTRIBUTION OF RESIDENCE BY NATIVITY:
                                                    Colony of Birth
Place of                                                                                     TOTAL
                     New Eng.       N.Y.     N.J.     PA        MD    VA    CAROLINAS
Enlistment
                                                      116       21    18        10            3859
                     1017           2417     222
                      .26            .63     .06      .03     .01
New York       a)
                                                                               .29
               b)     .83            .98
                                                      164        6     -4        0             203
                        6              1      22
                                                                      .02        —
Pennsylvania    a)    O3               -     .11      .81     .03
                b)                   .01     .50      .85     .02     .01
                      .09
                        0              0       0                36      3        0              39
                                                                      .08        —
               a)                      —                      .92
Maryland                                                              .05
               b)                                             .89
                                               7        16      21    372        1             422
                        4              1
                                                                                 -
                      .01              -      .02      .04    .05     .88
Virginia       a)
                                     .01      .22      .11.     .09   .95       .71
               b)     .08
                                             251       296       84   398        12           4525
   TOTAL             1027           2419
               a)    Proportion of row total
                                                                        Tables 9-il"
               b)    Weighted proportion of column total; see "Notes to
                                                              TABLE    10,
                              DISTRIBUTION OF RESIDENCE BY NATIVITY:               NATIVE-BORN SOLDIERS             AMERICAN
                                                                                                                    REVOLUTION
                                                           Colony of Birth
     Place of
     Enlistment              New-Eng.    N.Y.         N.J.        PA          DE      MD     VA       NC    SC   TOTAL
                               866         12          1           2           0        1        2     3     0
     Massachusetts      a)     .98        .01                                                                     887
                        b)     .48        .02     .01
                                74          2          0          -U           0        0              0     0
     Connecticut
                        a)     .97        .03                                                    -     -           76
                        b)     .41        .03
                               102        312      11              0           0        2
                                                                                                                  427
     New York           a)     .24        .73     .03
                    .   b)     .10        .92     •16                                 .01
                                 3          1      22             92           2       11        0     1     0
                                                                                                                  132
     Pennsylvaiia       a)     .02          -     .17            .70         .01      .08
                        b)     -           -      .46            .48         .06      .05     -      .01
L1
                                   1       0           3          12          51       6         1    0     0
                                                                 .16                  .08   .01       —     —
     Delaware           a)     .01                .04                        .70
                                                                             .87      .02    -        —     —
                        h)                        .04            .04
                                   0       0           4          17           0     154         3     0     2
                                                                                                                  180
     tryland                               :      :              :            :      :      .2        :    :
                                           2           6          25           0                       0     0
                                 2                                                    18    320
     Virginia           a)     .01       .01      .02            .07          —      .05    .86
                        b)     .01       .02      .23            .24          —      .16    .72       —     —
                                   1       0           0           3           1       2     41      102     1
     North Carolina           .01                      —         .02         .01     .01    .27      .68   .01    151
                        a)
                               -                                 .04         .08     .02    .13      .90   .05
                        b)
                                   0       1           1          20           0      15    107       26   48
     South Carolina                                                           —      .07    .49      .12   .22    218
                        a)                                       .09
                                                 .05             .11                  08    .14      .10   .92
                        b)
       TOTAL                 1049        330          48        171          54      209    474      132   51    2518
                        a)   Proportion of row total
                        b)   Weighted proportion of col. total; see'Notes to Tables 9-11"
                                      -36-




                              Notes to Tables 9-11


      The weights above consist of each sample's size divided by the population
                                                  refers to enlistments in an
of the colony in the appropriate year. ("Sample"
                                           is then divided into the numbers in
individual cälony's militia.) This weight
each row.

      If N1 is the number of militiamen enlisting in colony i born in colony j,
then dividing the weight into this number will give
                                           =
                                             Xj
(where N is the sample size and Pj is the population of the colony). If Ni/Nj
is an unbiased estimate of the nativity of the population, then Xii would
represent the number of people in all of colony i born in colony j. Of course,
                                       since it describes characteristics of
we have reasons to expect that Njj/N,
a distinct subset of the population_-young, male, probably not representative
                                                 of that population--would not
of the class, occupational, and ethnic structure
be unbiased. Hence we have reversed the  focus of this number by weighting all
elements in column j so that they sum to one:

                          Xii /      =               = 1

                                              elements of the column by assum-
The use of P in this measure standardizes all
ing thatthe militias of each colony represent roughly similar proportions of
the populations of those colonies.
                                                 follows: The number in row (a)
      The results are then to be interpreted as
                                          who eventually ended up in one of the
tells, of all militiamen bin in ciumn j
                                                 went to each. Because not all
colonies listed along the side, what proportion
                                                     these numbers are not com-
colonies are sampled, yet every column sums to one,
parable across rows but only down columns, since they depend so heavily on the
particular subset of colonies included in each sample. If the column heading
                                       intersection of the two can of course be
is also a row heading, the cell at the
                                             remained in their home state than
expected to dominate the column, if more men
moved on. If, on the other hand, no row corresponds to a particular column,
                                              of men born in that colony who emi-
then the percentages here described express,                             in each.
grated to those places listed on the rows, the proportions who ended up

       This statistic is a trifle veiled, and should be handled with some skep-
                                                 number it gain undue authority.
 ticism lest by its very existence as a concrete
 It becomes less useful the fewer the colonies listed on the rows, since likely
 destinations are thereby excluded.
                                            -37—


                                            TABLE 11

                                  WEIGHTS FOR TABLES 9    10


          French   Indian War                          American Revolution
       (based on 1760 population)                   fbased on 1780 population

                       .0619270, .0622514                Mass.*   .0039162, .0044523
            Penn.      .0034131                          Conn.    .0003870
            Va.        .0024696                          N.Y.     .0022513
            Md.        .0004129                          Penn.    .0015643,.00l70l8
                                                         Del.     .0026641
       *ere two weights are listed, the                  Md.      .0016865,.00206l3
       second was used for the tables of
                                                         Va.      .0008494
       foreign born; in several colonies,
       large numbers of native born whose                N.C.     .0006034
       colony of birth was unknown had to
       be excluded from the calculation.                 S.c.     .0014444, .0014500


       Source: U.S. Historical Statistics, colonial Times to 1957




       During the French and Indian War, geographically the more limited of the two

samples, the only significant movement that shows up is southward. New Englanders

reached New York; occasionally some passed through to Pennsylvania and Virginia.

It is conceivable, though we would consider it unlikely, that New Yorkers could

have moved back into New England, undetected in our sample; what appears here,

however, implies that they were more likely to have remained within their home

state, by the time they enlisted, than their neighbors the Pennsylvanians.

New Jerseyites moved west intO Pennsylvania, and Pennsylvanians and Marylanders

moved south into Virginia. We cannot tell whether Virginians were also moving

south, but we know there was no significant northward movement. Looked at from

the other point of view, New York was populated by a large minority of New Englan-

ders, Pennsylvania mostly by Pennsylvanians (excluding consideration of foreigners)

and   Virginia   by a minority of migrants from Middle Atlantic colonies.
                                    -38-


    A more complete picture is suggested by the Revolutionary sample,    The pro-

portion enlisting in the colony of birth is still slightly over-estimated (be-

cause of the three missing colonies) although this error is no doubt small. In

any case, the surprising fact is how small this proportion turns out to be in

several colonies. Pennsylvania, in particular, kept a hold on only half the

colonial militiamen born within its borders. In contrast, 92% of those born

in New Yárk remained to enlist there.

     Some of the differences in mobility between colonies can be explained by

the direction of migration. The muster rolls clearly indicate that the man

who travelled north was a rare individual, with the exception of the few Mary-

landers landing in Pennsylvania. (This is indicated in the matrix presented

in Table 10 by the many empty cells lying above the diagonal.)    New Englanders

moved to New York. A few New Yorkers reversed this'f low-, but interestingly

none showed up in Pennsylvania; mostly, they didn't leave the colony. New

Jersey natives again moved south and west. Pennsylvania natives, not only

the most mobile, appeared the farthest from home of any sizable group in the

sample. Delaware natives were exceptional in the region in their attachment

 to the home colony. As we proceed south, the proportions not migrating from

 the colony of their birth increase. This is expected, given that this is the

 region gaining native-born migrants, and at the "end of the line" along the

 migratory route.

      Certainly there is little justification for projecting the numbers of migrating

militiainenonto the total colonial population. However, beyond the surprisingly

high rates of migration that they imply, they indicate interesting regional

variations. The colonies lying between Pennsylvania and Virginia seem separated
                                                            thoroughly with those
 from those to the north, although they mixed populations

 to the south. (The exception to this is the isolation of Delaware.) Although
                                                               natives of these
 New England appeared to be losing population into New York,
                                        -39-



colonies did not play the role often attributed to them in tales of colonial

settlement. It was rather the natives of the mid-Atlantic region who opened

the South. Further investigation might probe migration within colonies--at least

for New York and Pennsylvania- -for clues to the greatly different propensities

to emigrate that these colonies engendered in their populations. The suggestion

that New Yorkers directed their settlement into upstate areas seems dubious in

this period of hostilities that inhibited expansion of the northwest frontier.

Our regression results, which calculate a greater average height for New Yorkers

than for Pennsylvanians (almost as tall, in fact, as southerners) suggests that

the economic differentials that might have attracted New Yorkers to make the move

did not exist. One further possibility is that the greater flow of new immigrants

from abroad into Pennsylvania pushed more residents of that state to seek open

areas to the south.

     A breakdown of migrants into age groups allows us to search for a typical

age of migration. Although militiamen were predominantly young, we have a

number of observations of men in their early fifties, making it possible for us

to correlate age and   mobility.   The results indicate that most of those who

would eventually leave their home colonies did so by the age of 20. A simple

average shows that about a third of the total native born became migrants;

about a fifth of the lS-to-17-year-olds and a quarter of the 18 and 19-year-

olds had already moved; by the 25-30 age group, the proportion of migrants

exceeds that of the average, indicating that almost all the migrating took

place before the age of 25. This holds for both wars, although French and

Indian migrants seem to have waited one or two years longer than their Revolu-

tionary counterparts before moving.

     When foreigners are sorted similarly, their proportion remains constant

beginning with the 25-30 age group. Although accounting for half the enlis-

tees in the earlier war, they comprise only a third of the youngest age group
                                         -40-



but 70% of the oldest. (The pattern is the same but the percentages lower for

the Revolution.) If immigrants were arriving beyond the age of 30, they appar-

ently were not enlisting. Another possibility is that higher mortality rates

among the foreign born, compared to the natives, disguised further immigration.

     One   interesting   fact that emerges from the age-mobility correlation is

that those emigrants that proceeded in the typical direction (west and south)

were in general younger than the few going against the predominate flow. This

latter group also differed from the mainstream in that they were more likely

 to be sailbs and not at all likely to be farmers.

                                                           of the recruits from each
      In Table 12, we report the occupational structure
                                                    substantial increase in the socio-
 colony. As is immediately evident, there is a

 economic status of the enlisted men between the two wars.      In the aggregate,

 14.9% and 24.7% of the Revolutionary soldiers, native born and foreign born

 respectively, were laborers, as opposed to 43.6% and 40.2% of these groups
                                                                    somewhat over colonies,
 during the earlier period. Although these percentages vary

 and thus the precise figures are sensitive to the geographical balance, the

 evidence does not appear to sustain the view of a Revolutionary army dominated

 by lower class individuals. Considering that laborers constituted a significant

 proportion of the agricultural labor force, that many artisans farmed part-time,

 and that the data refer to the bottom ranks of the military, the number of

 laborers seems small.

      It should not be surprising that the foreign born were less likely than the

 native born to be farmers and more likely to be artisans and laborers. Even

  after adjusting for urban residence, their occupational status is loer. They

  appear to have had difficulty in immediately acquiring land, because they were

  disproportionately represented among the urban residents, and this foreign-born

                                                       foreigners     in rural areas.
  urban population was somewhat younger than the

  Of the four nationalities represented in large numbers      (Irish, English, Germans,

  and Scots) only Scots show a significant number of farmers among their
                                                                 *
                                                      Table 12

                                             ThE DISTRIBUTION OF SOLDIERS BY
                                                     OCCUPATIONAL CLASS


AMERICAN REVOLUTION
                                                                                          Unknown
                                   Farmers        Laborers    Professionals    Seamen    Occupation   TOTAL
                       Artisans
New England

                                    529             198               3         44        166         1199
    Native Born         259
                        25.1%       51.2%           19.2%            0.3%      4.3%
                         43          20              23               -          12        71          169
    Foreign Born
                        43.9%       20.4%           23.5%                      12.2%

Middle Atlantic

                                    236              96               -           5       442         1040
    Native Born         261
                        43.6%       39.5%           16.1%             -         0.8%
                        218          60             119               5           6       303          711
    Foreign Born
                        53.4%       14.7%           29.2%            1.2%       1.5%

South

                                                                                  4       366          747
    Native Born         10.1        270               6
                        26.5%       70.9%            1.6%             -         1.0%
                         34          31               -               -           4        64           133
    Foreign Born
                        49.3%       44.9%             -               -         5.8%

TOTAL

    Native Born         621         1035             3Q0              3          53       974         2986
                        30.1%        51.4%          14.9%            0.1%       2.6%
                        295          111            142               5          22        438         1013
    Foreign Born
                        51.3%        19.3%          24.7%            0.9%       3.8%
                   ,




*                                                                  whose occupations are known, within a
    The percentage terms indicate the percentage of those recruits
                                                                    Some of the recruits whose places of
    row category, who belong to a particular occupational class.
    birth are unreported are included among the native born.
                                                 Table 12a

                                       THE DISTRIBUTION OF SOLDIERS BY
                                              OCCUPATIONAL CLASS




FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR

                                                                                       Unknown
                            Artisans   Farmers    Laborers   Professionals   Seainn   Occupation   TOTAL

New York, Pennsylvania

  Native Born                1567       462
                             40.4%      11.4%      47.7%        0.1%
                                        124        1601         32                      206        3854
  Foreign Born               1507
                             41.3%       3.4%      43.9%        0.9%         10.5%


Maryland, North Carolina,
 Virginia
                              153       241          16          5             3         47         465
  Native Born
                             36.6%      57.8%       3.8%        1.2%          0.7%
                              193       146          35          8            37         26         445
  Foreign Born
                             46.1%      34.8%       8.4%        1.9%          8.8%


TOTAL

  Native Born                1720       703        1943
                             38.6%      15.8%      43.6%        0.2%           1.9%
                                        270        1636         40            421        232       4299
  Foreign Born               1700
                                              -43-


ranks (just under a fifth, in both wars). Artisans and laborers account for

about 80% of the total in each of the other three groups, split evenly between

the two classes in the aggregate; the English were found more heavily among the

artisans and the Irish and Germans among the laborers.    A wide variety of Euro-

pean countries is found in the list of the remaining countries that contributed

                                          four mentioned above accounted for over
to the colonial militias, a!tltough the

90% of the foreign born enhistees. Many of the other 10% hailed from either

Mediterranean or Scandinavian countries, and of these roughly two-thirds of

each group were seamen and the remaining third laborers. This implies that

for residents of countries other than those in which a history of immigration

to America had established a network of information and ensured a continual

 stream, the most common way to end up in the New World was to be exposed through

 travel.

      Of the native born, laborers and seamen were more likely to have left

 their colony of birth, whereas farThersand artisans tended to remain.    In Vir-

 ginia, for instance, 81% of artisans and 87% of farmers enlisting in that col-

 ony were born there, compared to only 38% of the laborers. One possible inter-

 pretation of this is also that, •whatever the original occupation,   migrants

 became laborers in their new homes.

      An intriguing picture emerges from the simple sorting of enhistees into

 rural and urban categories. If the patterns observed in the militias held

 among the population at large, the cities maintained large congregations of for-

 eign immigrants, while losing much of the population born in the city to the

 countryside. 30% of the foreign born during the first war and 24% in the later

 war listed a city (with population of 3,000 or more) as residence. In contrast,

 only 9% and 3% of the native born in the respective wars were city-dwellers.

 Among the latter, about two-thirds of those born in American cities moved to rijral

 areas, while only a very small fraction (7% and 2%) of the natives of rural
                                   -44-


areas moved into cities. In both periods the number moving out of the cities

exceed the number moving in from rural areas, if only slightly.

    The fraction of the American population dwelling in urban areas did not

increase during this era,24 but the total population was growing. Since it

is difficult to argue higher rates of natural increase in urban areas the

deficit must have been filled by foreigners. One pictures the immigrants

arriving in colonial ports, replacing natives who were streaming out into

the countryside. Most foreign immigrants also sojourned in the cities only

a short time, if at all; their children probably contributed to the out-

migration of the natives.

     Although the scenario suggested here is vividly demonstrated in the militia

data, there is a possibility that it is spurious, The major ports of New England's

coast emptied drastically during the Revolution; Boston's population fell by about

13,000 between 1770 and 1776. If militia recruits living in Boston, Newport, or

Providence before the British blockade re-settled inland and then enlisted, giv-

ing their new homes as their place of residence, then both the movement out of the

cities and the suppressed migration into the cities would have been an artifact

of this aberrant decade. However, no such population shifts could be invoked to

explain the similar pattern observed in the French and Indian War. Together, the

two samples present a rather convincing story of urban-rural migration.

     Migration studies typically explain direction and extent of flows by relating

them to differences in per capita income. Since we lack such information and since the

the first part of thIs paper is concerned with calculation of heights for different subset:

of the population, it might prove interesting to compare the findings of the two

sections. Intercolonial immigration correlates rather well with differences in

average heights between colonies. Those areas receiving migrants net--New Yok

 and especially the South--registered the tallest recruits. New England and the

Middle Atlantic colonies, most of which were net losers of native-born population,
                                        -45-


averaged significantly shorter. With respect to foreign immigration, this pattern

disappears. The colonies receiving the lion's share of Europeans were those in

the "shorter" Middle Atlantic region.

     It is tempting to conclude that correlation between average heights and

native mobility implies that heights are proxying for per capita income levels,
                                               information to choose their destina-
and to assume that foreigners lacked enough

tions on this basis. However, there is another possibility that may explain part

of this. The Middle Atlantic region received the largest inundation of foreigners,

and all foreigners averaged an inch or two shorter than native Americans. If

nutritional effects carry through to a subsequent generation (as there is some

                                                                   for a generation
evidence they may), immigrant parents may have been responsible

of short children, even if diets were similar across colonies.     An equally

plausible alternative is that the foreign immigrants in that region produced

smaller children because, due to their own lack of resources (not to a poor

choice of place of settlement), they earned low incomes.
                                                   TABLE 13
                                                                                                  FRENCH
                          URBAN-RURAL CLASSIFICATIONS OF        MILITIA RECRUITS                  INDIAN WAR



             Foreign Born              Native Born            Native Born            Total      Unknown
                                           Rural                  Urban            Reporting   Nativity
                                                                                   Nativity


Rural             2273                     3215                    272               5760         177
Residence   a)      39%                      56%                     5%
            b)      71%                      93%                    74%



Urban              938                      255                    98                1291           7

Residence   a)      73%                      20%                     8%                                        C'
            b)      29%                       7%                    27%



Total
Reporting         3211                     3470                   370                7051
Residence



Unknown
                  1067                      657                    50
Residence




             a)   Percentage   of.   row total, excluding "Unknown"

             b)   Percentage of column total, excluding "Unknown"
                                                     TABLE 14
                                                                                                     AMERICAN
                                 URBAN-RURAL CLASSIFICATIONS OF MILITIA RECRUITS                     REVOLUT ION


                  Foreign Born         Native Born          Native Born           Total      Unknown
                                          Rural                Urban            Reporting   Nativity
                                                                                Nativity


Rural                365                  2130                  56                 2551        157
Residence   a)        14%                   84%                  2%
            b)        76%                   97%                 63%



Urban                114                   52                   32                  198         13
Residence   a)        58%                  26%                   1%
            b)        24%                   2%                  36%



Total
Reporting            479                 2182                   88                 2749
Residence




Unknown
                     534                  543                   15
Residence




            a)   Percentage of row total, excluding "Unknown"
            b)   Percentage of column total, excluding "Unknown"
                                      -48-

 Conclusions
       It shoiild be evident that the muster -rolls are a valuable source of
                                              r The information they contain can be
evidence for the study of colonial America.

employed to investigate a variety of issues beyond the obvious questions

related to the composition of the military.     There may be some problems

                                              serving in the military, or of
concerning the representatiVefleSs of those
                                                                    unusable.
our sample, but they are not so severe as to render the information

They can be handled effectively by utilizing prior knowledge and careful

consideration of which variables might be affected by the potential biases.

          There is now a substantial physiological literature, encompassing

                                                  that implies that height-by-age
both the descriptive and experimental schools,

datacanprovide a rather accurate index of the "average nutritional status"

of populations. If such inferences are valid, the pattern or systematic

 variation in height across places of birth and residence has potentially

exciting implications. The issue of what these apparent differences in

nutritional status reveal about relative income levels is especially intriguing.
                                               characterized colonial America,
 At the stage of economic development which
                                         of food would be a good indicator of the
 one might expect that the consumption

 standard of living. However, even if one disregards the possibility of

 dissimilar tastes, different conditions of food supply, reflected in relative

 prices, might provide an alternative explanation.
      -

          if
           one was simply comparing
                                     the heights of two populations at a single

                                 that a difference in terminal heights, and the
 point in time, one might argue
                                   had little to do with relative income levels.
 implied disparity in nutrition,
                                                                   differences
 In the case of the North and the South, for example, the obvious
                                   of the region, such as in crop mix or seasonal
 between the agricultural sectors
                                discrepancies in nutrition apart from income.
 patterns, might generate some
                                      -49-


In addition, there are other factors which could influence the demand for

food in specific areas and thus affect the nutritional status of the

populations involved. One of many candidates for such an agent is climate;

in Vie South, warmer temperatures may have encouraged greater consumption
                                               that amidst the virulent disease
of meat or protein. Another possibility is

pool of the South, individuals with a taste for highly nourishing diets

would have lower mortality, biasing the mean terminal height upward as

an e'-timate of the general population's level of nutrition, and, if such

tastes were conveyed to the next generation, natural selection would promote

the evolution of a new set of preferences toward food.

        Fortunately, we have information on the heights of the northern and

southern populations over time. Not only are the mean heights of the regions

changing, but they are changing at different rates. Although interpretations

 that emphasize differences in tastes or relative prices might predict a

 wedge between the heights of the regions, this class of arguments does not
                                               increases in height, over a short
 seem to adequately account for significant

 period, within one area. Similarly, they don't seem to offer a plausible

 alternative to at least part of the substantial discrepancy between northern

 and southern rates of increase of final height being attributable to change

 in relative income levels. This conclusion is bolstered by the observation

 that there were no significant changes in the relative prices of relevant

 commodities during the inter-war period.

         In our view, the growth in American final heights between the wars

 is well established, and has implications for the controversy on the extent

 oi colonial economic growth. That the southern rate of increase was so

 much   greater   than that of the North, and was impressive by any standard, suggests
                                     -50-



that this region may have been prospering during this period. That the northern

rate1 including all areas4 was small and positive, perhaps a bit smaller than

that of Britain, provides some support to those who perceive economic

stagnation in New England during these years. Urban populations seem to

be doing worse than any other segment of the society. This latter finding

might conceivably be a product of changes in the patterns of migration. A final

possibility is that the stature of the Revolutionary recruits (those near

age 25) in the sample may have picked up some of the effects of the economic

hardship which accompanied the early stages of the War, and was felt most

severely in northern urban areas.
        The levels of nutrition in the two regions have substantial

implications for the study of mortality during this era. The eighteenth

and early nineteenth centuries were characterized by the narrowing of sharp

interregional differences in mortality rates between New England and

the South.25Crude mortality rates in Massachusetts appear to have persisted

in the 15 to 25 per thousand range throughout this period, while

the rates for whites in the South declined from roughly 50 per thousand to

the vicinity of 25 per thousand.26The higher mean terminal heights in

the South would tend to dispel the notion that the higher southern mortality

rates were linked to lower levels of nutrition in that area. The data raise the

possibility that improvements in nutrition between the wars may have worked to

close the gap between the regional death rates by counteracting some of

the factors which contributed to producing higher mortality in the South

(     disease pooi, climate, etc.). One might also consider the

significance of the evidently high level of nutrition in the colonies

as a whole. Together with the regional patterns discussed above, this

piece of evidence would seem to support the hypothesis that other

factors besides nutrition were important in accounting for the dramatic
                                         -51-



decline of national mortality rates during the nfneteenth century. However,

the apparently superior levels of nutrition may provide a partial explanation of the

high fertility rates and low mortality rates, relative to Europe, which characterized

the early U.S. demographic experience.
                                    -52—
                                 Footnotes


          1. Fred Anderson is currently engaged in studying the Massachusetts

muster rolls from the French and Indian War period.   He has generously shared

his findings on patterns of migration with us, and they appear to be similar

to the results from our sample. A. T. Steegman, a biological anthropologist,

is also utilizing the colonial and revolutionary muster rolls to study height-

by-age profiles.
          2. The only quantitative estimate that we have located is contained

in Adam Seybert, Statistical Annals, Philadelphia, 1816, P. 631.
           3.   There have been several attempts at estimating the size of
 the American army during the War, but their range is wide and none of

 them is without problems. In 1790, Henry Knox, the Secretary of War,

 reported that there had been 396,000 total enlistments in the Continental

 Army and state militias during the War. This figure is recognized as

 grossly overinflated as a measure of the number of individuals involved

 because of multiple enlistments and the practice of meeting recruitment

 quotas by entering imaginary citizens on the rolls. The 184,000 - 250,000

  estimate compiled by the Department of Defense, and cited by Historical

  Statistics, was intended to apply to the number of different individuals

  who served in the "army, navy, and marine corps." Assuming that the

  state militias are included in this estimate, the inclusion of naval

  and marine forces may make the Department of Defense numbers inappropriate

  for our purpose of determining the number in the militia or Continental

  Army. Two scholars, Howard Peckham and Don Higginbotham, have studied

  this question in some depth, and characterize the Department of Defense

  figures as too high. Since the methods by which the estimate was calculated

  are not shown, their criticisms are based on inferenc about what the total

  enlistment of individuals could reasonably have been, given the size of

  the population. Both Peckham and Higginbotham (see Chapter 15 of

  Higginhotham, The War of American Independence, (New York, 1971),

  and Peckham, The War for Independence,, (Chicago, 1958), p. 200.
                                 —53-


acknowledge the lack of reliable information about the American colonial

population. They begin their treatments with the 1790 census figure of

3,000,000 and the British American Department estimate of 2,500,000.

Peckham notes the adjustments and deductions that are implied by the

age distribution, the numbers of blacks and women, loyalists, etc., and

concludes that only about 100,000 different individuals served in

any of the militias or the Continental Army. He supports this claim

with the argument that there were never more than 30,000 in arms at

any one time. Higginbotham seems to offer a qualified endorsement to

Peckham's estimate, but also indicates that the true number could

conceivably range as high as 250,000.

        The lack of information about the Department of Defense estimate is

unsettling, but the 100,000 figure of Peckham's might seem low. A

conservative accounting of the Massachusetts Soldiers and Sailors of the

Revolutionary War, (Boston, 1896-1908) volumes would indicate somewhere

between 100,000 and 140,000 individuals in Massachusetts alone with many

recruits being drawn from Maine and New Hampshire. It is unlikely that

adjustment for the number of sailors, as well as other upward biases

in counting, could reduce the total figure significantly below 90,000.

A 90,000 figure would seem quite plausible as estimates of the Massachusetts

population during the Revolution are in the 290,000 - 307,000 range, with

the inclusion of Maine increasing the total by 50,000. In an essay

appearing in Legacies of the American Revolution, edited by Larry R. Gerlach

et al., John Shy cites an unpublished estimate by Theodore J. Crackel as the

best estimate he is aware of. Crackel produced a figureca1cu1ated with

conservative assumptions.of 185,000 individuals who served for at least six

months in the American forces.
                                       -54-

        4. Herman Freudenberger and Gaylord Cummins, "Health, Work, and

Leisure Before the Industrial Revolution," Explorations In Economic History,

13 (January, 1976), p. 1-12.

        5. Thomas McKeown, R.G. Brown and R.G. Record, "An Interpretation of

the Modern Rise of Population In Europe," Population Studies, 26 (November, 1972),

p. 345-382. P.E. Razzell,"An Interpretation of the Modern Rise of Population In

Europe - A Critique," Population Studies, 28 (March, 1974), p. 5-17. Robert

Higgs,"Mortality In Rural America, 1870-1920: Estimates and Conjectures,"

Explorations In Economic History, 10 (Winter, 1973), p. 177-195. Andrew Appleby,

"Nutrition and Disease: The Case of London, 1550-1750," Journal of Interdisciplinary

History, 8 (Summer, 1975), p. 1-22.

        6. The study of human growth, utilizing height-by-age data, can be

traced back to the early nineteenth century. Many of the scholars of this period

linked differences in height-by-age profiles to socio-economic factors. See,

for example, A, Quetelet, Sur l'homme et le developpenient de ses facultes, ou:

Essai de physique social; Paris, 1835. M. Dunant, De la taille inoyenne des

habitants du canton de Geneve; Geneve, 1867.

        7. Phyllis Eveleth and James Tanner, Worldwide Variation In Human Growth;

London, 1976. James Tanner,"Growth at Adolescence," Blackwell Scientific

Publications; Oxford, 1962. James Tanner, Fetus Into Man: Physical Growth From

Conception To Maturity; Cambridge, MA, 1978. J.G. Fleagle, K.W. Samonds, and

D.M. Hegsted,"Physical Growth of Cebus Monkeys, cebus albifrons, During Protein

and Calorie Malnutrition," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 28 (1975),

p. 246-253. M.F. Elias and F.W. Samonds,"Protein and Calorie Malnutrition In

Thfant Cebus Monkeys:, Growth and Behavioral Development During Deprivation and

Rehabilitation", American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 30 (1977), p. 355-366.

        8. There are several well documented cases of rather continuous secular

increases in final heights. See J.C. Van Wieringen,"Secular Growth Changes,"

Human Growth, vol. 1, eds. F. Falkner and J.M. Tanner; New York, 1978. However,


there is some evidence that the long-term record of change in U.S. heights
                                       -55-

manifests cycles of substantial duration. See Robert W. Fogel et. al.,"The

Economic and Demographic Significance of Secular Changes In Human Stature: The

U.S. 1750-1960," Unpublished manuscr-ipt, 1979.

        9. There are some differences between ethnic groups in height-by-age

profiles, but-the relative importance of genetic and environmental factors

remains in dispute. Although the differences, between well-fed blacks and

whites, in the tempo of growth are substantial, the two groups have essentially

the same mean final height. Although Orientals seem to have lower final heights

than Africans or Europeans, the difference has diminished in recent years.    See

Eveleth and Tanner, Worldwide Variations In Human Growth.

        10. F.S. Hulse,"The Breakdown of Isolates and Hybrid Vigor Among the

Italian Swiss," Proceedings of Twelfth International Congress of Genetics, 2 (1977),

Tokyo: Science Council of Japan.

        11. There are two different sources of height-by-age data for northern

Civil War recruits that we have consulted. Both imply, or have already calculated,

a mean terminad height of 68.2 inches. See J.H. Baxter, Statistics, Medical and

Anthropological, of the Provost Marshal General's Bureau..., U.S. War Department,

2 vol.; Washington D.C., 1875. and B.A. Gould, Investigations In the Military and

Anthropological Statistics of American Soldiers; Cambridge, MA, 1869.

         12. The World War II mean terminal height was computed as 68.2 inches

 in Fogel et. al.,"The Economic and Demographic Significance of Secular Changes In Human

 Stature".

         13. From the theory of genetics, one would expect terminal height to be

 normally distributed within a population, the members of which had experienced

 the same environmental conditions. Quetelet, Tanner, and Van Wieringen, among

 many scholars, have noted the empirical regularity of distributions of terminal

 height being approximately normal. See James Tanner,"Boas's Contributions to

 Knowledge of Human Growth and Form," American Anthropologist, 1, no. 5, Part II, 1959.

         14. For a discussion of the possible biases, and   several   methods of
                                      -56-
dealing with them, see the Statistical Appendix in Fogel et. al.   In the method

we utilized, the loglinear three-moment estimator, the bias in the sample mean

is estimated from the sample mean, the standard deviation, and the coefficient of

skewness.

        15. "Professor Gwatkin. . .On the Manners of the Virginians, c. 1770,"

William and Mary Quarterly, 10 (1953), p. 84. James Henretta also cites this

quotation, but argues that the relative scarcity of livestock increased over

the course of the 18th Century. He further implies that this scarcity was most

severe in New England. Although it is a reasonable hypothesis, the evidence he

óffers in support of the former contention is highly sensitive to the selection

of the base year. See his The Evolution of American Society, 1700-1815;

Lexington, MA, 1973, p. 20.

        16. A potential bias of serious magnitude is the possibility that the

recruits, or some subset of them, were measured with their shoes on. Although

there is no evidence that any measurements were made in this manner, the problem

is, nevertheless, deserving of attention. Unfortunately, while military manuals

with instructions that measurements should be taken with shoes off have been

discovered for later periods, none has been located for the French and Indian

or the Revolutionary War. Although evidence of this nature would be reassuring,

an examination of the data leads to a discounting of the seriousness of the.

problem. Comparisons of the heights of foreign-born and black soldiers in our

 sample to those reported in other sources available for these groups, suggest

 that the muster roll measurements are extremely unlikely to have been made with

 the shoes on. Inferences can also be made from the heights of recruits who

 migrated across colonial borders. Only in South Carolina were such individuals,

 after allowing for the greater stature of migrants in general, significantly

 taller than their counterparts who had remained in the home colony. In this

 case, there is a coniderab1e amount of impressionistic material describing the

 superior diet of the citizens of South Carolina; thus, the discrepancy in
                                       —57—

heights can be explained without resorting to shoes. As South Carolinians

were only marginally taller than New Yorkers and North Carolinians, and shorter

than Virginians, the proposition that the former group was unique in being

measured with shoes on is not persuasive.

          17. Lionel Chalmers, An Account of the Weather and Diseases of South

Carolina; London, 1776, p. 37.

          18. Our understanding of the geographical pattern of wealth holdings

is based on the work of Alice Hanson Jones. For a summary of these findings,

see U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the U.S., Colonial Times

To 1970; Washington D.C., 1978, Series Z 169-191. The work of Terry L. Anderson

on the apparent economic stagnation of New England during this period offers

additional support to such a view. See his article, "Economic Growth In Colonial

New England: 'Statistical Renaissance'," Journal of Economic History, 39 (March, 1979),

p. 243.

          19. Benjamin Gould, The Military and Anthropological Statistics of

American Soldiers.

          20. The rate of increase of British final heights, during the period

1760-1779, has been estimated as 0.8 inches per generation. See Fogel et. al..

          21. The difference in average year of enlistment between the two samples

is 19 years. We are thus comparing members of the same age group two decades apart.

          22. We originally drew together as much information as we could find in

standard, secondary ources on the ethnic composition of the colonial American

population, and derived some estimates of the probably magnitudes of the different

populations. These are available in an appendix to this paper.

          23. Early works on inter-colonial migration include Stella Sutherland,

 Population Distribution in Colonial America; New York, 1936; and Lois. Mathews,

 The Expansion of New England; Boston, 1909, Both espouse this standard view.

 More recent work, especially by historical geographers such as Robert Mitchell,

 tend to examine quite limited geographical areas, or particular subsets o the
                                     -58-

population. See for example, "The Shenandoah Valley Frontier," Annals of the

Association of American Geographers, 62 (Sept., 1972), p. 461-486, and "The

Presbyterian Church As an Indicator of Westward Expansion In 18th-Century

America," The Professional Geographer, 18 (Sept., 1966), p. 293-299.

        24. See W. Rossiter, U.S. Bureau of the Census, A Century of Population

Growth; Washington D.C., 1909; and Herman R. Friis, "A Series of Population Maps

of the Colonies and the United States, 1625-1790," Geographical Review, 30 (July,

1940), p. 463-470.

        25. f4aris Vinovskis, "Mortality Rates and Trends In Massachusetts Before

1860," Journal of Economic History, 32 (March, 1972), p. 184-213.

        26. Robert Fogel et. al., "The Economics of Mortality In North America,

1650-1910: A Description of a Research Project," Historical Methods, 11 (Spring,

1978), p. 75-108.
