NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TOWARDS A RECONSTRUCTION OF KEYNESIAN ECONOMICS:

EXPECTATIONS AND CONSTRAINED EQUILIBRIA

J.

Peter Neary

Joseph E. Stig1it

Working Paper No. 376

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

August 1979

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in Business Taxation and Finance.
Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 376
August 1979

Towards a Reconstruction of Keynesian Economics:
Expectations and Constrained Equilibria

ABSTRACT

A two-period model of temporary equilibrium with rationing is
presented, paying particular attention to agents' expectations of

future constraints. it is shown that with arbitrary constraint
expectations many different types of current equilibria may be con—
sistent with the same set of (current and

expected future) wages and

prices, and that constraint expectations tend to be self-fulfilling
(e.g., a higher expectation of Keynesian unemployment tomorrow

increases the probability that it will prevail today).
In addition, rational constraint expectations (i.e., perfect
foresight of future constraint levels) are shown to enhance rather
than reduce the effectiveness of

J. Peter Neary
Department of Economics
M.I.T.

Cambridge, MA 02139

government policy.

Professor Joseph E. Stiglitz
Institute of Economics and
Statistics
University of Oxford
St. Cross Building
Manor Road

Oxford, England OX1 3UL

PLEASE DO NOT QUOTE WITHOUT PERMISSION

TOOJARVS A

RECONSTRUCTION

EXPECTATIONS

ANV

OF KEYNESIAN

CONSTRAINEV

ECONOMICS:

EQUILI73R1A

1. INTROVUCT1ON

This paper provides an old answer to an old question: how can
we explain unemployment equilibria?

The answer, provided both by

Keynes and by more recent equilibrium analysts, is that there is some
rigidity in prices (of factors or commodities) in the economy.

It

is well known that, if all prices are flexible, equilibrium will be
characterized by full employment of all factors (which are not in
absolute surplus).

Although the precise articulation of the nature

of equilibrium when prices are not flexible (Hansen (1951), Solow and
Stiglitz

including

(1968)

the

,

Hicks

(1974) ,

Benassy (1975), Grandniont (1977))

derivation of demand and supply curves when participants

are constrained in their purchases and/or sales of factors and commodities (Patinkin (1965), dower (1965), Leijohnufvud (1968) , Barro and
Grossman (l97l),Malinvaud (1977)) is of a more recent vintage, the basic
insight that when there is a rigidity in some factor or commodity price
then the only equilibria will entail rationing in some markets, remains
unaltered1.

2

That leaves two critical questions to be answered if we are to

understand the nature of unemployment in our economy: which prices are
rigid, and why are they rigid.

The recent works of Barro and Grossman

and Malinvaud do not attempt to answer the latter question; they simply
posit that money wages and prices are rigid.

We provide an alternative

answer to these questions: because of the absence of futures markets,
individuals must base their current decisions on expectations; for
certain expectations, there may be no values of current variables
(wages and prices today) at which labor is fully employed.2

More generally, it is our belief that the short—run analysis of
Malinvaud, I3arro—Grossman and Solow-Stiglitz misses out an essential

part of the Keynesian story: the role of savings and investment,
interest rates and expectations.

We show that the constraints which

households and firms expect to face in the future are critical in
determining their current behaviour.

A major implication of this

approach is that it becomes very likely that there exist multiple self—
fulfilling expectational equilibria, e.g. if households expect that
they will be unable to sell all their labor both this period and next,
then in fact, it will turn out that they will be unable to sell all

their labor; but had they expected there to be inflationary pressures
this period and next, then that might indeed turn out to be the case
instead.

3

Even more surprising is the result that there may exist temporary
equilibria

which exhibit unemployment or excess demand for labour when

expectations are rational (where we use the term rational expectations

in

the conventional sense, that agents possess full information now, not

only about the prices, but also about the constraints, not only
qualitatively, but quantitatively, which they will face in the future).
The paper thus serves to clarify the distinctive roles played by the
assumptions of rational expectations and price flexibility in some

recent models of macro—economic equilibrium: rational expectations
are consistent both with full employment and unemployment equilibria;
it is perfect wage and price flexibility which is necessaly (but not
sufficient) to ensure full employment, in general.

The model we construct has policy implications which differ in
some significant ways from those of the Barro—Grossman—Malinvaud one—

period

model as well as from those of the more recent rational—

expectations literature. The latter, for instance, has emphasized
the inefficacy of government policy; we show, on the contrary, that
having rational expectations actually results, in certain situations, in
the multipliers associated with government fiscal policy being greater

than they would be with, say, static expectations: an increase in
government expenditure today has a spill—over effect in raising national

income at a future date; if the equilibrium at that date is also a
Keynesian (demand—constrained) equilibrium, then that increases the
demand

for labour at that date; the anticipation of this increased

demand for

labour

demand rises.

reduces

savings currently, and hence current aggregate

4

Our model also has different implications with respect to the
effect of wage and price cuts.

There is considerable evidence, for

example, that the real wage did not vary significantly in the course

of the great depression; assuming plausibly that the aggregate
production function did not shift significantly during that period,
this evidence would imply that the economy was at the Wairasian equili-

brium real wage: According to the Barro—Grossman-Malinvaud analysis,
"all" that was required in this situation was a proportionate reduction
in wages and prices, which would have restored full employment by means
of the real—balance effect.

'Ie argue, however, that these real—

balance effects are quantitatively insignificant, and that the shortrun dynamics of expectations (and, after all, it is the short run with
which we are concerned here) are such that reductions in wages
and prices may actually exacerbate the unemployment.
thus

Our model is

much more in the tradition of Hansen and Solow-Stiglitz who

questioned the relevance of the real—balance effect for 6hort—rw.
macro—economic analysis.
We believe that the model we have constructed, simple as it is,
captures much of what was contained in Keynes, but seems so missing in

the one—period macro—economic models, in which savings nd investment,
interest rates and expectation formation play no critical role.

The plan of the paper is as follows.

In Section 2 we outline

the micro—economic foundations of the model, illustrate the determination
of notional equilibrium when all wages and prices are flexible, and
examine the various types of effective equilibrium which can prevail

5

when the current and expected future wage rate and the expected future

output price are sticky.

In this section we assume that agents have

Wairasian expectations (i.e., they do not expect to face any quantity
constraints

in the future), while in Sections 3 and 4 we investigate

the consequences of arbitrary and rational constraint expectations
Section 5 considers the comparative statics properties

respectively.

of the model, while Section 6 re—examines its behaviour when the current
real wage is assumed to be perfectly flexible.

Finally, Section 7

summarises the paper's conclusions and notes sons directions for
further research.

NOTIONAL

2.

MV

EFFECTIVE EQUILIBRiA WiTH CQALRASIAN EXPECTATIONS

The model to be examined is a two—period one,

base

in which agents

their behaviour in the present, period 1, on their subjectively

certain point expectations concerning prices, wages and

levels

in the future, period 2.

constraint

considering first the behaviour of

households, we abstract from distribution effects, and so assume that
the behaviour of the household sector can be characterized as if it were
the outcome of the maximization of a single aggregate utility function.
Since we assume for simplicity that total labour supply is fixed and
since we are excluding a real—balance effect, utility depends on
present and future consumption only.

This is written in a simple

additive form, where the discount factor c equals (1 +

being

the household sector's discount rate:

6

U =

(1)

u(c)

+

cu(c2)

When households are unconstrained, maximization of (1) is carried out
subject

to two

budget constraints, the lifetime budget constraint (2)

and the requirement (implied by the assumption of imperfect capital
markets) that current consumption cannot exceed current income:

(2)

(3)

C1

+ p2c2

c1 <

<

Y=

rn

+

w1L+

w2L

rn+w1L

where the current output price, p1, is normalized to equal unity,
rn is the value of the household's initial endowment, L is the
household's labour supply (assumed not to change between periods) and

w2 and p2 are the present values of the currently expected future
wage and price level respectively.3

Note that we assume that firms'

profits are not redistributed to households, but instead are absorb'ed

by the government through 100 per cent profits taxation.

This is an

undesirable assumption, both because it implies that government policy
is state—dependent, and because, by assuming a zero propensity to
consume out of profits, it leaves the model open to the criticism
that it is biased in favour of fiscal policy.

However, this assumption

permits a considerable simplification of the model and it does not
affect any of its qualitative properties.

7

Ignoring boundary solutions (where the current income constraint
(3) bites so that savings are forced to equal zero) ,

maximization

of (1)

subject to (2) and (3) leads to unconstrained or notional demand
functions for current and future consumption:

(4)

and

c1(p2, Y)
?

+

c2(p2, Y)
+

where the signs of the partial derivatives of the functions in (4) are
as indicated.

As is well known, the effect on current consumption of

a change in the price of future output (i.e., the effect on savings of
a change in the interest rate) is indeterminate in general, since the
income and substitution effects of such a change work in opposite
directions.

In the diagrams below we assume for convenience that

the substitution effect dominates, so that c1/p2 is always positive,
but this assumption is not crucial.

Turning next to firms, we assume that their behaviour can be
viewed as the outcome of the actions of a representative firm which
maximizes the discounted sum of current and future profits:4

(5)

=

When the firm faces no constraints, it chooses current and future

employment levels, e1 and e2, as well as I, the quantity of current
output which it holds over as investment to augment the productivity of
labour in the future:

8

=

(6)

F(e1)

I

—

—

we1

p2H(e2, I) — w2e2

(7)

where F(e1) is current output and H(e2,I)

is output next period.5

We assume that production is subject to diminishing

factor in both periods: Fee ,

H

ee ,

H

<
II

0;

returns to each

that labour and investment

are complementary in the production of future output: H1

>

0;

and

that the production function for future output is strictly concave:

HeeII
H

- H2

el

>

0

(i.e., that labour and investment are subject to

diminishing returns to scale) .

tinder these assumptions, unconstrained

profit maximization leads to notional employment and investment demand
functions, which also imply notional supply functions for both current
and future output:6

(8)

e1(w1), I(p2, w2)
+

and

-

e2(p2, w2)

+

implying:

(9)

y1(w1, -p2 1)
+

and

y2(p2, w2)
-

+

note that, when firms face no quantity constraints, current employment demand depends only on the current real wage: a change in expected

We

future wages or prices changes the amount of current output held over

9

as investment and so changes current sales, but it does not affect
current employment and output decisions.

employment

Similarly next period's

and output decisions are independent of the current real

wage.

The third and final agent in the economy is the government, which,
in addition to taxing firms' profits, can make direct transfer payments
to households, increasing their initial endowments rn, or can make
direct purchases of goods in both present and future periods, g1 and
g2.

Having made these assumptions about the individual agents in the
economy, we can now characterize a full Walrasian equilibrium as a

triple (w1, p2, w;) which simultaneously satisfies the
current

notional

and future goods market equilibrium loci (GMEL) and the

notional current and future labour market equilibrium loci (LMEL):
(10)

GMEL1: c1(p2, Y) +

g1

(11)

GMEL2: c2(p2, Y) +

g2

(12)

LMEL1: L =

(13)

LMEL2: L = e2(p2,

e1(w1)

w2)

=

=

y1(w1, p2, w2)

y2(p2, w2)

10

By Wairas' Law the four equations are mutually dependent and so we may
omit any one from consideration.

For the present, we chobse to drop

the GMEL2I which leaves us with three equations in three unknowns.
However,

in order to permit a two—dimensional representation, we focus

on only two variables, w1 and p2. In the remainder of this paper,
therefore, we assume that w2, the wage rate currently expected to
prevail next period, is parametrically fixed (and it is convenient,

though quite inessential, to assume in most of the paper that it equals

the "full" Wairasian equilibrium value, w2), but the analysis would
not be substantially affected if we assumed instead that

expectations were unit elastic (i.e., w2/p2 =

real-wage

w1)

For any given future wage, we can illustrate these loci in

(w1, p2) space, as in Figure 1.

The LMEL1

uniquely

defines

points above this locus representing excess supply of, and points
below representing excess demand for labour, while the GMEL1 is a
downward—sloping locus, points above it corresponding to excess demand

for

goods and points below to excess supply of goods.

(We assume that

the fall in supply of current output following a rise in p2 is more
than sufficient to offset any fall in demand.)

Finally, the future

LMEL2 uniquely defines a value of p2, which equals the equilibrium

value, p, only if the value of w2 underlying the diagram equals the
full equilibrium value, w. It may be noted that the equilibrium at

A is globally stable if w1 and p2 change according to ttonnement
processes.

This may be seen more easily by noting that the GMEL1 is

11

in effect an IS curve, with points above

it representing situations

where investment demand exceeds savings, requiring a rise in the interest

rate (i.e., a fall in p2) to restore equilibrium and conversely for
points below the locus.

When w1

and

p2

are

rigid, however, the division of the space

into disequilibrium regions cannot be the same as in Figure 1, for the
by—now well known reason that a disequilibrium in one market will

affect decisions in the other market, so affecting the location of the
equilibrium loci at all points other than the full Wairasian equilibrium

point A.

In the remainder of this section we show how the regions are

affected when disequilibrium is allowed, on the crucial assumption (to
be

relaxed in the next section) that all agents expect a Wairasian

equilibrium to prevail in the next period.

We also assume for simplicity

that the same expectations of future wage arid price levels are held by
all agents arid that

at

the Wairasian level w2.

Consider

first the goods market equilibrium locus under conditions

of excess supply of
unable to

in

expectations of future wages are completely inelastic

sell the

labour: firms face no constraints but households are

full amount, L, of their endowment of labour

the current period.

(14)

where

Hence the GL1 becomes:7

GMEL1(ESL, W): c1(p2, Y)

+ g1 =

y1(w1, p2, w2)

services

12

Y =

(15)

rn

e1(w1), < L

÷ w1e1(w1) + w2L,

Since constrained income, Y, is less than notional income, Y, it
follows that households' effective consumption demand is reduced as a
result of the unemployment they face, and so a point of notional goods

market equilibrium in (w1, p2) space corresponds to effective excess
supply of current output.

In passing from notional to effective regions,

therefore, the GMEL1(ESL,W) lies to the right of the notional
as shown in Figure 2.

GMEL1,

However, the two loci only differ for values

of w1 greater than w1, since it is only in this range that the
employment constraint facing households is binding (i.e.,

e1(w1) < L)

A similar argument applies to the GMEL1 when the labour market
exhibits

excess demand: households are now unconstrained whereas

firms' current production is constrained by the labour they can obtain:8
(16)

(16')

GMEL1(EDL, W): c1(p2, Y) +

g1

=

=

1:1'
F(e1)

—

I(p2,

w2)

where e1 is simply L and is less than the notional labour demand
e1(w1) .

We may note that, under our assumptions, the excess demand for

labour does not affect firmst investment plans (assuming, of course,
that the constraint does not become so severe that their maximum output
level falls below their desired level of investment).

Comparing (16)

13

with (ii), it must follow, since the employment constraint bites, that
effective supply is less than notional supply, implying that the con-

trajned GMEL1 lies to the left of the notional locus when excess

demand for labour prevails (i.e., when w1 is less than w1)

The LMEL1 is affected in a similar manner when the goods market
is out of equilibrium.

Thus, in a situation of excess supply of goods,

households are unconstrained but firms are unable to make their notional
level of sales.

This forces them to recalculate their employment and

investment decisions, with the result that the LMEL1 becomes:

(17)

LMEL1(ESG, W): L =

=

(17')

1l'

":i' 2'

F1[y1 + @l; Wjj 2'

W;)]

where:

(18)

y1 = c1(p2, Y) + g1 < y1(w1, p2, W;)

We may note that, by contrast with (8) ,

current

employment demand now

depends on much more than just the current real wage: the demand for
labour is determined both by what firms are able to sell and by what
they decide to store.

The latter is itself in turn affected by the

sales constraint, by contrast with an employment constraint which, as
illustrated in equation (16'), does not affect the relative profitability

14

of selling and investing.

Comparing equations (12) and (17), since

constrained employment demand,

,

is

less than notional employment

demand, e1 , a point of notional labour market equilibrium must
correspond to effective excess supply of labour when excess supply of
goods prevails;

(17) therefore lies below (12) in Figure 2.

However,

comparing (17') with (16'), since constrained investment demand I

must be greater than notional investment demand I, it follows that
these two loci do not coincide and that (17) lies above (16).

Allowing

investment to be carried out by firms therefore leads to an effective
region of excess supply of goods and excess demand for labour, or, in
the terminology of Muellbauer and Portes (1978), a region of underconsumption.

Finally, when excess demand for goods prevails and the labour
market is in equilibrium, firms are in equilibrium, and though households
are rationed in the goods market, the assumption that labour is supplied
inelastically ensures that this does not affect their labour supply.
The

effective

labour market equilibrium locus therefore coincides with

the notional locus.

These shifts from notional to effective equilibrium loci are
summarized in Figure 2 (where the notional loci are shown as dashed
and the effective loci as solid lines).

Following Malinvaud the four

regions are labelled K, for Keynesian unemployment, C, for classical

unemployment, R, for repressed inflation, and U, for underconsumption.
It may be remarked that region K corresponds to a low expected price

15

of future output, and

so

to a high interest

rate: although this

might

be thought to contradict the Keynesian notion of a liquidity trap, it
is in fact fully consistent with Keynes, as will become clearer after
the explicit consideration of expectations, to which we now turn.

3.

CONSTRAIWT EXPECTATIONS

So far, except

for

MV CON.STRAINEV EQUILiBRIA

the change in state variables implied by the

explicit consideration of two per4ods and the neglect of the realbalance effect, the present model is extremely similar to that of
Barro—Grossman—Malinvaud.9

However, some new features are intro-

duced when we abandon the assumption, made throughout the last section,
that all agents expect a Walrasian equilibrium to prevail in the future.
Instead, we assume in this section that agents expect to face given
constraint levels in one or both markets next period.

we retain the assumption that firms and

households

(For simplicity,

have the same

expectations about which regime will prevail next period.

The analysis

may easily be extended to examine the implications of heterogeneous
expectations).

The first point to emphasize is that if agents expect to be constrained next period this will affect their current behaviour even if

w1 and p2 are flexible; in other words, it will shift the notional
equilibrium loci.
(12), since

Admittedly, this is not true of the LMEL1, equation

labour supply is fixed and, when firms face no constraints

16

in the present period, their current employment decisions are determined

only by w1.

However, the notional GMEL1

will be

affected.

Consider

first the case where agents expect regime K (exbess supply of both
labour and goods) to prevail next period.

Equation (10) therefore

becomes:

(19)

=

c1(p2, ) + g1

GMEL1(W, K):

''

=

(19')

w

—

F[e1(w1)]

where:

(20)

=

(21)

<

In + wL

y2p2'

+

w;L2

<

L)

w2)

Relative to equation (10), (19) implies an expansion of the region of

notional excess supply of goods on two counts: both because households,
whose lifetime income is now lower, have a lower consumption demand, and
because firms, expecting to face a sales constraint in the future, have
a lower investment demand, and so would like to increase their current
sales.

These two effects are illustrated in Figure 3.

The expectation

of unemployment by households shifts the notional GMEL1 to the right at

all points, from the line (W,W) to (W,L2).

The expectation of a

17

sales constraint also shifts the locus to the right (since a reduction

in y2 raises l' and so increases the region of current excess
supply of goods).

However it does not shift it throughout its length,

since a given value of the expected sales constraint y2 is only
binding when it satisfies (21) .

The shift therefore takes place only

for values of p2 above p, where p (which must be less than p2)
is the value of p2 which satisfies (21) with equality and is therefore
The resulting locus is shown by the line

a function of w2 and y2.
denoted (W,K)

in

Figure 3.

The effects of other constraint expectations on the notional

GMEL1 may be illustrated in a similar fashion.

Consider, for example,

The notional

the effect of an expectation of Classical unemployment.
GMEL1 now becomes:

(22)

GMEL1(W,C):

c1(c2;

p2' Y) + g1 =

y1(s41, p2, w)

where

C2 <

(23)

c2(p2,

Y)

Assuming that

The location of (22) in Figure 3 is easily determined.
the

level of the expected employment constraint

(19),

the same as in

this constraint alone shifts the notional locus as before from

(W,W) to (W,L2) .

the

is

The

expected consumption

constraint c2

additional effect of shifting the locus to the left,

then has

since such a

18

constxaint raises current demand (because households, expecting to be

unable to

purchase all the goods they wish in the future, have a reduced

incentive to save) and so the region of current excess supply contracts.
However, as with (21) ,

this

constraint is only effective for those

values of w1 and p2 which satisfy (23).

It is easily seen that

this inequality defines a region to the left of an upward—sloping

locus in Figure 3, which locus must itself lie to the right of A,
and so the notional GMEL1 when Classical unemployment is expected

pivots to the left around point D, the intersection of this locus
and the (W,L2) locus.

Finally,

since our main concern is to locate the effective

equilibrium loci in the diagram, we note that the two effective loci
corresponding to (19) and (22) differ from these only in replacing the

current notional labour supply L by the corresponding effective

supply, e1(w1); i.e., in replacing Y by Y where:

=

(24)

+ w1e1(w1) +

Hence, moving from notional to effective loci implies (since the current
employment

constraint is binding only for values of w1 above w) that

the two loci pivot to the right around their points of intersection

with the notional LMEL1, i.e., points A' and A", as shown in
Figure

the

4.

Moreover, for the same reasons just given

which require

notional GMEL1 when Classical unemployment is expected to lie to

19

the left of the corresponding locus when Keynesian unemployment is
expected, so the locus

marked

(ESL,C)

in

Figure 4 must lie wholly to

the left of that marked (ESL,K).

This analysis has three important implications.

Firstly, even

when w1 and p2 are flexible, there is a continuum of possible
"Walrasian" equilibria lying along the notional

L11EL1

(including,

for

example, all points on the segment AA"), each one corresponding to a
given configuration of constraint expectations.

and p2 are sticky, there is a large region of

Secondly, when
(w1, p2) space (including

the whole of the area between the two solid lines in Figure 4) which is
compatible with either

regime

C or K prevailing today, the only

difference being the state of constraint expectations.11
constraint

expectations tend to be self—fulfilling3 in

Thirdly,

the sense that

regime K is more likely than regime C to prevail today if it is
expected to prevail tomorrow, and conversely.

A similar analysis may be carried out for the effects of other
constraint expectations on all four effective equilibrium loci, and
broadly similar conclusions follow.
this statement must be noted.

However, two qualifications to

In the first place, the L?L1 under

conditions of excess demand for goods turns out to be completely independent of the state of expectations about future constraints, just as
we found in the last section that with Wairasian expectations it
coincides with the notional LMEL1.

The reasons for this are simple:

the assumption of an inelastic labour supply ensures that households'

expectations do not affect their current labour supply; while the
assumptions that the labour market is currently in equilibrium

20

and that firms can sell all they currently wish to produce mean that
firms' demand for labour depends only on the current wage rate and is
independent of whether or not they expect to be constrained in the
future.

A second qualification is that the complementarity assumed

to exist between employment and investment in the second period production

function H(.) yields some exceptions to the rule that expectations tend
to be self—fulfilling in the sense defined above.
consider

To illustrate this,

the effective GMEL1 when excess demand for labour prevails.

When all agents expect to be unconstrained in the future, this is given
by equation (16) above.

Now suppose instead that they expect regime

R to prevail in the future.
(25)

GIyIEL1(EDL;R) :

This yields an alternative locus:

c1(.c2,

p2, Y) +

g1

=

=

(25')

1e
F(e1)

e1 p2)
—

I(e2;
+ p2)
+

where

(26)

<

e1(w1)

and

< e2(p2, w2)

Since consumers expect to be constrained in the goods market in the

future,

this reduces their incentive to save, and so encourages them

to spend more in the present, thus increasing the likelihood that
excess demand for goods will prevail today.

However, the fact that

firms expect to be unable to hire as much labour as they will wish in
the future leads them, because of the complementarity between labour and

21

investment,
demand.

to reduce rather than increase their current investment

Since their current output is unaffected, this tends to make

it more likely that excess supply of rather than excess demand for goods
will prevail today.

In this case, therefore, the expectation that

regime R will prevail tomorrow leads to two effects, one of which
makes it more likely but the other of which makes it less likely that

regime R will prevail in the present, and there is no presumption in
general as to which of these effects will dominate.

unless the values of e2 and

(Clearly, however,

are such that I in (25') is

considerably less than I in (19'), equation (25) must lie to the left
of (19)

Subject to these qualifications, the location of the equilibrium
loci under different assumptions about agents' constraint expectations
tends

to confirm the general points made above: the prevalence of a

given regime today depends on the expectations held about which regimes

will

prevail tomorrow, and in most cases these expectations are of a

self—fulfilling kind in the sense already discussed.

It is clear that

to the extent that the government can influence these expectations,
then it possesses an important instrument capable of influencing to a
considerable degree the current state of the economy.

4. RATiONAL CONSTRAINTEXPECTATIONS

In the last section we examined the effect of arbitrary parametric
constraint expectations on the location of the effective equilibrium loci

22

in

(w1, p2) space.

In this section we explore an alternative approach

which aVoids this arbitrariness of expectations by postulating that
households and firms have full information concerning each others'
intended future actions.

Thus, for example, the labour supply con-

straint which households expect to face in the next period equals the
employment level which firms currently intend to demand in that period.
By analogy with the widely studied phenomenon of rational expectations
of prices, we label this hypothesis one of rational constraint
expectations.

One immediate consequence of the assumption of rational constraint
expectations is that the set of regimes which can be expected to prevail
next period is restricted.

Consider first regime U: if, at a given

(w1,p2) combination, firms are pursuing a production and sales plan

which implies that regime U will prevail next period, they must be
acting irrationally.

For, if they are to be rationed in both labour

and goods markets next period, they will end that period with unsold
inventories, so foregoing an opportunity to increase their profits.
Hence

with rational constraint expectations neither households nor

firms can expect regime u

prevail next period. A similar argument
applies to regime C: households cannot rationally expect to be conto

strained in both markets next period, and so with rational constraint
expectations both households and firms will adjust their plans to ensure

that

they do not imply such a double rationing in the future,

Of

course, these conclusions are a consequence of the assumption that the
world ends at the end of the second period.

Nevertheless, while

23

allowing for more than one future period would a3Toid the stark conclusion

that (ignoring boundary cases) only regimes K and R can be rationally
expected, there remains a presumption even in a multi—period model that

these regimes are more likely to be expected than C or U, since
under each of the latter regimes one group of agents is involuntarily
building up stocks (of savings or inventories), which is only consistent
with rationality if one of the two constraints which these agents face
in such a regime is expected to be relaxed in a subsequent period.

Having established which regimes can be rationally expected to

prevail next period, we now wish to locate in (w11p2) space the regions
which are consistent with different disequilibrium regimes when constraint
expectations are rational.

As in previous sections this requires us to

locate in (w1,p2) space various equilibrium loci, and we illustrate
this construction for the case of the current GMEL, assuming that
excess supply of labour prevails today and that Keynesian unemployment
is rationally expected to prevail tomorrow.

This locus is given by

solving the following set of four equations in five variables (w1,p2,

L1,L2 and y2) for a single equation in w1 and p2 only:

(27)

GMEL1(ESL,K;RCE): c1[P2;-i-w11+w2] + g1

(28)

(29)

e1(w1)

L2 =

—

*

e2(y2;w2)

=

24

+

y2 =

(30)

W1L1

+

w2L2] +

The construction of the desired equilibrium locus proceeds by
substituting from (28) and (29) into (27) and (30), locating these two

equations in (w1,p2) space for different values of y2, and then
tracing the locus of their intersection points as y2 varies.
is illustrated in Figure 5.

The line

ctci.

This

is the Wairasian locus,

equation (10), which passes through the full Walrasian equilibrium

point

Even if firms do not expect to be sales-constrained next

A.

period, rational households will realise that they will face an employment constraint next period if e2(p21w2) is less than L, i.e., if
is less than p2.

(31)

ci[p2 ;

Hence, amending (10) to:

+ w1L + w;e2(p2,w;)] + g1

=

y1(w11p2,w2)

causes it to pivot around point A to give the locus A. Next,
for a given expected sales constraint, y2, this locus must shift to

the right,except at points to the left of D, where p2 is less than
0

(the

—

solution, as before, of y2 =

sales constraint is not binding.

*
y2(p2,w2))

and so the expected

This yields the locus DA' ,

which

is identical to (19) except that the knowledge by households of the
dependence of their expected employment constraint on the firms'

expected sales constraint is allowed for by substituting for L2
from (29).

The locus DA'

is therefore the notional GMEL1

25

conditional

on a sales constraint of y2 being expected by both firms

and households.

The áorresponding effective GMELI1

from (28) , which

obtained in the usual way by substituting for

to give yA' ,

causes the locus to pivot around A'
which

is therefore
the equation of

is:

(32)

;

GMEL1(ESL,K;y2):

+

rn+w1e1(w1)+w22(y2w2

g1

=

The next step in deriving the rational—constraint-expectations
locus is to locate (30) in the diagram, after substituting from (28)

and (29), for given values of y. We note first that this locus is
upward-sloping if and only if the current elasticity of demand for
labour

is less than unity (i.e., (w1/e1)e1/w1 <

assumption

.

Making

this

for diagranimatic convenience, we note also that the locus

must pass through A if the

notional

1)

expected sales constraint just equals the

Wairasian supply next period (i.e., if

and that reductions in

=

y2(w11p2,w2)),

move it progressively to the right.

Moreover it may be shown that (provided c1/p2 is positive but not
too large) a given reduction in
less than it moves (32).

will move (30) to the right by

Hence corresponding to the locus yA'

(equation 32)) is a locus such as S

(equation

(30)), with both

loci conditional on the same value of y. The intersection of
these two loci at E therefore represents a point on the effective

GMEL1

under rational constraint expectations.

26

By varying the expected sales constraint y2 continuously, the
In

desired locus may be traced out, as shown by the heavy line AF.

a similar manner the other effective equilibrium loci under rational
constraint expectations may be derived.

Without presenting the details

of this construction, it is clear that rational constraint expectations
do not eliminate the possibility that Keynesian unemployment will
prevail today.

derivation

On the contrary, by working through a similar

in order to locate in the diagram the effective LMEL1(ESG,K)

under rational constraint expectations, it may be seen that the region
in (w1,p2) space consistent with Keynesian unemployment today

is

greater when the same state is rationally expected to prevail tomorrow
At the same time, of

than when Wairasiari equilibrium is expected.
course,

there are some points (such as ó

and

A' )

which are consistent

Keynesian unemployment today when expectations of future demand

with

constraints

are arbitrarily pessimistic, but not when they are rational.

Nevertheless,

relative at least to the situation where Walrasian

equilibrium

is expected tomorrow, rational constraint expectations

necessarily

increase the likelihood that regime K, and also regime

R, will prevail in the current period, for

any given (w1,p2)

combination.1

Having outlined some of the consequences of rational constraint
expectations for the location of current disequilibrium regions, we

in the next section to a brief consideration of their implications

turn

for

the comparative static responses of the model to exogenous shocks.

27

5.

COMPARATIVE STATICS: MULTIPLIERS ANP SHIFTS ETh'EEN REGIMES

As is now well known, an analysis of the effects of changes in
exogenous variables in a model of temporary equilibrium with rationing
must take account of both their effects on the endogenous variables
within each region and their effects on the location of the regions
themselves.

Considering the latter first, Figures 6 and 7 illustrate the
effects of changes in current government expenditure and the state of
technology (or, equivalently, the level of profitability), on the
location

of the four disequilibrium regions assuming Wairasian expec—

tations.

An increase in g1 shifts the Walrasian equilibrium from

A to B in Figure
Wairasian

6, implying that, if

the economy is initially in

equilibrium, a cut in government spending will give rise to

Keynesian unemployment while a rise in government spending will induce
excess demand for goods (without immediately disturbing labour—market
equilibrium)

shocks
(due,

Similarly, Figure 7 shows the effects of supply-side

.

on the

diagram.

An exogenous improvement in profitability

for example, to technological progress) affects the loci as shown,

assuming (plausibly) that it raises the demand for labour at a given
real wage.

Hence point A, which represents initial Walrasian

equilibrium, moves into a state of Keynesian unemployment, requiring
(paradoxically) a rise in the real wage if Walrasian equilibrium is to
be restored.

Conversely, an exogenous decline in profitability (due,

for example, to an increase in the price of an imported input) converts

28

an initial state of Wairasian equilibrium into one of Classical unemployment, so requiring the Classical remedy of a real wage cut.

These

effects of changes in current exogenous variables are

virtually identical to those which hold in the Barro—Grossman—Malinvaud
model.

One additional feature of our two—period model is that it

permits an examination of the effects of exogenous changes in expectations,

both of future constraint levels and of

future wages and

prices. The effects of changes in the former have already been considered in Section 3. As for an increase in w2, the expected future
wage rate, it has an ambiguous effect

on the diagram:

on the one hand,

it has a substitution effect on production, reducing firms' desired
employment next period and so (because of the complementarity in the

production function H(.)) reducing current investment demand and
therefore raising the current supply of output.

On the other hand,

a rise in w2 increases households' lifetime income, so raising their
current

demand for output.

dominates,

To the extent that this income effect

then an increase in

w2 has exactly the same effect on the

diagram as an increase in g1 in Figure 6, implying that an expected
future wage cut will shift the economy from Walrasian equilibrium into
Keynesian

unemployment in the current

These

period.

relationships between changes in exogenous variables and

shifts in the equilibrium loci continue to hold whatever assumptions
are

made about constraint expectations.

In addition, rational

29

constraint expectations permit a further role for, government policy

through the "announcement effects" of a perfectly foreseen change in
future government spending.

Thus, an increase in g2 relaxes the

expected future sales constraint on firms, which both raises their
current investment demand and (by raising their future labour demand)

relaxes the expected future labour—supply constraint facing households.
On

both counts, the region of excess demand for current output is

enlarged, and so with rational constraint expectations a perfectly
anticipated

increase in g2

has exactly the same effect on the diagram

as an increase in g1 has in Figure 6.

similarly, an anticipated

increase in future profitability enlarges the region of current excess
supply of goods, and so has effects similar to those of an increase in
current

profitability in Figure 7.

Turning next to the comparative static properties of the model

within different regions, a great many results
many

of these

Malinvaud

could be presented, but

are familiar from previous studies of the Barro—Grossman—

model, and it would be tedious to present them in detail.

However, one issue which is of considerable interest is the effect
of

rational constraint expectations on the magnitudes of the comparative

statics

derivatives, and especially of the Keynesian employment multiplier.

To examine this, consider first the multiplier when Keynesian unemployment
prevails in the current period, but agents make no allowance for future
constraints (i.e., they assume that Wairasian equilibrium will prevail
next period).

Current employment and sales are therefore jointly

30

determined

(33)

by the two equations:

=

=

This

c(p2;

+ w11

in

+

w2L)

+

implies a simple one—period multiplier, very similar to the usual

Keynesian expression (the only difference arises from the fact that in
our model the marginal propensities to consume out of wages and profits
are different, by assumption):

—l

e1 c11
——I

r

Il—w

(35)

—

L
However, if regime K both prevails today and

is

rationally expected

to prevail tomorrow, then, since all agents take into account the effect
of

current events on future

behaviour, (33) and (34) must be replaced

by the following set of four simultaneous equations:

1

(36)

Ii =

(37)

=

(38)

e1(y1, '2' w1, w2)

rn

=

c2(p2;

+

rn +

+ w22) +

+ w22) +

31

(39)

L2

e2(y1, y2 W11 w2)

Routine calculations show that under these circumstances the multiplier
is:

wAl1
1

r

Ii—

(40)

[
where:

l

1 -

_J

w2BJ

WA
2

1 -

a

w2B

A

A

(41)

A =

— c1

(42)

B =

2
—

y1 '

+

c1 2 c2
'2

There are three distinct reasons why (40) exceeds (35).

as shown in the Appendix, /y1 exceeds

Firstly,

(at least

locally); i.e., a relaxation of the current sales constraint faced
by firms has a greater impact effect on their current demand for
labour when they expect to face a similar constraint in the future than
when they expect to be unconstrained.

This result, which reflects the

Le Chatelier principle, does not arise because expectations are rational

solely because they are "Keynesian": hence government policy has a
greater expansionary effect when firms are pessimistic about their
future sales prospects. Secondly, a relaxation of the current sales
but

constraint also causes firms to revise their future employment plans

32

upwards, but with rational constraint expectations households know
that this raises their lifetime income and so they increase their consumption in both periods thus having a further impact effect on firms'
current demand for labour.

Finally, and probably most importantly,

with rational constraint expectations the multiplier itself is increased,
or rather, it might be more correct to say that there are now not one
but

many multipliers, operating both within and between periods.

though the government
relaxation

enhanced

Even

injection is not repeated next period, the

of a current constraint on one group of agents has an

expansionary effect by relaxing the constraints which the

other group expects to face in the future, and so on.

findings illustrate the important point that the implications
of rational expectations for the effectiveness of government policy
These

depend completely on

price

whether or not they are accompanied by sufficient

flexibility to ensure market clearing without rationing.

When

prices are rigid, rational constraint expectations, at least in the
present model, actually enhance the effectiveness of traditional fiscal
policy.

6. VISEQJJILI8RIUM REGIMES OJITH CURREWr WAGE-PRICE FLEXI8ILITY

So far we have followed both Solow-Stiglitz and Barro-Grossman-

Malinvaud

in assuming that at least one current price or wage rate is

inflexible in the current period.

If we relax

this

assumption and

33

assume that w1 is perfectly flexible (though p2 and w2 are still
exogenbus) then there are two
either

possibilities:

w1 may move to clear

the current labour market or the current goods market.

If

w1 is assumed to move to clear the current labour market,

then for a given value of p2 the only possible equilibrium is at
the

corresponding

equilibrium
the

point on one of the two effective labour market

loci in Figures 2 to 7.

With this

qualification much of

analysis in previous sections continues to be relevant, the only

additional feature being that the slope of the effective LMEL1, when
excess supply of goods prevails, now becomes a crucial determinant of

the efficacy of wage flexibility in ensuring continual full employments
Consider, for example, this locus when agents expect to be unconstrained

next period - equation (17) for
from (18))
(43)

and totally differentiate it (substituting

L+—I l =
w1J

r1

Li

2

l1
2J

The coefficient of dp2 will generally be negative, but the coefficient

of dw1 will be positive -

implying

boundary between regions K and U
-

that this locus, which is the

in

Figure 2,

is

downward-sloping

if the first or "Keynesian" term in parentheses dominates the second

"Classical" term, 1/Bw1.

If this happens, then even a small dis-

placement of p2, the expected future goods price, below its Walrasian
equilibrium level, may require a considerable fall in the current real

34

wage, possibly even to zero, if labour market equilibrium

restored.

This suggests that under

the

is to be

presentsetof assumptions

current wage flexibility may be anything but a painless means of
ensuring continual full employment, if expectations of future wage and

price

levels are inelastic.

But in any case the assumption of the preceding paragraph, that
the real wage moves to clear the current labour market, runs counter
to a long tradition in macro-economics which argues that goods markets
clear rapidly by price adjustment whereas the labour market does not.
It would be more consistent with this tradition (which finds expression,
of course, in Keynes's General Theory and in the IS-LM model of income

determination) to assume that w1 ,

or

rather its inverse, the price of

current output in terms of "wage—units", adjusts to clear the current
goods market rather than the current labour

market.

With this change

in assumptions, the model becomes one with current wage—price flexibility,
but in which the given expectations of future wages and prices can give
rise to either excess demand for or excess supply of labour in the
present period.

It is most convenient to analyse the model under this new
assumption by setting up the diagrams
notional
solved

in (w2, p2) space.

equilibrium first, the notional GMEL1, equation

for the value of w1

a function

which

Considering
(10), may be

clears the current goods

of parametric wage and price

market, as

expectations and of the level

35

of current government expenditure:

(44)

w1 = (p2,

w2

g1)

signs of the partial derivatives of ft.) imply that an increase in
either p2 or w2 gives rise to excess demand for current output (so
requiring a fall in w1 to restore equilibrium) . The former effect
The

has already been assumed in Section 2;

the

latter assumes that the

income effect on households of a higher expected future wage rate
raises current consumption demand by more than the substitution effect
on firms lowers current investment demand.
into

(45)

Substituting from (44)

(12) yields the notional LMEL1 in (w2,p2) space:

LMEL1(W,W):

As shown in Figure

L=

e1[(P2

W2;

8, equation (45) defines a

g1)]

downward—sloping

locus in

(w21p2) space, with points above corresponding to excess demand
and

for

points below to excess supply of labour in the current period.

The diagram also shows equation (13), the notional future labour market

equilibrium locus, which is upward—sloping and intersects (45) at the full

Walrasian equilibrium point (w2, p2).

Moving from notional to effective equilibria does not affect
either locus, as long as we continue to

assume that constraint expec-

tations are Walrasian, since the current goods market always clears.

36

Of course, at all pointsoff the IMEL1

the

equilibrium value of w1 is

determined not by (10) but by either (14) or (16), and this must be
taken into account in evaluating the comparative statics properties of
the model.

Notice that under these assumptions there can be no

multiplier, since there is no market on which both buyers and sellers
are simultaneously subject to constraints.

Suppose next that agents have arbitrary expectations of future
constraints.13

If excess supply of labour is expected then current

consumption demand is lower than when expectations are Wairasian, and
so a rise in the current real wage is required to choke off the incipient
excess supply of current output.

This causes a fall in the current

demand for labour, and so the region of current excess labour supply
expands.

(46)

Formally, (45) must now be replaced by:

LMEL1(W,ESL):

where (.)

givs

L =
e1[c(L2;

p2, w2; g1)]

the solution for w1 of equation (10) with households'

lifetime income equal to Y (equation (20)) rather than Y.

As in

Section 3,

therefore,

property:

the region of (w2,p2) space consistent with unemployment

expectations of unemployment exhibit a "bootstraps"

today is larger the more pessimistic the expectation of unemployment
tomorrow.
By contrast, if excess demand for labour is

expected to prevail

tomorrow, the likelihood of current excess supply of rather than

37

demand for labour is increased, arid so the "bootstraps" phenomenon does
not emerge.

As in Section 3, this arises because of the Oomplementarity

between employment and investment next period: if firms expect to
face

to

a labour—market constraint their current investment demand falls;

avoid a current excess supply of goods w1 must

region

rise, and so the

of current excess supply of labour expands.

Of course, as in

Section 3, this argument must be qualified by the fact that an arbitrary
expected
the

employment constraint

is only binding if it is

less than

notional future demand for labour:

e2 <

(47)

e2(p2, w2)

When e2 equals L equation (47)
if firms

than

with equality is simply the LMEL2;

(irrationally) expect to face

an employment

constraint less

L then (47) with equality is an upward-sloping locus with the

same slope as, but to the left of, the LL2. In either case the area
within which (47) binds is to the right of this locus, and so arbitrary
expectations of excess demand for

Figure

labour affect the diagram as shown in

9, causing the region of current unemployment to expand rather

than contract.

What if constraint expectations are rational?
does

Once again, this

not rule out unemployment or excess demand for labour in the

current period.

However, under the assumptions of the present section

it introduces a new feature: not all (w2,p2) combinations are now

38

consistent

with a rational—constraint_expectations equilibrium, because

be

at most only two markets in both periods can
equilibrium.

out of Wairasian

To illustrate this point, consider the possibility of

a rational-constraint_expectations equilibrium exhibiting excess supply
of labour in both periods.

Such an equilibrium must

to the left of both loci in Figure 8.

lie

in the region

But the (w2,p2) coordinates of

an arbitrary point in this region uniquely determine a second-period
level of employment (since the latter always equals

e2(p2,w2) in this

when combined with the requirement that the first-period goods
market must clear this in turn determines unique values for
and
region);

w1

the

first-period level of employment.

But with rational constraint

expectations it is necessary that these values of

(w11p2,w21f1,2)
be such that the second—period goods market is guaranteed to clear.
In other words, their values must satisfy the relevant
GMEL2:

(48)

where

GMEL2(ESL,ESL):

the current

market;

+

c2[2;

w1e1(w1)

+

w2e2(p21w2

+

g2

=

y2(p21w2)

real wage is such that it clears the current goods

i.e., w1 must satisfy:

(49) GMEL1(ESL,ESL) :

ci[p2; i + w1e1(w1) +

w2e2(p21w2

+

g1

=

y1(w1,p2,w2)

These two equations define a locus in

(w21p2) space, whose location

may be determined by means of the same

geometric

techniques

that were

39

used in Section 4, and which is illustrated by the dashed line in
Figure 8.

This construction (which may be repeated for other kinds of

illustrates the point that only some (w21p2) combinations
consistent with rational constraint expectations when the current

equilibria)
are

wage rate is flexible and the goods market clears in both periods.
it

But

also shows that even current wage flexibility combined with rational

expectations does not eliminate
only

unemployment: any

rigidity, even if

in expected future wages and prices (which are generally unobserv-

able, of course), is sufficient to rule out the necessity of full
employment prevailing today and hence to provide a role for anticipated
changes in government policy.

7. SUMMARY MV CONCLUSION

This paper has presented a simple two-period model of temporary
equilibrium with rationing which lays considerable stress on agents'
expectations

of the constraints which they may face in the future.

Arbitrary constraint expectations were shown to permit multiple

equilibria, with more than one regime in the present period being
consistent
and prices.

with a given vector of current and expected future wages
Moreover, such expectations were shown to exhibit a

"bootstraps" property, so that, for example, Keynesian unemployment

40

is

more likely than Classical unemployment to prevail today if it is

expected to prevail tomorrow, and vice versa.

It was also shown that Wairasian equilibrium and the impotence
of goverment policy are not guaranteed by rational constraint expectations, in the sense of perfect foresight of future constraint levels.
On the contrary, such expectations actually increase the probability
that Keynesian unemployment will prevail today relative to Walrasian
expectations, and they raise the value of the government multiplier.
Even when all current prices and wages are flexible, as in Section 6,
rati:onal expectations do not guarantee full employment: any rigidity
in wages or prices, even if only in the expectations of their future
levels -

which in any case is highly likely, given the absense of

futures markets -

is

sufficient to generate excess demand for or excess

supply of labour in the current period.

These results suggest that

the critique of the effectiveness of government policy presented by
"new Classical macroeconomists", such as Lucas (1973) and Sargent and
Wallace (1975), rests primarily on their assumption that wages and
prices move instantaneously to clear markets, and not on their use of
the rational expectations hypothesis.

One obvious objection to our concept of rational constraint
expectations (obvious at least to Robert Barro, whom we thank for
pointing it
should

out) is

that with so much information available agents

be able to change prices directly to attain the first-best

Walrasian equilibrium.

We believe, however, that this type of argument

41

greatly underestimates the difficulties of concerting individual
behaviour in a decentralised economy with highly imperfect information.
In any case, we defend rational constraint expectations, not on the
grounds that we believe in their descriptive realism, but because they

the role of wage—price rigidities (including rigidities in

isolate

expected future wages and prices) in giving rise to unemployment, inter—
market

spillovers, and other such Keynesian phenomena.

Finally, we would argue that even though wage-price flexibility
may eventually bring the economy to Wairasian equilibrium it is unlikely
to do so by a swift or easy route.
may bring about

to

The facts that shifin expectations

substantial changes in the wage-price vector required

achieve Walrasian equilibrium, and that (as noted in Section 6) the

market whose price is sticky need not be the one which fails to clear,

suggest a sort of "dynamic second-best theorem": with limited flexibility
of some prices, increasing the flexibility of other prices may reduce
rather than increase the ability of the system to return to Walrasian

equilibrium. A full consideration of such dynamic problems, as well
as

an evaluation of the ability of the real-balance effect -

excluded

by assumption from our model — to ensure the reattainment of equilibrium,

are topics to which we hope

to return.

42

APPNVIX

THE

BEHAViOUR OF THE FIRM

The behaviour of the firm under different constraint regimes can
be derived directly bY solving (6) subject to (7), (8) and appropriate
additional constraints, but it is easier and more illuminating to adopt
a dual approach, along with the concept of "virtual" prices used by
Neary and Roberts (1979).

Consider first the case of no constraints in either period,
where we may define the unconstrained profit function as follows (note
that it is convenient throughout this Appendix to work with p1 explicity):

(A.l)

Tr(p1,w1,p2,w2) =

Max

e11e2,I

[P1{F(e1)_I}_we1+ p2H(e211) — w2e2]

By Shephard's Lemma the partial derivatives of this function give the
unconstrained employment demand and output supply functions for each
period:

=

(P.2)

p1

y1

'ii

Suppose now that the firm
period: y <

y1.

=-e

w1

faces

11

=y 2

TF

-

W2

=-e 2

a sales constraint in the current

Its behaviour in this case may be deduced from the

43

constrained profit function, (y1;p1,w11p21w2), and as in Neary and
Roberts (op.cit.), the properties of the latter are most easily
determined by relating it to the unconstrained profit function evaluated

at the virtual price p1:

(A.3)

Max

(1;p11W11p2,w2)

=

(A.4)

[(P1iw1P2iw2):
+

¶(p1,w1,p21w2)

yl<

(p1—p1)y1

where the virtual price, that price which would induce an unconstrained

firm to produce y, is defined implicitly by:

=

(A.5)

It is easily seen that the constrained and unconstrained current
employment demand functions coincide when the latter is eva1itated at

the virtual price

(A.6)

1

=

-'ii

=

-

w1

- (ii
W1

p1

- y—

)

pl = -

1 w1

w1

Hence the effect of a change in the sales constraint on current employment demand is found to be:

(A.7)

— = —iTW

—
2i;

1 1 cy1

44

=

(A.8)

-r

> 0
P1P1

wipi

Other properties of the firm's behaviour in the face of the sales
constraint may be deduced in a similar manner.

— = -r -r —

(A.9)

w1

wl

+ ii

—l

'ii

wlpl p1p1

iT

p1w1

the second term in (A.lO) is positive this yields a Le Chatelier-

type result:
locally)

the imposition of a sales constraint reduces (at least

the responsiveness of employment demand to a change in wages.

Consider
in

w1p1 w1

w1w1

=

(A.1O)

Since

For example:

both periods:

fashion

next the case where the firm faces a sales constraint
<

y1

and y2 <

y2.

We may proceed in an analogous

to define a doubly-constrained profit function:

1

(A.ll)

;(112;p1,w1,p21w2) =

(A.12)

=

(A.13)

=

Max[iT(y1;p1w1iQ2,w2):

1T(y1;p11w1,p21w2)

Tr(p1,w112,w2)

+

+

y2 y2]

(p2—p2Y2

(p1—p1)y1

+

45

The two virtual prices,

replacing

are now

and

straints

corresponding to the two con-

and

jointly determined by (A.5) (with

p2) and (A.14):
=

(A.14)

1T

(p11w1,p2,w2)

As before the doubly—constrained and unconstrained labour demand

functions

coincide when the latter is evaluated at

and

A

=

(A.15)

1

-rw1

=

= -Tr

-T

w1

w1

Hence:

(A.16)

This

—

——

=

w1p

—
w1p1 l
is zero (i.e.

may be simplified by recalling that ir
1p2.

unconstrained

current employment demand is independent of the future

output price) and by solving (A.5) and (A.l4) for p1/y1.

This

yields:

(A.17)

=

- iT

r
Iii

w1p1p1p1

-

1-1
Tr

11

I

p1p2 p2p2 P2P1J

This is clearly greater than (A.8), which proves that (as was asserted

46

in Section 5) the presence of an expected future sales constraint
increases the responsiveness of current employment demand to a
relaxation of the current sales constraint.

It should be clear how these techniques may be used to deduce
the behaviour of the firm in the presence of other combinations of
constraints.

47

FOOTNOTES

1.

The Barro—Grossman-Maljnvaud model has been further examined and extended

Hool (1978), and Muellbauer and

by Hildenbrand and Hildenirand (1977) ,

Portes (1978); its dynamic behaviour (under ttonnement-type assumptions)
has been studied by Barro and Grossman (1976, Chap. 2), Blad and Kirman
(1978), B3hm (1978) , Dehez and Gabszewicz (1978) and Honkapohja (1978)

and it or similar models have been applied to public finance by Dixit
(1976) and to international economics by Dixit (1978) and Neary (1979)

2.

For a detailed examination of the causes and consequences of wage and
price rigidities, see Stiglitz (1978)

3.

Note that the model is a monetary one, but only in a rudimentary way.
Wage payments in the first period are made in the form of money, since
if they were made in the form of goods the model would always satisfy
Say's Law.

However the purchasing power of money is fixed in terms of

current output, and so the model contains only three relative prices:

w1, p2 andw2.

4.

If capital markets were perfect, the discount factor

would equal

unity (since p2 is a present—value expected price, and so has already
been deflated by one plus the discount rate).

Allowing

to differ

from unity is therefore an artificiality attempting to capture the effects
of imperfections in the capital market.

48

5.

If the state of technology is given, the current production function

F(.) may be viewed as identical to the future production function H(.)
with a predetermined level of investment:

F(e1) =

H(e1,f),

We explicitly

assume that H(.) exhibits diminishing returns to scale (thus ruling out,
for example, the form

H(e2, I) =

F(e2) +

I)

since

otherwise future—

period production levels would be indeterminate unless firms expected
to face a sales constraint next period.

6.

The derivation of the firm's behavioural functions

is sketched in the

Appendix.

7.

Henceforward each effective equilibrium locus is specified as contingent

on two regimes, indicated in parentheses: the first is the regime which
prevails in the current period, and the second that which is expected to
prevail next period.

8.

As in Neary (1979) we adopt the following notational convention: a bar

over a variable (e.g., e1) indicates that, from the point of view of
the agent under consideration, its value is predetermined in the current

period; a tilde (e.g., y1) indicates a function or parameter arising
from behaviour in the face of a labour—market

(e.g., )

indicates

constraint; a circumflex

behaviour in the face of a goods—market constraint;

and corresponding symbols are used to indicate behaviour in the face of

multiple constraints (e.g., l'

etc.)

49

9.

Figures 1 and 2 are in fact identical to the corresponding diagrams
illustrating the regions of notional and effective éqüilibria in

(w/p, m/p) space in the Barro-Grossman-Malinvaud model, provided
it is assumed that labour is supplied inelastically and that investment
may be carried out by firms.

When reinterpreted in this way, Figure 2

may be used to illustrate a Point! made in Section 1 above: Consider a
Barro—Grossman—Malinvaud economy where the real wage is at its Walrasian
level but initial nominal money balances are too low to achieve full
employment (i.e., the initial equilibrium lies directly to the left of

point

A in the diagram corresponding to Figure 2) .

stances a proportionate reduction in w and

full
10.

In these circum-

p will necessarily restore

employment through the real-balance effect.

Because of our assumptions about the form of the household's utility
function, the constrained consumption function in (22) is determined
by

the budget constraint alone, and so takes the particularly simple

form:

increase

= Y —

p2c2.

We continue to assume that the effect of an

in p2 in reducing current supply outweighs its depressing

effect on demand; i.e., that a fall in the interest rate raises
investment demand by more than it raises the supply of savings.

11.

It should be clear that multiple equilibria follow in our one-consumer
model from the presence of parametric constraint expectations, by
contrast with the model of Hildenbrand and Hildenbrand (1977) where

50

multiple equilibria arise from the assumption of general utility
functions combined with a disaggregated consumer sector, in a model
which is otherwise identical to Malinvaud's.

12.

whether or not rational constraint expectations are consistent with
multiple equilibria is still an unresolved question.

Guy Laroque has

proved, in a model which is formally rather similar to ours, although
its interpretation is different, that rationing equilibria are unique
in the neighbourhood of the Wairasian equilibrium, which suggests that
the multiple equilibria which (as we showed in Section 3) are very
likely to arise when constraint expectations are arbitrary, cannot
arise when constraint expectations are rational.

Of course, multiple

equilibria are still possible in the sense that a given

(w1, p2)

combination may be consistent with a number of different current regimes
when constraint expectations are rational, depending on the (unobservable)
value of the expected future wage rate

13.

w2.

We assume for simplicity that agents never expect disequilibrium in
the future goods market.

51

REFERENCES

Barro,

R.J. and H.I. Grossman (1971): "A General Disequilibrium Model
of Income and Employment", American Economic Review, Vol. 61, 82—93.

Barro, R.J. and H.I. Grossman (1976): Money, Employment and Inflation,

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Benassy, J.P. (1975): "Neo-Keynesiari Disequilibrium in a Monetary

Economy", Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 42, 503—523.

Blad, M.C., and

A.P. Kirman (1978): "The Long-Run Evolution of a

Rationed Equilibrium Model", University of Warwick Economic
Researck Paper, No. 128.

Bhm, V. (1978): "Disequilibrium Dynamics in a Simple Macroeconomic
Model", Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 17, 179—199.

dower, R.W. (1965): "The Keynesian Counter-Revolution: A Theoretical
Appraisal", in F.H. Hahn and F Brechling (eds.): The Theory of
Interest Rates, London: Macmillan.

Dehez, P. and J.J. Gabszewicz (1978): "Savings Behaviour and Disequilibrium
Analysis", Colloques Internationaux du C.N.R.S., No'. 259, 197-212;

CORE Reprint No. 313.

Dixit, A.K. (1976): "Public Finance in a Keynesian Temporary Equilibrium",
Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 12, 242-58.

52

Dixit, A.K. (1978): "The Balance of Trade in a Model of Temporary
Equilibrium with Rationing", Review of Economic Studies,
Vol.

45, 393—404.

Granthnont, J.M. (1977): "Temporary

Econometrica,

General Equilibrium Theory",

Vol. 45, 535-573.

Hansen, B. (1951): A Study in the Theory of Inflation, London:
Allen and Unwin.

Hicks, J.R. (1974): The Crisis in Keynesian Economics, Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.

Hildenbrand, K., and W. Hildenbrand (1976): "On Malinvaud's
'Reconsideration of the Theory of Unemployment'", Institute of

Business and Economic Research, University of California,
Berkeley, Paper No. 244, December.

Honkapohja, S. (1978): "On the Dynamics of Disequilibria in a Macro
Model with Flexible Wages and Prices", mimeo, Yrj6 Jahnsson
Foundation, Heksinki.

Hool, B. (1977): "Monetary and Fiscal Policies in Equilibria with
Rationing", mimeo., University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Leijonhufoud, A. (1968): On Keynesian Economics and the Economics
of Keynes, New York: Oxford University Press.

53

Lucas, R.E. (1973): "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation
Trade—Offs", Amrican Economic Review, Vol. 63, 326—34.

Malinvaud, E. (1977): The Theory of Unemployment Reconsidered,

Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Muellbauer, J., and R. Portes (1978) :

"Macroeconomic Models with

Quantity Rationing", Economic Journal, Vol. 88, 788—821.

Neary, J.P. (1979): "Non-Traded Goods and the Balance of Trade in a
Neo—Keynesian Temporary Equilibrium", Quarterly Journal of
Economics (forthcoming).

Neary, J.P. and K.W.S. Roberts (1979): "The Theory of Household
Behaviour

under Rationing", European Economic Review (forthcoming)

Patinkin, D. (1965): Money, Interest and Prices: An Integration of
Monetary and Value Theory, Second Edition, New York: Harper
and Row.

Sargent, T.J. and N. Wallace (1975): "'Rational' Expectations, the
the Optimal Money Supply

Optimal

Monetary Instrument, and

Journal

of Political Economy, Vol. 83, 241-54.

Rule",

Solow, R.M. and J.E. Stiglitz (1968): "Output, Employment and Wages
in the Short Run", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 82, 537-60.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1978): Lectures in Macroeconomics, All Souls' College,
Oxford.

54

Wi

Wi
ES L

EDG
K

W

C

LME L

EDL

E DL

ESG

E DG

\

R
\

p2
Figure 2
Figure 1

Wi

Wi

c2c2 (p2,Y)

/

/

(W,E)
(W,W)
U

p2

*
p2

p2

p2
Figure 4

Figure 3

c

Wi

\

\

\\
\D

/F

4

-

"k"

Figure 5

w

-

A"

/I

\

\

'3

A'

\\
c.

p p

p2

55

Wi

\
\\E—

Wi

\
\

\

A

/

/

//4—

I

I
Figure 6

p2

Figure 7

W2

e2e2

W2

EDL1

ESL2

LMEL2 (w,w)

/

/
/
/

,w2)

E DL1

w

EDL2

\\

LMEL1(W,W)

(W,W)

p
Figure 8

LMEL1(W,EDL)

p2

Figure 9

