                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          EXCHANGE RATES AND PORTFOLIO BALANCE



                     John P. Martin
                     Paul R. Masson


                  Working Paper No. 31T




           NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                    Cambridge MA 02138

                       August 19T9




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research, nor of the institutions to
which the authors are affiliated.
                                                   NBER Working Paper 37
                                                     Revised October 1979




                 Exchange Rates and Portfolio Balance


                              ABS TRACT




     An open economy portfolio balance model, describing allocation among

money, a domestic bond, and a traded foreign currency bond is developed

for a world of many countries. A special role is attributed to the

dollar, namely that all internationally traded bonds are denominated in

that currency. It is shown that in the short run with real variables

exogenous and expectations static, stability requires that all countries

except the U.S. be net creditors in dollar-denominated bonds.

     What data are available on inter-country claims suggest that

some countries may well be net debtors abroad in foreign currency. In

particular, if one excludes direct investment claims, private claims

on the rest of the world by Japan and Canada have been negative over the

period of floating rates since 1973. However, some preliminary reduced—

form regression equations for the dollar exchange rates of these two

countries do not support the implications of the portfolio balance model

in the debtor case. On the other hand, an equation for a composite of

Western European currencies (by our calculations, this group of countries

is a net creditor) gives more promising results.



John R. Martin                               Paul R. Masson
OECD                                         Bank of Canada
2, rue Andre-Pascal                          Ottawa K1A 0G9
75775 Paris Cedex 16                         Canada
France
                                             613/563—8222
524—9358
I. Introduction

     The purpose of this paper is to consider in detail the theoretical properties

of a model of exchange rate determination that appears increasingly in the

literature, and to subject it to some empirical tests. The motivation for the

development of this general class of models, which broadly-speaking can be des-

cribed as portfolio balance models, is the increasing importance in the post-war

years of capital flows compared to trade flows, aided by such factors as the

return to convertibility of European currencies in the nineteen-fifties and the

more recent enormous growth of Euro-currency markets, and the recognition that

capital flows should be modelled via the underlying asset demands rather than

as independent entities. In consequence, the exchange rate has come to be seen

as an asset price rather than a goods price, and exchange rate determination

to be inextricably linked to portfolio allocation among assets denominated in

home and foreign currencies.

     Portfolio balance models of the exchange rate are also a natural development

of closed economy portfolio allocation models most closely associated with the

work of James Tobin and others of the Yale School. As such they enforce consistency

across asset demand equations and do not focus on only a restricted set of assets

(e.g. monies), but rather consider the whole menu of assets to which wealth can

be allocated (albeit in a necessarily aggregative fashion). Consequently, such

portfolio balance models have great theoretical appeal when one is trying to

explain exchange rate movements.

     However, it is argued here that there are some theoretical features of such

models that have not been widely recognized, and that these features have consi-

derable empirical significance. They relate to the sign of a country's net position

in assets denominated in foreign currency. If it is negative, that is, the country

is a net debtor in foreign currency assets, then the signs of most comparative
  statics results are reversed. Whereas in the net creditor case an increase in

  the home money supply, or a purchase of foreign currency in the exchange market,

  will tend to depreciate the home currency, the opposite is true for a net debtor

  country.1 Even more disturbing, in the net debtor case the comparative statics

  positions are not stable equilibria; shocks to the exchange rate will be self-

  reinforcing rather than bringing about a return to the initial position.

           The above-mentioned properties, both because they conflict with intuition

  and because they have such major implications for policy, must necessarily

  induce a certain wariness about use of portfolio balance models for exchange

  rate determination until they have been subjected to considerable empirical

  testing. On the one hand one may be tempted to reject such models out of hand,

  at least for net debtor countries (which, as we shall see below, are numerically

  important). On the other hand, one may find some heuristic support for such

  models in observed exchange rate volatility for countries like Canada which are

  clearly net debtors in foreign currency. Neither reaction is a satisfactory

  substitute for careful testing of the model, which we attempt to do below.

           The plan of the paper is as follows. Section II generalizes the portfolio

  balance model to a multi-country framework in order to make it empirically

  relevant and derives comparative static and stability results. The model ascribes

  a special role to the U.S. dollar; al1J.nternatjona1 claims and liabilities are as

  sinned   denominated   In that currency.   Section   III   gathers together what   data   exist for
- Leatir)q tbe m l,whichreq.iizes bilateral net claims on the ilnitpd
  countries: exchange rate equations aze tested                             and awesternEurope
  vmposite currency, corresponding to available bilateral asset stocJç. Xt happens that

   (1) See, for instance, Boyer (1976)       and Henderson (1977).




                                      I
                                           -4-

the first tw    countries   are riet   debtos, thus   pointing lip   the   empirical Importance

of   this case. Regression results are reported, and they prove generally unfa-

vourable to the model. Section IV sketches a few conclusions.

II. Portfolio Balance Models of the Open Economy

      What is meant here by portfolio balance models (and this term will be used

henceforth in the restricted sense as a shorthand) is an extension of a closed-

economy asset allocation model (see, for instance, Tobin (1969)) to include

holdings of assets denominated in foreign currencies. What we view as essential

characteristics of such models are as follows:

       (1) wealth-owners in a given country translate their foreign assets (or

          the relevant part of their foreign assets, such as fixed price bonds)

          into domestic currency using the prevailing exchange rate, and

       (2) with unchanged interest rates and risk, there is some determinate

          proportion of national wealth that invetors desire to hold in each of

          the domestic and foreign assets (the latter after translation into

          domestic currency).

      The model presented and tested in this paper possesses the above characteristics,

and shares other features with portfolio balance models appearing in the literature:

assets considered are money, domestic bonds and a foreign bond; real output and

income, prices and the current account balance are assumed exogenous. The model

does not assume, however, that one of the countries is "small", i.e. that it has

no effect on financial conditions abroad and hence can be taken as exogenous

to it (this was the assumption in, for instance, Branson, Haittunen, and Masson

(1977) and Flood (1976)). Furthermore, it considers the effect of intervention

on domestic asset markets and the exchange rate, as do Girton and Henderson (1977)


(1) The proportions may vary with wealth if demand functions are not homogeneous.
                                         - .) -

 in   their theoretical model.

       An innovation here is the attempt to account in a consistent way for

developments in many countries. A shortcoming of much modelling work is that

only two countries -     or   one country and an exogenous "rest of the world" -   are
considered, and a bilateral spot rate is then related to the developments in

each of the two countries. Other countries are ignored or ad hoc assumptions

are made in order to yield the result desired, namely the independence of the

spot rate considered from third-country effects. Empirical testing of the

portfolio balance model of exchange rate determination requires, on the contrary,

that it be formulated in a form consistent with the data available. It must

account for the realities of a multi-country world if it is in fact true that

rebalancing of portfolios by the residents of each country in response to an

exchange rate change is a significant and predictable force - as the portfolio

balance model assumes. This is not to say that there do not exist consistent

multi-country exchange rate models - examples are the IMF MERM model (Artus

and Rhomberg (1973)) and that of Armington (1979) -      but   the primary mechanism

by which exchange rates get determined is not through the rebalancing of national

portfolios of financial assets.1

       A conceptual framework exists for examining in complete generality the

effects on exchange rates of asset holdings2: ideally one should look at a

three-dimensional matrix of claims, with an index for the borrowing country,

the lending country, and the currency of denomination. In practice such data

are simply not available. Even if one excludes direct investment, where there

are notorious problems in measuring the market value of the underlying stock,

the remaining assets are so diverse and their statistical coverage so fragmentary


(1) The MERM model determines exchange rates to equilibrate trade flows, while
    Armington's model assumes that it is the global portfolio that is relevant,
    not the portfolios of individual countries.

(2) See Basevi (1973).
                                        -   -

as to make an attempt at empirical verification of a fully general model

fruitless.

     Fortunately the preeminent role of the dollar in world financial markets

makes possible a major simplification which does not do too great violence

to reality, namely that current account deficits and surpluses lead to decumu-

lations and accumulations of assets that are denominated in U.S. dollars,

excluding the portion corresponding to direct investment. This is consistent

with both the size of non-U.S. borrowing and lending in the Eurodollar and

domestic United States market, and the fact that a vast majority of official

intervention takes place in dollars. The assumption of the primary role of

the dollar also has the realistic implication that the United States must be

treated differently from other countries in a portfolio balance model. It is

such a model that we develop below, considering first comparative statics and

then dynamic stability.

(a) Comparative Statics Results

     We consider a world where only country 1, the United States, issues fixed-

price bonds (F) which are held internationally; its money (M1) is not traded.

Other countries (i=2,.. .   ,n)   issue non—traded money CM1) and bonds () ,the latter held

only by private domestic residents (BP) or the central bank (BG); but US

bonds are also held by private residents (FP) and by i's central bank (FG),

which keeps all its foreign exchange reserves in US bonds. The United States

central bank is assumed not to intervene in foreign exchange markets, and it

does not appear explicitly in the model.

     The portfolios of each country can thus be written schematically as follows,

assuming demand functions are homogeneous in wealth:
                                                          —I—


                                         United States Private Sector

         Money:           M1 = m1 (r1) W1

         Dollar bonds held domestically: F1 =
                                                                  f1   (r1) W1
         Wealth: M1 + F1                 =
                                             W1

                                                  Non-U.S. Country i

Private Sector                                                           Central Bank

M. =
 1
         m.(r
          11      ,   r.)
                       1
                            W.
                                1
                                                                         M. = BG. +
                                                                          1      1    FG./e
                                                                                       11
BP. =
     1
          b.
              1 (r 1,     r.)
                           1
                                    W.
                                     1
              =
FP/e1             f1 (r1, r) W
W. = M. + BP. +
 1        1           1
                            FP./e.  11
where r is the interest rate on the bond issued by country i, e1 is the spot

exchange rate expressed as dollars per unit of currency i, e is some fixed

exchange rate used by the central bank to value its foreign exchange reserves

(arbitrarily set at 1, as is the initial value of e) so that capital gains or

losses are not reflected in the money supply.

         Asset holders are assumed to have static expectations, that is, their

expectation of the relevant future rate is just this period's rate. In general,

however, demand functions should include the U.S. interest rate minus the

expected rate of change of the exchange rate; the difficulty in modelling expec-

tations of the exchange rate and some partial evidence that it may follow a

random walk have led us to omit this term.

         As the model is a short-run financial model which abstracts from the

influence of conditions in flow markets, the current account is taken as

exogenous (in terms of dollars). This means that each country's holdings (Ft)

of dollar bonds (except for the U.S.) are predetermined as the sum of past

current account (CA) surpluses, that is, F = FP1 + FG1 =                             J   CA. (t)dt or
alternatively that

                       +             =
     dF = dFP              dFG            CA     (i=2,...,n)

Similarly,
                                            n
     dF1 =dF+CA1 =dF-ECA.1
                                             2
where F is the net supply of dollar bonds by the United States (other countries

can issue dollar bonds, but their net holdings are each still limited by their

cumulated current accountsW).

    We are interested in the effect on exchange rates e2 to e and incidentally

on interest rates r1 to rn, of changes in the asset stocks: money supplies,

U.S. issue of dollar bonds, other countries' supplies of non-traded bonds,

current account surpluses, and foreign exchange market intervention. It

should be noted that the latter cannot change the net wealth of the private

sector, but rather affects the shares of dollar bonds held by the private

sector and the central bank, with offsetting changes to private sector holdings

of domestic bonds (if there is complete sterilisation) or domestic bonds and

money (if sterilisation is incomplete). Intervention is thus best viewed as

an open-market swap of foreign bonds for domestic bonds (and perhaps money),

just as domestic monetary policy is an open market swap of domestic bonds for

domestic money.

    We thus differentiate the market clearing conditions, of which we have

2n, only 2n-1 of which are independent (we eliminate that for U.S. bonds), after

noting that with e1=1 initially, the change in wealth can be simplified to

     dW =    dM       + dF -             dF.1
       1          1
                                 2
     dW. = dB. + dF. - FP.de. (i=2,.. .,n),
       1     1     1     1 1
to yield


(1) Net of direct investment outflows. This will be discussed more fully below,
    in the empirical section.
       dM1 = W1m11 dr1 + rn1 (dM1 + dF -                                                      E   dF.)

       dM. = W.
         1    1
                                   (m. dr +
                                       ii            1
                                                               in..
                                                                11
                                                                    dr.)
                                                                      1
                                                                                    +   in.
                                                                                         1
                                                                                            (dB.1        +dF. - FP. de.)
                                                                                                            1     1   1
       dB.1       -       dBG.
                                   1
                                           dB. + dFG. - dM.
                                             1      1     1
        = W.
              1
                      (b. dr1 +
                           ii                        b..
                                                      ii
                                                                dr.) +
                                                                  1
                                                                              b.1       (dB. +
                                                                                           1
                                                                                                      dF.1   -   FP. de.)
                                                                                                                   1   1

where   in..
          13
                      =    am./ar.,
                            1   3
                                                     b.. =
                                                         13
                                                                   Bb./r.,
                                                                    1   3
                                                                                         f. .
                                                                                             13
                                                                                                  =
                                                                                                         1       3
                                                                                                                      etc., and

m. .<0 for all i, j;                             b.ii <0, b.1]..>0,                     ii
                                                                                    f. .<0 all 1>1, f. >0 for all i.
                                                                                                                     ii
 13

In    matrix terms, the system of 2n-1 equations can be written in the form

Ady = Bdx, (see page 10).

After inverting the matrix on the left and multiplying by the matrix B, one

can derive the following:

        de.
          1
             .1 W.
                1 (1-rn 1)                                                                                            a money financed budget
        dM - . PP. m W                                                                                                deficit in U.S.
          1   1    1 11 1
        de.- _. W.1 in1
        dF
           -
             . iFP.1 11
                               'i           rn           W
                                                                                                                      a bond financed budget
                                                                                                                      deficit in U.S.
                                                           1

                                                     —
        de                                     —                                                                      an open market purchase
        W'1               dBG.=dM.
                             1   1                    c. FP.
                                                          1        1
                                                                                                                      of bonds



        de.                f.. in. -in.. f.
                               11          1              11 1                                                        a bond financed budget
                  -
        dB.
          1                            .
                                       1
                                         FP.
                                           1
                                                                                                                      deficit

        de.1              de.              de.
        dB.
                  =         1 =
                          dM.
                                  1
                                dFG.
                                                           = 0      if ji                                             cross   effects
          3                    3                 3


        de.                    11
          1 =             —1  i.W.rn
                          FP. .
                                                               1       + 1)                                           a current account surplus
        dF.
             1                 1
                                    W
                                               1 11 1
                                                 rn                                                                   with U.S.


        de.1
                  =        i11
                          iji.W.m
                          ''                                                                                          a current account surplus of
        dF
          j               "i FP i m
                                  11W1                                                                                a third country with U.S.

        de.                        m..
                           -
        dFG1
                      =
                                   Fp                 ;                                                               purchase of foreign exchange
                                                                                                             IM,

                                                                                                            iF
                                                                                                            a,1x
                                                                                                             a
                                                                                                             S



              —                       0                                   ' J''       O_   •   ••   a
                                          a

              o FP            0           a                    S
                                                                                                             0

          •                               a          •
                                                                         .0'                                 •
                             .                                            .'               0                 a

                                 Mj           rIp'                             ;rfl
W;L               -bFP                    •
                             0            S

SI
                         a
                                          S
                                                                   a
                                                                                           •0   S           a
      0            0                                     S.-           i0 •'                                 a
                             —                                                                      I   I
                                                          -1
                                                                                                            dLf

                                                                                                             a


                                                                                                            a
    where       iP. =            Tn.j -              b11) > 0
                         (b.1              m11


                 1
                     =   (m.. b. -
                           11 1           b..
                                           11 m.)
                                               1           < 0.


         The changes in current balances and budget deficits being considered are

    assumed to be the result of autonomous shifts in savings (in the first case)

    and in investment (in the second case) which are not induced by either interest

    rates or exchange rates. This is not to deny that these linkages do exist,

    just that the lags involved are long relative to the short run time frame of

    exchange rate determination. Since they thus do not pose simultaneity problems

    for estimation, these linkages need not be considered here.

         The derivatives de./dF. and de./dF. give results for the case where the
                           1   :i      1   3
    current account surplus run by i or j is solely at the expense of the United
*
    States;     furthermore as F is being kept constant, the U.S. authorities are

    assumed not to issue bonds in response to the iVcreased foreign demand for

    dollar bonds. Other cases are also of interest, however, and can easily be

    calculated from the above derivatives. In particular, (1) if i's current

    account is at the expense of a third country k:

         de.
                                           =           1
         dF dF k =              -dF.1                      1

    (2) if j's current account is at the expense of a third country k (k1, ki):

         de.
                                                 0



    (3) if the U.S. issues bonds equal to the increased demand for dollar bonds due

    to surpluses by i or j at the expense of the U.S.:

         de.
                                           =           1
         dF1         dF=dF.
                            1                              1

         de.
                                            =     0
         dF3.     IdF=dF.
(4) if the authorities in country i absorb the current account surplus with

the U.S. by intervening in the foreign exchange market:

     de.
       1                   =1                      I
                                                       .1 W.1 1
                                                              in        m.
                                                                         1
                                                                             f.. -
                                                                              11
                                                                                     f.1 11
                                                                                        in..
                                                                    +
           dFG. =                                      4. m1
     dFi            dF                             L           W1

(5) if the authorities of i absorb the current account surplus with a third
country k by intervening:

     de                         1     x    I           ..11in.1 - f.1 rn..l
                                                                      11         =
                                                                                      de.

     dF dFk =       -dF1    FPi

           dFG. = dF.                      [                                 J
              1     1

(6) if the U.S. increases the money supply by open-market operations rather
than a budget deficit:



     dM
       1
                dF = -dM
                            1
                                    =FP.
                                       1
                                               r
                                               I
                                                       1W.1
                                               L
     The latter impact must be worked out separately because the U.S. central

bank does not appear explicitly, so that F1, the stock of bonds held by the

private sector, was implicitly held constant for de/dM1 given above.

     Given the pattern of signs of the partial derivatives of asset demand

functions, one can in most cases determine the direction of the comparative

statics results. One knows in addition that

     m+b1+f1                        i=(2,...,n)

and that money and bond stocks have to be positive. However, f is the ratio

of a net stock of dollar bonds (resulting from all past current account

surpluses and deficits minus central bank interventions) and hence need not

be positive. In particular, there is no reason to exclude borrowing in dollars

to finance a current account deficit, either from the United States or from

third countries, and there is no reason to exclude the possibility of a country's
private sector being a net debtor internationally.

     The implication for our comparative statics results is major, as each

of the derivatives changes signs as FP (and hence f1) moves from positive

to negative. We therefore present the comparative statics results below

for two cases, first where country i is a net creditor internationally,

second where it is a net debtor (see Table 1).

     It is striking that if the portfolio balance model holds (and abstracting

from possible additional feedbacks through expectations, and price and output

changes), the effect of the exogenous variables is completely opposite depending

on the sign of the net foreign asset position. This is a strong and

radical implication of the model, for it implies that intervention is perverse

  a country's private sector is a net debtor: purchase of foreign exchange

drives up the value of one's currency! This and other implications of the model

will be tested below in the empirical section

(b) Short-Run Dynamic Stability

     It is of interest to determine under what conditions the portfolio balance

model presented above will be stable, that is, will return to its equilibrium

position when shocked. We postulate a simple adjustment process in which

each country's interest rate responds positively to excess demand for money

and its exchange rate negatively to excess demand for foreign currency assets

on the part of its residents. Writing this as

           =
               c1 (in1 (r1) W1 - M1)

     :1.
           =   c.1   (in.  { r.)
                       1 (r , i
                                   W. - M.)
                                    1    1

           = _d       (f. (ri, r) W -    FP./e.)   i=2,. ..,n


(1) Except for those cases where a positive net position does not permit the
    sign of the derivatives to be determined.
                                         - 14 -

                                        Table   1

                       Effect on the Dollar Price of i's Currency

                                                             Sign of i's Private
                                                             Net Foreign Asset
                                                                    Stock

of:                                                                 +

    1. Increase in U.S. money through open
         market operation                                           +

    2.   Increase in i's money through open
         market operation                                                    +

    3. Increase in the stock of dollar
         bonds                                                               +

    4. Increase in the stock of i's bonds

    5. Bilateral current account surplus with
       U.S.                                                         +

    6.   Bilateral current account surplus                          +        -
         with   a third couxitry                                (less than 5. in
                                                                 absolute value)

    7. Bilateral current account surplus with                       +        -
       U.S., financed by an increase in U.S.                    (magnitude equal to 6.)
       bonds)

    8. Intervention (Purchase of dollars) by                                 +
       central bank I
    9. Bilateral current account surplus with                       ?**
       U.S. with an equal central bank purchase
       of dollars

10. Bilateral current account surplus with a
    third country with an equal central bank                    (equal to line 4., smaller
    purchase of dollar                                          in magnitude than 9.)



*        This is positive if and only if dollar bonds are better substitutes for
         domestic bonds than is domestic money, in terms of demand elasticities.
**       This is positive if, but not only if, dollar bonds are better substitutes
         for domestic bonds than is domestic money.




                   I
                                                        - 15   -



where c1, d are (positive) speeds of adjustment, and a dot over a variable

indicates a time derivative.

       The adjustment equations can be linearised about the equilibrium values

y° =                                                to yield a system of equations of the form
       (r10,...,rO,e2O,...eO)
       I
       y         =   B(y-y   )


Stability requires that the characteristic roots of B have negative real parts,

and    a   necsssary condition for                  this to be true, for 1* positiv,    speeds of

adjustment, is               for leading principal minors to alt.rn*te in sign, starting
with nsgativ. (Bee Gandolfo (1971), Part III, Chapt.r 9).
     It can easily be shown, however, that the principal minors of B are

equal to those of A (given above in section 11(a)) since B can be transformed
into   A by subtracting row j from row 2j+1 (for j=2,. . .,n), leaving the values

of the relevant determinants unchanged. Therefore we shall discuss stability

in terms of the properties of matrix A.

       Consider the first n principal minors (call them P1 to                              Since the

determinant of a triangular matrix is the product of its diagonal elements
                        i                       .       i
       P. =
           :i.
                        II       m.. W. =   (1)1        II         in.. W.
                                                                         3
                       5=1                             j=1

for    i=            1,.. .,n    and these minors satisfy the stability conditions.

       The           value of principal minors                     (i=2,.. .,n) can be found through
partitioning the relevant matrix (call it A11) into
                                     n i-i
                                 n   S   T.
                                            1
       A.
       n+i-1
             =

                             i-i     U. V.
                                      1  1
                                               - 16       -



and recalling that by Schur's formula (see Dhrymes (1970), p.571) if V is

non-singular then

                 =   det   (A1) =      det       .     det (S_TV1U.),

from which it can be shown that




                                                                            j
                                  I                  i                                        n
        p
         n+i—1
                 =   (1)n+1..l    II     FP.         II       W.(b. .m.-b.m. .)m w
                                                                     3 3          11   1
                                                                                              ii m w
                                                                                                    kk k
                                 j=2            j=2                                        k=ii-l


It is clear that the only way all principal minors P can have sign (-1)'

Is for all FP >        0, j > 1.
        Thus it is necessary forstabj].jty inthis short—run asset m-ir
model   that all countries be net creditom in d'1lr xept the Jinitcd                                       -   -   ---
States):     if any country is a net debtor in foreign currency (because it has
a cumulated deficit on its current account-forcing it                      to   issue dollar bonds),
then    its currency will not return to its initial value when subject to a

random shock.

        The reason for this surprising result can best be understood by comparing

the portfolio rebalancing induced by an exchange rate shock in the net debtor

case with the net creditor case. Suppose a country is a net creditor in

foreign currency assets. A fall in its exchange rate will induce a rise in

the value of those assets and hence in wealth, but it will not in general

be desired to hold the increase in wealth solely in dollar bonds; the attempt

to shift out of dollar bonds into domestic assets (causing an incipient capital

inflow) will tend to appreciate the currency and re-establish the initial

exchange rate.

        In the case of the net debtor country, on the other hand, a fall in the

exchange rate will increase its foreign currency liabilities and hence
                                   — 17 —


decrease wealth. The consequence of the decrease in wealth will be the desire

to scale down all assets and liabilities; however, its dollar liabilities have

increased. The attempt to decrease foreign currency liabilities leads to an

incipient capital outflow and hence a further weakening of the exchange rate,

driving the rate even further from the initial value and again lowering wealth.

It could be argued that the creditor and debtor cases are not necessarily

symmetric, especially if the assets concerned are of longer term to maturity

than just one period. In the latter case, debtors may not be concerned with

the current value of their liabilities as they cannot repay them before maturity,

while creditors can dispose of their assets. However, if, as we assume here,

the relevant securities are marketable, debtors can repay their debts by

repurchasing them in the market.

    The unstable process described above wôuld onlycome to an end when forces

not captured in the model (expectations, output and price changes) dominated

the portfolio balance effects detailed here. For instance, if exchange rate

expectations are strongly regressive, and investors use a "normal" exchange

rate to value their liabilities, a change in the exchange rate will not induce

a perverse wealth effect. The argument suggests, therefore, that the comparative

static results in the net debtor case may have limited applicability, as the

observed values for exchange rates and asset stocks may not reflect so much

the expected change in the exchange rate produced by the exogenous variables

as the effect of those stabilizing forces. Alternatively, observed data may

correspond to disequilibrium positions that are only transitory. As the

states which are present in the comparative static results are not stable

equilibrium states, there is no presumption that they are likely to be observed.
                                 - 18   -



     Nonetheless, it is significant that under some conditions an exchange
rate model with eminently reasonable assumptions about portfolio behaviour

produces instability, without the assumption of destabilizing expectations.

Recent periods have witnessed a number of episodes in a number of currencies

where observers have talked of exchange rate movements feeding upon themselves.

These are usually ascribed to expectional forces extrapolating past changes.

More recently, the "vicious circle hypothesis" has linked falls in exchange

rates to the cumulated effect of import price increases, domestic inflation

and further depreciation):i) In addition, a literature on "overshooting"

has sprung up (see e.g. Dornbusch (1976)) where the faster adjustment of

financial markets than goods markets causes the exchange rate to overshoot its

equilibrium value in the short run, though eventually to return to it. Another

possible explanation of observed volatilitlin exchaige markets then emerges

from the analysis of this paper, namely perverse wealth effects making exchange

rate shocks self-reinforcing, at least in the short run where real variables

are constant.

III. Empirical Results

     In this section we apply the theoretical framework developed above to

monthly data on three spot exchange rates against the U.S. dollar: the Canadian

dollar, the Japanese yen and a weighted average exchange rate for Western

Europe.2 The choice of these particular bilateral exchange rates was dictated

by the availability of bilateral data on current accounts and direct investment

vis-à-vis the U.S. From these data we were able to calculate bilateral net

claims or liabilities on the U.S. by cumulating the balance of payments flows

(1) See Basevi and De Grauwe (1977).

(2) For this exercise Western Europe comprises Belgium, France, Germany, Italy,
    the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
                                  - 19   -



from benchmark values)1 The time period for estimation purposes runs from

April, 1973, the beginning of the managed floating regime, to April, 1978,

the latest observation available for certain series at the time of estimation.

     (1) Asset Stock Measures

     Three different measures of the bilateral foreign asset stock vis-â-vis

the U.S. were calculated: (1) the cumulated bilateral current account (henceforth

called FTB); (2) the cumulated overall current account excluding direct foreign

investment claims (CBBM); and (3) the cumulated bilateral current account

excluding direct foreign investment claims (FTED). The latter two measures

have strong intuitive appeal since long-term direct investment flows are not

related to the exchange rate in the same way as short-term financial flows,

as expected future earnings will to some extent offset exchange rate movements.

Clearly decisions about direct investment may be influenced by long-term

judgements concerning movements in real exchang'e rates. However, they do not

depend on current spot exchange rates to the same extent as short-term capital

flows. (2)   In addition, the theoretical discussion dealt with the portfolio

behaviour of the private sector. Thus, corresponding to each of the three

measures of the bilateral foreign asset stock, we calculated the net private

stock as the difference between total national net claims on the U.S. and the

authorities' holdings of foreign exchange reserves.

     Thus, in two respects our empirical analysis of the role of the foreign

asset stock represents an extension of Branson and Haittunen (1979). First,

we have calculated bilateral net foreign asset stocks whereas they used both

(1) See Appendix for sources of data.

(2) The case of long-term portfolio investment is more ambiguous. On the one
    hand, as such assets may be held for a short period, they may respond to the
    exchange rate in the same way as short-term assets. On the other hand,
    portfolio investment will include equity holdings the investment motive for
    which is very similar to direct investment.
                                   - 20   -




countries'   foreign asset stocks in the equation determining the bilateral rate.

Second, we also restrict the definition of the foreign asset stock to exclude

capital flows taking the form of direct investment.

     (ii) Net Creditor and Debtor Positions

    The theoretical analysis in Section II also highlighted the importance

of establishing whether the home country is a net creditor or debtor in its

foreign asset position vis-à-vis the U.S. Since the properties of the model

are so crucially dependent on the sign of the net position, we have considered

alternative definitions and been diligent in searching for reliable stock

data. However, we are aware that it may be possible to construct other

measures giving quite a different picture, and that these could conceivably

change the interpretation of the regression results.

     The positions for Canada, Japan and Western Eutope for the three definitions

of the total and private foreign asset stocks are set out in Table 2. Canada,

as would be expected, is a net debtor with the U.S. on all definitions. The

cases of Japan and Western Europe are less clearcut. Japan is always a net

debtor for the private asset stock but switches during the time period in

question from a net debtor to a net creditor position on all definitions of

the total foreign asset stock though with the CBBM measure this only holds

for the last observation. Western Europe, on the other hand, is always a

net creditor for the total foreign asset stock but switches during the period

from a net creditor to a net debtor on the private asset stock.

     (iii) Estimating Equation for the Exchange Rate

     In our empirical specification of an exchange rate equation, the main

focus is on the impact of shifts in the bilateral money, bond and foreign asset

stocks on the home country exchange rate vis-à-vis the U.S. dollar. Thus,
                              Table 2: Net Creditor and Debtor Positions for Canada, Japan and Western
                                Europe vis-â-vis the U.S. for Alternative Definitions of the Stock of
                                             Foreign Assets, Sample Period 1973:4-1978:4



                                                       Foreign Asset Stock (U.S. Dollars)


              CBBM           CBBM              FTB                     FTB               FTED                FTED

Canada     Net Debtor       Net Debtor    Net Debtor             Net Debtor         Net Debtor           Net Debtor

Japan      Net Debtor       Net Debtor    Net Debtor             Net Debtor         Net Debtor           Net Debtor
                                                                   .


           except for                     through 1976:1;                           through 1974:6;
           1978:4                         Net Creditor since                        Net Creditor since

Western       na.             n.a.        Net Creditor           Net Creditor       Net Creditor         Net Creditor
Europe                                                           through 1975:1;                         through 1977:9;
                                                                 Net Debtor since                        Net Debtor since


Notes:    n.a.   =   not available
          CBBM   =   interpolated total
                                    current account + interpolated.direct foreign investment (cumulated)
          FTB    =   bilateral
                           trade balance + interpolated services (cumulated)
          FTED   =
                 interpolated bilateral current account + interpolated direct investment (cumulated)
          The superscript "P" indicates the private foreign asset stoák i.e., CBBM, FTB and
          FTED minus foreign exchange reserves.
                                          — 22 —


the    typical equation to be estimated specifies the home country exchange

rate against the U.S. dollar, e($/Nome) as a function of the home and U.S.

money and bond stocks and the bilateral net foreign asset position: (1)

        e{/Fome} =
                            f{M1, M, B11, B, F1}                                       (1)
where the subscripts "F" and 'U" stand for home country and the U.S,

respectively; and F1 =         bilateral    net foreign asset position with the U.S.

  (iv) A Reaction Function for Intervention

       Public sector decisions, in so far as they affect the asset stocks of

the private sector, will have repercussions on the exchange rate, In an

attempt to model the systematic part of the authorities' behaviour, we

assumed that the reaction function might (in its most general manifestation)

have three components: (i) a desire to smooth changes n the exchange rate;

(ii) an attempt to hit a target exchange rate level depending on purchasing

power parity and capacity output relative to actual output; and (iii) a

target level of foreign exchange reserves whose level might be expected to

grow with nominal income. (2)

        Symbolically, it is assumed that

          FXR a'e—e1 + Me*_e1} + cFXR * — FXR1}                                        (2)

with    the    target levels of the exchange rate and reserves given as:

              e* =
                     &CP111/CPIU}
                                    + f   yt—logI?)                                    (3)

        FXR* =       t+   pTP (PI                                                      (4)




(l) In addition to estimating such an equation with the home and U,S money
  T and bond stocks entering as separate regressors, we also experimented
     with an alternative specification where the money and bond stocks were
     constrained to enter the equation in ratio form. However, this
     specification never produced better results.

(2) A more thorough discussion of such a reaction function is presented in
     Branson, Halttunen and Masson (1977),
                                        - 23   -



The reaction functions, thus, include the current exchange rate so that a

reduced-form exchange rate equation such as equation (1) above, if estimated

by ordinary least squares (OLS), would produce biased estimates of the

coefficients. To correct for this bias we also used a consistent estimating

technique, two-stage least squares (2SLS), for the exchange rate equation and

the reaction function.

     (v) Data Set for the Regressions

     We used monthly series on Ml and M3 as alternative measures of the money

stocks having no prior opinion as to which was the more suitable monetary

aggregate. The bond stocks were proxied by monthly data on the public debt

(measured in domestic currency).

     The list of variables used in the regressions is as follows:

      (suffix       - indicated by a dot -   can   taie the sting "US","C,P".
or "EIJR",   except for the CBBM variables for which CBBMEUR does not exist.

The U.S. variables exist only for money and bond stocks).

     Ml.
                    money stocks
     M3.

                -
     DB.             government bond stock outstanding (data on Ml, M3, DB all measured
                     in local currency units).

     FTB.       -    cumulated bilateral current account vis--vis U.S.
     FTED. - cumulated bilateral current account excliding direct investment

                    vis-a-vis   U.S.
     CBBM.      -    cumulated overall current account excluding direct investment.

      FXR.      -
                     foreign   exchange reserves (data on FTB, FTED, CBBM and FXR all



(1) Further details on the data and sources are to be found in the appendix.
                                              - 24 -

                       in   U.S. $).

         ERI.      -
                       exchange rates, indices Dec. 1971 = 1, U.S.$/Ilome.
         IP.       -   industrial      production.

         RCP.      -   ratio   of a country's consumer price index (CPI) to that of the

                       U.S.

         Y.        -   a proxy for nominal income, the product of CPI and IP.

         QUEDUM    -   a dummy variable with value 0 before Nov. 1976 and 1 since.

         The equations were first estimated by OLS but in every regression run

    low values of the Durbin-Watson statistic indicated positive serial correlation

    of the residuals. The equations were then reestimated using the Cochrane-

/   Orcutt    iterative process and only the latter results are reported here.

         (vi) Results for the e(U.S.$/Can$)

         The OLS estimates are set out in TabYe 3(a) while the consistent 2SLS

    estimates are reported in Table 3(b))1 Inspection of the residuals from

    the early regression runs revealed that the Quebec election in late 1976

    was accompanied by a sharp depreciation of the CAN$ and the negative effect

    persisted. Accordingly, we added a (0,1) dummy variable to the regression

    equation to capture this effect.

         Canada was a net debtor throughout the sample period on all definitions

    of the net private foreign asset stock (see Table 2). This implies a particular

    pattern of expected coefficient signs for the money, bond and foreign asset

    stock which are set out in Table 1.              In particular, the bilateral net foreign

    asset stock variable should have a negative coefficient in this situation.

    However, in all three equations reported in Table 3(a) the foreign asset stock


    (1) For Canada the Ml measure of the money stock consistently outperformed the
        M3 measure so only the results for the regressions including the former
        are reported.
     (z)     (Lo)
9'L. 6O 860 L000
                                                    (6) (v) (o) (vo)
                                                    coo '7OO— OOOO OOOO—
                                                                                           (eO) (cLL)         (6ot7)
                                                                                           L0000— OO'O         9OO
     (t6)
.9_t. 6O 960
                            .


                                   (vo)
                                  90000—
                                                    (L)
                                                     OQO
                                                           (9i) (vo) (o)
                                                           OO— OOOOO c0000—
                                        (io) (L?9) (9t7) (Lo) (9o) (L9) (ov) (6)

                                                                                             (o6L)
                                                                                             OOO—
                                                                                                      (LL)
                                                                                                     900'O
                                                                                                               (ooL)
                                                                                                               96VL.                '
      8O 6O
      (ç'1i,)
                                        oo.o— OO OO— oOOO coooo— ?OO'O— coo•o 7c0L-
                 ,
                                                                                                                                     i.
                                                \
ta      oii      ',   NVDiIEE3    Nva2L NVL NV3X wnano sna NVDE            snw 'ivo-w NOD                                          oquxn
                                                                                                                               UOTflb
                                       ($N/s'u) .xoj surps snisz :(q) iqj.
     tOT;I.Io
              uzI     Ut UAI     GO   ç.s—q.            TT
                                                        UOSJV—UTOJfla = .Jya
                          ap.2O—S.1;=O}j 1OUTULXGq..ep edq..nw ;o                quçoç;;oo ponb= u
                                                                                                    tITOTJeO3
                                                                           :MoTTo.  S     sToquL&2           e,T,
      9t (oL
         95O 6O
                            (66o
                                600'O
                                                       (8L) (coo)
                                                       OO.O—oooo.O— ooO.o
                                                                          (6oo)    (o) (6)
                                                                                    oooo oo (i)                          'c
              (•)     6O                (co)           (c6)      (9'o) (goo)            (7VO)     (6L.)(gL')
                                                                                                  OO
              9760                      OOO            L.900— OOOO— OOOO
                                                                                                  ()v)
                                                                                                                               .
      9.I.                                     •
                                                                                    OOOO—              9OE-          .
      LL-
              (5c
              LO 6O                                (gi) (69)     (o) (cvo) (iwo)
                                                   6000 6OO— OOO'O— OOOO— OOOO— LOO                                      't-
       PiO.   OH'S         NVDI'I3      DL NV3L        Wfla21O   sna                    SflL_I,   NVDW NOD               QN
                                                                                                                    uoqr1b
                                          ($Mv/$sfr) 1o surp.sj    s'io   :()   3qB.L
                                  - 26   -



variable   has a positive coefficient and is never significant at conventional

significance levels. The two money stock variables (those for Canada and

the United States), on the other hand, have the expected positive and negative

coefficients and the Canadian money stock is significant at the 10 per cent

level. The latter coefficient suggests a perverse result in that an expansion

of the Canadian money supply will, cet.       appreciate   the Canadian dollar.

The bond variables tend to have the wrong coefficient signs and are never

significant. The Quebec dummy is always highly significant with a negative

coefficient.

     When the policy reaction function is estimated with the exchange rate

equation by 2SLS, the results in Table 3(b) show that two of the foreign asset

stock variables, FTBCAN and FTEDCAN, now have the predicted negative coefficients

but neither estimate is significant. The-ther foreign asset stock measure,

CBBMCAN, is also insignificant. Both the mone' stocks and the bond stocks

have the expected pattern of coefficients though the bond stock variables

are always insignificant. One difference from the results in Table 3(a)

is that the Canadian Ml variable tends to decline in significance while the

U.S. Ml variable becomes significant at the 1 per cent level with the FTBCAN

measure and is also significant at the 10 per cent level with the FTEDCAN

measure. The intervention variable, FXRCAN, is highly significant in all

three regressions with the expected positive coefficient. This result, if

taken on face value, implies that intervention in the foreign exchange market

by the Canadian authorities produced perverse results over the sample period!

However, this conclusion can only be regarded as tentative for our specification


(1) In the net debtor case it is possible to sign the de/dB1 variable (see
    Table 1) whereas it is not possible to do this in the net creditor case.
                                  - 27   -



of   the reaction function is over-simplified and may not have served to

entirely eliminate the simultaneity bias.

      One additional result deserves to be noted. The underlying model stresses

that third-country asset stocks should also be included in the regression

equation. To test this we constructed a measure of the third-country asset

stock as the difference between the total cumulated current account excluding

direct investment (CBBMCAN) and the cumulated Canadian-U.S. bilateral current

account excluding direct investment (FTEDCAN). When such a proxy for the

third-country net foreign asset stock was added to the exchange rate equation

e.g., equation 2 of Table 3(a), both the net foreign asset stock variables

were insignificant.

       (vii) Results for the e(U.S.$/Japanese Yen)

      The OLS and 2SLS estimates are set otit   in   Tables 4(a) and 4(b), respectively.

The regression results revealed no grounds for selecting between the two

alternative money stock measures so we only present results with the Ml variables.

      The key point to remember in interpreting the results is that while Japan

changes from a net debtor to a net creditor on its total net foreign asset

position with the U.S., the private sector is always a net debtor on all

measures. It also hardly needs stressing that the yen strongly appreciated

against the U.S.$ over the sample period.

      The OLS results seem at first sight to be very satisfactory in that all

three foreign asset stock measures are highly significant with a positive

coefficient. This result implies that a Japanese current account surplus

with the U.S. should, cet.         appreciate   the yen exchange rate.

However, as Japan is a net debtor on a private basis, on our measures, the

expected coefficient on the bilateral foreign asset variable is negative and
                                                                        (\J       (I•)            '0
                                 (\J       If\                          ()        (i)
                                                                                        .
                                                                                                  C))
                     (I)         (U        U)
                       •              S     •                           (\J       s—
                     5-'                   5—                                5•
                     O--'    F('- tf\'                          0 N-c—'' 0Om
                                                                    U) v L(   O-
                                                                            CONN-
                                                                                N
              O      N- I(\ s-- f(' I(—.)                               N- fC\
                                                                          .             .
                                                                                            1'—
              :i'           tc\tC) 4 N—
                     —:.i- (\J
                      • •     . .
                     o 4- 0 —i-     0
                                      . .
                                       rc
                                                                        ocr\
                                                                         ...' o—i     orc
                               '-, -,
                                                                               ....,,


                                                                        tr                        N-
            N
                     o
                       •
                                 Lf\

                                 0
                                      .
                                           "0

                                           0
                                            .
                                                               N
                                                                        000
                                                                I_)
              •zx:
                                                                cr1
                                                                                                  o,c
                                                                11                                OLf\
                                                                c_)
              cr1
              C)
                                                                I_)               c'JLc\
    '—S       ct4
                                 0—"                    0       111

                                 0(0  I.                '-
                                                                1x4

                                                                çi
    _         ILl
                                 ON-
                                  '-"
                                                          •
                                                                - ON-
                                                                   OIf\
              1J-    s---
                     4-c-
                                                        Cl)
                                                                E- 00
—
              b      ON
                      •
                                                        '1)
                                                                çi1     ——- —:1- —' cr —
              Ei  0 N-
                            S
                                                        -'              N 4- c— O 0 ir

                                                                              - - .-
                                                                <C
    o         ILl    '—'                                        ':;     O4-0s—
                                                                         • .
                                                                                                  Os-•
    t4_

                     Lf\    0 0'-—
                               "0
                                                        Cl)
                                                        0
                                                                < Or\ ON ON   •         S           S




                     0'--' 0—'
                     OU\ 00 OtC
              J 0 C\,J
              (ID
                       0 0 0 a)
                   • • 0 •   • •
                                                        E
                                                        •r4             4  '' N-'-'
                                                                        0 'D 0 s--a)
                     Os--     .0 Os-                            Cl)     ON-
                                                                        0 • OC\J
                                                                            0 • 0ON
                                                                        0.0'—00  •s-
    1.L               I '—' 0•—' I '—
    Cl)
                                 N
                                  I
                                     N
                                                        Cl)
                                                                c:1
                                                                             0•—  0

                                                        '
    O                0)                                                  I
                     0'--'       0—-' 0—"
              b 00(0 0(0 ON-
              )-4
                                                                        N
                 0. 0.0.
                  0
              I Os—
                      0 O
                       Os-
                          00
                        • —ON
                                                                        0 '-'
                                                                        OU"
                                                                        00
                                                                             Lr\'-'
                                                                             04-
                                                                            ON   ON-
                                                                                    '&-"
                                                                                     00
                  • '—
                     0
                           . '—
                                 0O                 •
                                                        —'
                                                                        o
                                                                        00•  C>
                                                                            Os-   •
                                                                                  Os-o•
                                                                        0 0—"0—
                                                                        0 '— 0 '— 0
    C)                                                  C)


                     0.—' O\-' N --'
                     s-s- 04-
                     O• .N 00)
                            • • 04-
                                 • .
                                           0                            4-,-'
                                                                        0 W ic-i N N D
                     Oif 04   Os-
                          I'—' I'—
                      I'-—-                                      D 0. 0 0
                                                                (0      Os— Os— Os-
                                                                : 0'—.00'—'
                                                                          •C\I
                                                                               0'—                 •s-—

                     4-          4-                                      i       I
                     O           0
                     O '—' 0—-' s- ----                                 4- — Lc\- tr'
                     00—i OO'lON
                               olc\                                     ON
                                                                        ON-OK
                                                                            00Os-
                     00 00
                     0. 0. ON
                     00 00 0.                                           0.
                                                                        00  0.
                                                                           Os—  0.
                                                                               00
                                                                                Os-
                     O
                      I
                       • '—
                                 00
                                  • .'—

                                  I
                                            • '—
                                                                        000
                                                                        0 "— 0— 0 —
                                                                         I          I

                                 s- CO     U\ 0                         CO'-" O-" LC\'-"
             0                   N-c- 4-N•                      0     N s—s---
                                                                         4-    ONTh N-N
             C)
                                 L1 •
                                  • 0\      • IC\               C)       . . Lf\S •N 4- N          S

                                 I('— s- —'                             s-        N 4-            s- L(


          O4
          -c--I 0
                     s-
                       •
                                 N
                                  .         .
                                                              (i
                                                              -do)
                                                              p ,(D

                                                              o1Z
                                                                        s-
                                                                          •
                                                                                  N
                                                                                   .
                                 -2   -



not   positive. The coefficients on the two bond stocks and the Japanese money

stock in equations (1) and (2) also have the wrong signs though the U.S.

money stock has the expected negative coefficient and is significant at the

1 per cent level. In equation (3), however, the Japanese money stock has

the expected positive coefficient which is significant at the 5 per cent

level while the U.S. money stock loses significance.

      The 2SLS estimates do not produce much change in this picture. The

foreign asset stock variables tend to be less significant than in the OLS

regressions; indeed, the FTBJAP variable is now insignificant. However,

they still have positive coefficients in all cases. The intervention variable,

FXRJAP, has the expected positive coefficient and is always significant.

Thus, just as in the Canadian case, the results suggest that official exchange

market intervention tends to produce perverse results on the exchange rate.

The money and bond stocks tend to be insignifiant in almost all cases.

      Thus, the comparative static properties of the model when the home

country is a net debtor in foreign currency, are not supported by these

results with the sole exceptions of the intervention variable and the U.S.

money stock. Two possible explanations may account for these dismal econometric

results. First, the portfolio balance model is unsatisfactory in the case

of a net debtor country; the model does not allow any role to expectations

and it abstracts from conditions in flow markets)2 Second, our three

proxies for the bilateral asset position of the Japanese private sector may

all be defective. Clearly there are difficulties in (1) delimiting the


(1) When the third-country foreign asset stock, FTCJAP (defined as CBBMJAP
    minus FTEDJAP), was added to equation 2 in Tables 4(a) and (b) and the
    equations reestimated, the FTEDJAP variable becaie insignificant in both
    cases but the FTCJAP variable was highly significant with the wrong
    (i.e., positive) coefficient.

(2) Following the terminology in Isard (1978), this is a "point in time" model.
                                   - 3(4   -




appropriate   set of short-run financial flows and (ii) in computing appropriate

asset stock measures on a monthly basis. Thus, a different set of criteria

might turn the Japanese private sector into a net creditor in foreign currency

over some or all of the sample period. In that event, the positive coefficients

on the foreign asset stocks would be consistent with the predictions of the

portfolio balance model.

        (viii) Results for the e(U.S.$/Western European Basket)

       Tables 5(a) and 5(b) set Out the results of selected regressions for

the composite Western Europe exchange rate against the U.S. dollar. As there

was little to choose between the Ml and M3 money stocks, only the results

for the latter are presented. To interpret these results, we once again return

to Table 2. On both measures of the total bilateral foreign asset position -

FTBEUR and FTEDEUR -   Western Europe is a net creditor over the entire sample

period. However, if one only considers the bilateral private asset stock,

Western Europe switches from a net creditor to a net debtor position over

the sample period.

       The OLS estimates show both foreign asset stock measures have the expected

coefficient i.e., if Western Europe runs a current account surplus with the

U.S., this should, cet.         appreciate     its exchange rate against the dollar.

However, only the FTB measure is significant and then only at the 10 percent

level. Neither the money nor the bond stocks are significant. When         the
exchange rate equation is reestimated by 2SLS, both foreign asset stocks

become insignificant. In this case, the only significant variable is the

intervention variable with a positive coefficient. A positive coefficient

on the foreign   exchange reserves variable would be expected in the net debtor
case   but as this is not true throughout our sample period one has no prior
                             Table 5(a):   .OLS   Estimates for e(U.S.$/Western Europe Basket)


bion                                                                                                              .
er           CON    M3EUR       M3TJS       DBEUR           DEliS      FTBEUR         FTEDEUR     FXREUR   R2           RHO     t.W.

.          —0.389 0.0005       0.0006      —0.0008       0.0005        0.016                               0.83       0.8L2
           (0.39)
                                                                                                                                1.49
                    (0.58)     (0.61)      (0.51)        (o.1#7)       (1.67)                                         (12.09)
•           0.072 0.0006       0.0004      —0.001        0.0004                        0.010               0.82       0.693     1.46
           (0.06)   (0.74)     (0.35)      (0.87)        (0.34)                        (0.82)                         (15.76)
                                            F




       ,

                             Table 5(b):   2SLS Estimates                                                    .
                                                              for   e(U.S.$/Western     Europe   Basket)
                                                                                                                                       I-
•           0.966 0.0004       —0.00002 —0.001           0.00003 0.001                            0.006    0.88       0.805     1.45
           (o.97)(o.65)         (0.03)      (0.87)        (0.39) (O.1\1)                          (2.30)          (10.51)
•          0.919 0.0004      —0.000004 —0.001            0.00005                      0.002       0.006    0.88       0.803     1.44
           (0.93) (0.62)        (0.01)      (0.87)          (o.5)                     (0.17)      (3.20)          (1o.L-)
                                - 32   -



expectation   as to sign.

     To cope with this case we split the sample period in two at January 1975

when, on the FTB measure, Western Europe moved into a net debtor position and

reestimated the equations separately over the two sub-periods. The aim was

to establish whether the estimated coefficients switched signs between the

two sub-periods in accordance with the predictions of the model. The OLS and

2SLS results (not shown) were very disappointing. For instance, the foreign

asset stock variable was mildly significant in both sub-periods but always

with the wrong sign.

IV. Summary and Conclusions

     In this paper we specify a portfolio balance model of short-run exchange

rate determination and test it against monthly data on selected exchange rate

movements over the floating rate period.

     Our specification of the portfolio ba1anc model attempts to give greater

generality by incorporating portfolio shifts in a multi-country framework.

In order to make the model tractable, we postulate that all current account

deficits and surpluses are settled via transactions in U.S. dollar-denominated

assets. Thus, our version of the model assigns a pivotal role to the U.S.

dollar and the bilateral international investment position of individual

countries vis-à-vis the U.S. In particular, the model allows for the possibility

of the private sector being either a net creditor or net debtor in U.S. dollars

on its foreign asset stock.

    Whether the private sector is a net debtor or creditor internationally

is shown to be crucial for the comparative static properties of the model.

Indeed, the effects of changes in the exogenous asset stocks on the exchange

rate are reversed as the private sector moves from a net creditor to a net


(1) If the country is in a zero position in its net international lending, the
    model is indeterminate.
                                - 33   -




debtor position. If the private sector is a net debtor on its foreign asset
stock, the short-run behaviour of the exchange rate is shown to be unstable.

This result arises solely because of wealth effects due to the net liability

position and does not depend on extrapolative exchange rate expectations.

     Several measures of the net foreign asset position were constructed

for Canada, Japan and Western Europe. Indeed, for Canada and Japan our

calculations showed the private sector to be consistently in a net debtor

position throughout the estimation period while Western Europe moved from

a net creditor position at the beginning of the period to a net debtor mid-

way during the period in question. It is, however, possible that applying

a different set of criteria as to which financial flows should be included

in the cumulation of current flows might change Japan from a net debtor to

a net creditor over part of the sample pei4od. Thi would certainly not be

the case for Canada.

     The empirical results for the exchange rates of the Canadian dollar,

Japanese yen and a weighted average exchange rate for Western Europe against

the U.S. dollar were very mediocre. The foreign asset stock variables tended

to be insignificant in most cases except Japan and, in the latter case, the

foreign asset stock variables always had signs opposite to those predicted

by the model. The coefficients on the money and bond stocks tended to match

expectations in the net debtor cases though few of the, coefficients were

statistically significant. The results su/ggested that intervention by the

authorities in the foreign exchange market produced perverse results. Thus,

the empirical verdict on the utility of the portfolio balance model, at least

on this data set, must be judged unfavourable.


(1) But in agreement with conventional beliefs about the effect on the
    exchange rate of a current account surplus.
                              - 34   -




                 APPENDIX:   SOURCES OF DATA



Abbreviations:

BEQB: Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin
BOCR: Bank of Canada Review, monthly
BOJ:   Bank of Japan, Economic Statistics Annual
IFS:   International Monetary Fund International
       Financial Statistics, monthly
MEl:   Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
       Development, Main Economic Indicators, monthly
SCB:   United States Department of Commerce, Survey
       of Current Business, monthly
SFTA: OECD, Statistics of Foreign Trade, Series A,
       monthly
SNBMB: Swiss National Bank, Monthly Bi.hletin
                             - 35 -



1.     Exchange rates
       End—month spot rates against the U.S. dollar taken from
MEl. West European rate against the dollar was calculated as
a geometric average of spot rates, in the form of indices
(December 1971=1), for France, Germany, Italy, U.K., Belgium,
Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland. Weights were based on
the relative size of the monetary base (average of the two end—
years 1973 and 1977) for the countries concerned (IFS, line 14)
after conversion to a common currency. These weights are (.176,
.301, .215, .110, .050, .038, .029, .083) respectively.
2.     Money stocks
       Eiid—month Ml and M3 (Mi + quasi—money) taken from MEl,
and converted to billions of local currency units. SeasoIly
adjusted data were extracted directly from MEl for Ml (all
countries) and for M3 in the cases of Canada, U.S., and Japan.
The West Europe M3 aggregate was constructed as follows: non—
seasonally adjusted Ml plus quasi—money figures were taken for
France, Germany, Italy, U.K., Netherlands and Sweden. For
Switzerland, the sum of Ml and savings deposits was used; for
Belgium, Ml alone. The countries'money stocks were converted to
U.S. dollars using a fixed exchange rate, namely that prevailing
on average in 1974 and 1977. The resulting total was then
seasonally—adjusted using the X—11 programme. Two numerical
adjustment to the data were also made. MEl data for France omitted
a value for March 1974: the average of February and April,
namely 585 billion frances, was inserted. For Canada, data for
October-December 1975 are distorted by a mail strike; they were
replaced by figures of $ Canadian 17.3, 17.35, and 17.4 billions,
respectively.
3.     Bond   stocks
        Bond stocks refer to central government debt at month—end
and are taken from IFS, line 88, except where not available. The
latter were created as follows: France, IFS line 88b (governaent
debt in francs), with missing data replaced by interpolations;
Japan, IFS, line 88b (government debt in yen); Belgium, IFS, line
88a (government debt in francs); Netherlands, IFS, line 88b
 (government debt in guilders)0 For the U.K., quarterly data on
"domestic borrowing" (IFS, line 84b) were cumulated and adjusted,
where necessary, to match annual benchmark numbers for the
national debt (excluding foreign currency debt) published in
BEQB. These quarterly stocks were then interpolated to monthly.
For Italy, monthly data for net borrowing in lira (IFS, line 84b)
were cumulated from a benchmark figure for 1972 (IFS, line 88).
For Switzerland quarterly data on "net domestic borrowing" (IFS,
line 84a) and "other financing" (IFS, line 86c) were cumulatTand
adjusted, to match annual benchmark numbers for the national debt
published in SNBNB. These quarterly stocks were then interpolated
to monthly. The West European aggregate bond stock is a dollar
total using the 1974, 1977 average exchange rate.
                                   - 36   -




     4'     Forei   Asset Stocks

            Net claims or liabilities on foreigners, calculated by
     cumulating balance of payments flows from benchmark values,
     were created for three different definitions:

     (a)    CumulatedCurrentAccounts: bilateral stocks vis—à.-vis
            the United Stes
              Monthly current account figures are not available on a
     bilateral basis. Monthly trade balance figures, on a seasonally
     adjusted customs basis, were taken from SFTA,.for flows between
     the U.S., on the one hand, and Canada, Japan, and OECD Europe,
     on the other. The difference between the quarterly seasonally—
     adjusted current and trade accounts (to all countries: Source
     JVJEI) was allocated to Canada, Japan and Western Europe using
      E1 relative importance of those countries in the services
     balance for the year 1977 (namely .407, —.141, —.009): source
     SCB (march 1978). The services were interpolated and added to
      Ei monthly trade balance, and the resulting flows cumulated from
     benchmark figures for end—1975 of U0S. net international invest-
     ment positions vis—à—vis Canada, Japan, and Western Europe
     (Source: SCB, August 1976), namely ($46.361, $0.805, $—41.027)
     billions, respectively.
     (b)   Cumulated Bilateral Current and Direct Investment Accounts
            Quarterly flow data were taken from SCB ("International
     Investment Position of the United States", Table 10, various
     issues) for flows vis—à—vis Canada, Japan, and Western Europe.
     Before 1977, both current account and direct investment ignore
     reinvested earnings, and account for them since. However, the
     sum of current account and direct investment is consistent over
     time. Flows were interpolated to monthly and cumulated from end—
     1975 benchmark figures for the U4S. net international investment
     position excluding direct investment (source SCB, August 1976),
     namely ($20.352, —1.665, $—74115) billions for Canada, Japan
     and Western Europe, respectively0 The pgative of the resulting
     series are those countries' net positions with respect to the
     United States.

     (c)   Cumulated Overall Current and Direct Investment Accounts
            For Canada and Japan only, series for their overall
     position vis—à-vis foreigners were calculated using monthly trade
     and quarterly current accounts, seasonally—adjusted from NEI
     the difference between the two plus direct investment (source
     BOCR for Canada and IFS line 77 bad for Japan), being interpolated
     to monthly and added to the trade balance. The result was cumu-
     lated from benchmarks for overall net investment positions exciudin
     direct investment at the end of 1975: $—12.99 billion for Canada
     (BOCR, July 1978, Table A15 converted to U.S. dollars) and
     $—16.54 for Japan (BOJ, 1977, table 123).



(7
                            - 37   -




5.     geLnExcharie Reserves
       Monetary authorities' reserves held in the form of
foreign currencies were obtained from MET, and converted to
dollars using the SDR exchange rate at month—end (source: MEl).
The Western European reserve total was calculated as the sum
of figures for France, Germany, Italy, U.K., Belgium, Netherlands,
Sweden and Switzerland,
6.     Consumer Prices and Industrial Production

       These variables were used as instruments in the exchange
rate equation as they were assumed to affect target exchange
rates. Consumer price indices, all items, and industrial
production, seasonally adjusted, were taken from MEl for each of
the following: United States, Canada, Japan, and OECD Europe.
The latter grouping weights together the component countries
using 1975 final consumption and 1975 gross domestic product'
priginating in industry, respectively.
                               - 38 -

                             REFERE NCES



Armington, P., "A Multilateral Dynamic Model of Exchange Rates and Short-Term
      Interest Rates", Paper presented to the Sixth International Conference
      of Applied Econometrics on Monetary and Financial Models, Rome, February
      7-10, 1979.

Artus, J.R. and R.R. Rhomberg, "A Multilateral Exchange Rate Model", IMF Staff
      Papers 20 (November 1973), 591-611.

Basevi, G., "Balance of Payments and Exchange Markets: A Lost Correspondence",
      European Economic Review 4 (December 1973), 309-328.

Basevi, G. and P. De Grauwe, "Vicious and Virtuous Circles: A Theoretical
      Analysis and a Policy Proposal for Managing Exchange Rates", European
      Economic Review 10 (December 1977), 277-302.

Boyer, R.S., "Net Foreign Assets and the Exchange Rate Regime", Paper presented
      to the Conference on Macroeconomic Policy and Adjustment in Open
      Economies, Ware, England, April 28 - May 1, 1976.

Branson, W.H., H. Halttunen and P. Masson, "Exchange Rates in the Short Run:
      The Dollar-Deutschemark Rate", European Economic Review 10 (December 1977),
                                          -
      303-324.

Branson, W.H. and H. Halttunen, "Asset-Market Determination of Exchange Rates:
     Initial Empirical and Policy Results," in J.P. Martin and A. Smith (eds.),
     Trade and Payments Adjustment Under Flexible Exchange Rates. London:
     Macmillan, 1979.

Dhrymes, P.J., Econometrics: Statistical Foundations and Applications. New
      York: Harper and Row, 1970.

Dornbusch, R., "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics", Journal of Political
      Economy 84 (December 1976), 1161-1176.

Flood, R., "Asset Trading, Exchange Rate Determination and Exchange Rate
      Dynamics", Paper presented to the Conference on Macroeconomic Policy and
      Adjustment in Open Economies, Ware, England, April 28 - May 1, 1976.

Girton, L. and D.W. Henderson, "Central Bank Operation in Foreign and Domestic
      Assets Under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates", in P.B. Clark, D.E. Logue
      and R.J. Sweeney (eds.), The Effects of Exchange Rate Adjustments.
      Department of the Treasury, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office,
     1977.

Gamo1fo G, J4athe tic          Is and Models in Hconomic Dynamics, Amsterdam:
    North-Holland, 3.971
                                 - 39   -



Henderson, D.W., "Modelling The Interdependence of National Money and Capital
      Markets", American Economic Review, 67 (February 1977), 190-199.

Isard, P., Exchange Rate Determination: A Survey of Popular Views and Recent
      Models. Studies in International Finance No. 42, Princeton, N.J.,
      International Finance Section, Princeton University, May 1978.

Tobin, J., "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory", Journal of Money,
      Credit and Banking 1 (February 1969), 15-29.
